                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       PRIVATE DECEPTION AND THE RISE OF PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES
                      IN THE UNITED STATES, 1890 - 1930

                                               Woong Lee

                                         Working Paper 13695
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13695


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2007




Woong Lee is a doctoral candidate at the Department of Economics, University of California, Irvine.
The author gratefully acknowledges the generous advice and guidance of his advisers, Dan Bogart
(primary adviser), Jiawei Chen, Jun Ishii, and Gary Richardson. He also thanks Keith Finlay, Chen
Feng Ng, Raaj Tiagi and Kathleen Wong for their useful comments. In particular, David Autor and
Susan Houseman gave invaluable comments and advice to improve this paper. The author is indebted
to Price Fishback, who shared his expertise regarding the data used in this paper. All the errors and
views in the paper are the author's own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Woong Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Deception and the Rise of Public Employment Offices in the United States, 1890 -
1930
Woong Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 13695
December 2007, Revised September 2008
JEL No. J4,N3,N4

                                             ABSTRACT

At the turn of the 20th century, state and local governments in the United States began to establish
public employment offices. These non-profit governmental organizations match job seekers and businesses,
one of their main objectives being to protect job seekers from fraudulent activities by private employment
agencies. In this paper, I propose a theory that describes the malpractices of private employment agencies
as a situation of asymmetric information between job seekers and the private employment agencies,
which could cause adverse selection in the labor exchange market. The establishment of public employment
offices can be viewed as a policy device to eliminate low-quality private employment agencies committing
malpractices. I show that public employment offices helped lower the degree of asymmetric information.
The majority of job seekers who used public employment offices were unskilled workers, immigrants,
or migrants, who were vulnerable to exploitation by private employment agencies. I also find that
the role of public employment offices was especially important for interstate migrants who were most
lacking in information and networks in their new environment.


Woong Lee
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
woongl@uci.edu
1. Introduction
Public employment offices are non-profit governmental organizations that match job seekers and

employers, one of their main purposes being to reduce job search costs in order to improve job

seekers’ success in finding a job in the labor market.1 As a labor market intermediary, public

employment offices have existed in all the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and

Development (OECD) countries since the 1950s (Walwei 1996). Recent trends in European

countries have been to deregulate and privatize employment services since the 1990s (De Koning,

Denys, and Walwei 1999). Interestingly, the opposite trend took place in the late 19th and early

20th centuries. The establishment of public employment offices was a widespread phenomenon in

both Europe and North America during this time.2 Many countries also passed laws to abolish or

strictly regulate private employment agencies (Martinez 1976, and Finkin and Jacoby 2005).3 As

a result, the labor exchange market was monopolized by the central government in these

countries. This institutional feature did not change until the late 1980s.

           In this paper, I provide a rationale for the establishment of public employment offices

and explore the relationship between the development of public employment offices and labor

market conditions in the United States (US) in order to argue that public employment offices

were effective in protecting job seekers, who lacked information and networks with regards to

the job search process, from malpractices by private employment agencies.

           In the first part of this paper, I propose a theory that exploitation by private employment

1
  There are other terminologies for public employment offices such as public employment agencies, bureaus, or services. I use
public employment offices in this paper because it was the most frequently used historically.
2
  Public employment offices were established in Belgium in 1870, Sweden and France in 1884, Britain in 1885, the United States
in 1890, and Italy and Germany in 1897 (US Employment Service 1935a).
3
  The Canadian Labor Congress requested the complete abolition of private employment agencies in 1913. The German
government began to abolish private employment agencies in 1922. Austria declined to issue any new licenses for new businesses
after World War I. Finland, Romania, and Bulgaria completely eliminated private employment agencies by 1926 (Martinez 1976).
   In the early 20th century, state governments in the US (e.g., State of Washington) tried to abolish private employment agencies
but the US Supreme Court ruled their attempts to be unconstitutional (Finkin and Jacoby 2005).


                                                                                                                                1
agencies with respect to job seekers resulted from asymmetric information between job seekers

and private employment agencies. Job seekers who are uninformed cannot distinguish between

high and low-quality agencies and this may cause them not to pay for high-quality services. This

situation could give private employment agencies an incentive to exploit uninformed job seekers

(provide low-quality services) due to their profit-maximizing behavior, thus causing adverse

selection. Consequently, the market may disappear or only low-quality agencies may survive.4

In theory, it is possible that introducing public employment offices may eliminate low-quality

agencies that exploit uninformed job seekers, increase competition in the labor exchange market,

and thus improve labor market efficiency. The introduction of public employment offices may

remove low-quality private employment agencies because such agencies cannot survive if

uninformed job seekers use public employment offices without charge and without the risk of

malpractices, while informed job seekers use public employment offices or high-quality private

employment agencies. As a result, no one would use low-quality private employment agencies,

which would cause them to disappear eventually. This implies that the introduction of public

employment offices could resolve the problem of adverse selection as they provide an alternative

network to uninformed job seekers in the labor exchange market.

             In the second part of this paper, I estimate the number of job seekers using public

employment offices as a percentage of the labor force to examine the development of public

employment offices in the US labor market over time. The data show that public employment

offices grew substantially and became a major labor market intermediary with the US

involvement in World War I. The use of public employment offices by job seekers as a

percentage of the labor force was at least 4 percent between 1916 and 1940. This shows that

4
    In this paper, private employment agencies that exploit uninformed job seekers are described as low-quality providers.


                                                                                                                             2
public employment offices played an important role in the labor market, and thus could affect the

behavior of job seekers and private employment agencies.

        In the third part of this paper, I show that the majority of public employment office users

were unskilled workers, immigrants, or migrants in the early 20th century. These workers were

also major clients of private employment agencies in this period. This finding suggests that these

workers, who were most likely to be abused by private employment agencies, tended to utilize

public employment offices for their job search.

        Finally, I test the relationship between the use of public employment offices and changes

in labor market conditions which were related to asymmetric information such as proportions of

immigrants, migrants, and unskilled workers. The key finding is that the relationship between the

use of public employment offices and interstate migration is positive and significant in most

specifications. This positive correlation may support the hypothesis that public employment

offices contributed to lowering the degree of asymmetric information for interstate migrants who

were most likely to lack information and networks with regards to the job search process, and

thus the most vulnerable to exploitation by private employment agencies.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 proposes a theory of public

employment offices. Section 3 provides the background of public employment offices in relation

to the labor market. Section 4 presents the analysis of public employment office users. Section 5

provides the empirical work. Section 6 concludes the paper.



2. A Theory of Public Employment Offices
        Economists have put forth theories about the existence of labor market intermediaries,

including private employment agencies (hereafter, referred to as “private agencies”) and public


                                                                                                 3
employment offices (hereafter, referred to as “public offices”), to explain why these

intermediaries are necessary and how they help reduce transaction costs in the labor market (e.g.,

Pissarides 1979, Yavas 1994, and Kübler 1999). The fundamental intuition behind these theories

is that labor market intermediaries can increase the efficiency of the job matching process by

reducing transaction costs (Pissarides 1979 and Yavas 1994). It has also been suggested that

coexistence of public and private agencies may improve an employer’s screening ability if there

exists asymmetric information between job seekers and employers (Kübler 1999). However,

these theories do not explain why public offices were introduced to restrain private agencies

from malpractices with respect to job seekers. To explain this, I first describe how severe the

abuses by private agencies were and why these were possible. Next I propose a theory of how

public offices served to limit the incidence of malpractices by private agencies.

          Around the turn of the 20th century, in response to the cries of job seekers who were

exploited by private agencies, social reformers and public officials tried to find a solution, one of

which was to create public offices (Bogart 1900, Sargent 1912, Leiserson 1915, and Herdon Jr.

1918).5 Two examples, which support the notion that public offices were established to check on

the actions of private agencies, are as follows:



    “[T]he establishment of free public employment offices rests on the abuses which exist in the
    private agencies”…“This point is made much of by the commissioners of labor in the various
    states, and their reports contain many instances of the deception and fraud practiced by these
    agencies on the unemployed.” (Bogart 1900, p. 345)

    “One of the influences making for the rapid growth in the number and importance of public
    employment offices has been the flagrant evils connected with these private employment

 5
    Establishment of public offices is an example of the Progressivism movement in the US in the early 20th century because they
were introduced to eliminate the abuses by private agencies in response to the cries of job seekers. Thus, this governmental
intervention was a kind of social justice to help disadvantaged people.
   Stewart and Stewart (1933), Edwards (1935), Commons and Andrews (1936) and Martinez (1976) report that many European
countries also established public offices to prevent private agencies from exploiting their clients.


                                                                                                                              4
   agencies.” (Herdon Jr. 1918, p. 5)



The most common malpractice by private agencies was the misrepresentation of characteristics

on occupations to job seekers (Commons and Andrews, 1936). Sargent (1912, p. 36) summarizes

common deceitful practices by private agencies, which took advantage of uninformed job

seekers in some of the following ways:



   1) Charging a fee and failing to make any effort to find work for the applicant.
   2) Sending applicants where no work exists.
   3) Sending applicants to distant points where no work or where unsatisfactory work exits, but
      whence the applicants will not return on account of expense involved.
   4) Collusion between the agent and employer (e.g., foremen), whereby the applicant is given
      a few days work and then discharged to make way for new workmen, the agent and
      employer divide the fee.
   5) Charging exorbitant fees or giving jobs to such applicants as contribute extra fees,
      presents, etc.
   6) Inducing workers who have been placed, particularly girls, to leave, pay another fee, and
      get a better job.



In addition to these malpractices, several private agencies were found to have actually sent

women to houses of prostitution (Muhlhauser 1916).

        These abuses were possible because many job seekers who used private agencies were

immigrants, unskilled workers, or temporary workers (Sargent 1912, Commons and Andrews

1936, US Bureau of Labor Standards 1962, and Rosenbloom 2002). As such, they were most

likely to be unfamiliar with the language and customs of the US, less educated, or had little legal

recourse to recover damages from private agencies. Thus, I argue that exploitation by private

agencies with respect to job seekers resulted from information asymmetry between job seekers

and private agencies.

        Private agencies that exploit job seekers can be described as low-quality agencies. If job


                                                                                                 5
seekers cannot distinguish between high and low-quality agencies or if their search cost is very

high, then high-quality agencies may have an incentive to reduce their service quality (if they

stay in the market) because job seekers who use private agencies cannot pay for high-quality

services. Therefore, the market would disappear or only low-quality private agencies with severe

abuses would prevail in the labor exchange market, meaning adverse selection. Furthermore, if

private agencies exercise a high degree of market power, then the situation would become worse.

           In general, there are two ways to reduce or eliminate asymmetric information that causes

adverse selection in the above situation: increase in search costs (for information gathering) by

job seekers and signals by private agencies. Increase in search costs to distinguish between high

and low-quality private agencies is burdensome because job seekers need to make additional

effort. Moreover, it is very costly to those who are unfamiliar with new environment, less

educated, or needy such as immigrants, unskilled workers, and temporary workers. Theoretically,

signaling by high-quality private agencies is feasible, but there may be a possibility of a pooling

equilibrium.6

           The creation of public offices to provide job seekers with placement services can be seen

as a mechanism to eliminate low-quality private agencies, and thus resolve adverse selection

caused by asymmetric information between job seekers and private agencies in the labor

exchange market. With the provision of public offices, low-quality private agencies may not

survive because job seekers who are uninformed can use public offices without charge and

without the risk of malpractice, while job seekers who are informed can use public offices or

high-quality private agencies.7 Under ideal conditions, job seekers would be fully informed

6
  For example, low-quality agencies may charge high fees to their clients to imitate high-quality service providers because high
fees are usually accompanied by high-quality services. This may result in a pooling equilibrium if both high and low-quality
agencies send high-quality signal to the clients.
7
  An implicit assumption is that public offices are credibly of high-quality because services are publicly provided. Even if job


                                                                                                                                   6
about the quality of the private agencies that they deal with, and thus could make a preferred

choice along the quality-price locus. Public offices may help in this regard by driving deceptive

private agencies from the market, allowing job seekers to choose to use either public offices or

credible private agencies. This implies that the creation of public offices can resolve the problem

of adverse selection as an alternative network is provided to job seekers in the labor exchange

market. Therefore, the introduction of public offices may inject competition that either causes

low-quality private agencies to improve or drives them out of the market. Throughout this

process, high-quality private agencies survive, and without monopolization of the labor exchange

market by the government, both public and private agencies can exist together to improve the

efficiency of the labor market.

           Besides the introduction of public offices, state governments began to regulate private

agencies even before public offices were established (see, for example, Bogart 1900). Some state

or municipal governments required private agencies to pay license fees, deposit bonds, or both.

In addition, several local governments imposed fines on private agencies or shut down their

businesses when violation of the regulations was investigated.

           Baldwin (1951) and the US Bureau of Labor Standards (1962) insisted that before World

War I, public offices did not function well and only restrictions on private agencies were

effective in the labor exchange market. However, Devine (1909), Sargent (1912), and Leiserson

(1915) argued that restrictions on private agencies were ineffective and the creation of public

offices lessened the degree of malpractices, thus contributing to the protection of job seekers. It

is an open question as to which institution worked better to keep private agencies in check since



seekers are not sure about the credibility of public offices, they could provide an effective means to solve the information/quality
problem faced by job seekers because services by public offices are free.


                                                                                                                                   7
there is little evidence of specific statistics or detailed reports to compare these two institutions.8

However, evidence supporting the effectiveness of public offices is as follows (State of Illinois

Bureau of Labor Statistics 1906, p. 3):



         “While the primary purpose in establishing these offices was to aid the common or
unskilled laborers in getting work without cost to him or her, their influence has not been limited
to that class…From this it is shown that nearly 8,000 people, representing established skilled
trades, including commercial and professional pursuits, have secured positions during the
year…The better class of private employment agencies will accept only applications for a certain
service, mainly of a professional character.”9



3. Background of Public Employment Offices
           In this section, I provide evidence that public offices were a major labor market

intermediary and thus could affect the behavior of job seekers and private agencies in the US in

the early 20th century. To do this, I estimate the number of job seekers who used public offices

(the use of public offices by job seekers) between 1890 and 1940 (see Figure 1).10 I also measure

the percentage of public office users in the labor force and compare this to the unemployment

rate (see Figure 2).

           The first five (continuous) public offices were established in Ohio in 1890.11 Only fifty-

one offices were operated in nineteen states by 1910 (Herdon Jr. 1918). The use of public offices

by job seekers as a percentage of the labor force also did not exceed 1 percent by 1910 (see
8
   Fee and bond regulations could be effective because they are likely to raise costs by more for low-quality than high-quality
agencies. But if there are no effective means of enforcement, then such mandates would be unlikely to work. For example, the US
Supreme Court ruled unconstitutional a New Jersey law regulating the fees that private agencies could charge their clients (Finkin
and Jacoby 2005). In addition, inspection of private agencies could be very costly if there are many illegal (unlicensed) private
agencies. Several states’ labor bureaus reported violations of the license law (see, for example, State of Missouri Bureau of Labor
Statistics 1913 and State of California Bureau of Labor 1923).
9
   In 1905 the total number of job seekers placed by Illinois public offices was 39,598 and the number of applicants was 45,323.
10
    The first (continuous) public offices were established in Ohio in 1890 and the nationwide system of public offices as a
permanent labor market intermediary was set in the US in 1940 (the author’s inspection). That is why the estimates in Figures 1
and 2 range from 1890 and 1940.
11
    There were a couple of trials to establish public employment offices before 1890. Examples are the Castle Garden Labor
Exchange in New York City opened in 1850 (Rosenbloom 2002) and the California Labor Exchange established in San Francisco
in 1868 (US Employment Service 1935b). These public employment agencies eventually discontinued due to a lack of funds.


                                                                                                                                 8
Figure 2). When immigration reached its highest point (1.4 million immigrants) in 1907, the

federal government started to intervene in the labor exchange market (US Employment Service

1935a). The Division of Information, the first federal employment agency, was created in the

Department of Commerce and Labor. However, its role was restricted to disseminate immigrants

over the states up until World War I (Guzda 1983). Although both federal and local public offices

contributed little to the labor market at that time, these organizations aimed to protect immigrants,

who were unfamiliar with the urban environment in the US, from the abuses of private agencies

(International Labour Office 1955).

        Many firms lost their foreign markets with the beginning of World War I, causing a

serious unemployment problem, as shown by the relatively high unemployment rates in 1914 and

1915 (see Figure 2). However, the problem of lack of labor demand changed to a shortage of

labor supply upon the US’ entry into World War I, especially due to higher labor demand in war-

related industries as well as demand by the military service (US Bureau of Labor Statistics 1931).

Accordingly, the Division of Information, renamed as the US Employment Service (USES), was

reorganized to serve as a nationwide labor market intermediary to assist the war-time emergency

in 1917. Most public offices, which had exclusive power of matching unskilled labor to

industries, were under the control of USES during the nation’s involvement in World War I

(Kellogg 1933). The use of public offices soared during the 1918 fiscal year (see Figures 1 and 2),

mainly due to the massive number of returning soldiers and workers who had previously been

transferred to war-related industries (US Employment Service 1919). Soldiers and workers went

back to their peace-time occupations after the war ceased and public offices played an important

role in reallocating them to their former positions and other places (US Bureau of Labor

Statistics 1931).


                                                                                                   9
            As the nation returned to normalcy, the use of public offices by job seekers dropped

substantially. The USES, the central authority of public offices during World War I, lost its power

over the labor market due to huge budget cuts by Congress. Thus, a substantial number of offices

were closed or turned over by the state and municipal governments (US Employment Service

1935a). The USES was a paper organization during the 1920s, meaning that the federal

government’s power over the labor exchange market was minimal. Most public offices were

maintained and operated by states or municipalities independently of the federal government.

Despite the decentralization of public labor exchange, the use of public offices was nontrivial.

Most research and documents ignore public offices’ contribution to the US labor market in the

1920s (e.g., US Employment Service 1935a, Commons and Andrews 1936, Adams 1969, Guzda

1983, and Breen 1997). However, the evidence in Figures 1 and 2 shows that more than 2 million

job seekers or roughly 5 percent of the total labor force per year used public offices during the

1920s. Public offices also made placements for 1.5 million job seekers, approximately 3 percent

of the labor force, during this period. Therefore, I argue that the role of public offices was also

important in the labor market in the 1920s. One might think that public offices played an

important role in the labor market only during times of emergency, such as World War I and the

Great Depression, as public offices became centralized to resolve these chaotic situations. But

public offices continued to serve as a major labor market intermediary in the 1920s, which was a

time of peace and economic growth.

            As the economy entered the Great Depression, the Wagner-Peyser Act of 1933

revitalized USES to be a nationwide employment service to control public offices across the

nation. It was a joint system of federal and state governments.12 As a main tool to perform New

12
     The federal government would provide up to 50 percent of the fund support, the remaining 50 percent being provided by the


                                                                                                                                 10
Deal relief programs for unemployment, public offices were influential over the entire labor

market during the Great Depression. The substantial increase in the use of public offices by job

seekers in 1933 (as seen in Figures 1 and 2) was mainly due to the public works provided by the

Civil Works Administration (CWA). CWA hired more than 4 million people and almost all

placements for this administration were made by public offices. People who wanted to find jobs

in CWA had to use public offices (US Employment Service, 1935b).

          Public offices also placed millions of unemployed in jobs created by the Works Progress

Administration (WPA). High use of public offices since 1935 indicates this (see Figures 1 and 2).

The use of public offices was also directly related to the unemployment compensation between

1937 and 1939. The large increase in the use of public offices between 1938 and 1939

demonstrates this fact. Unemployment benefits were paid to jobless people starting from January

1938 by the Social Security Act of 1935 (Atkinson, Odencrantz, and Deming 1938). People who

wanted to receive these benefits had to register with public offices.

          One point should be mentioned about the two spikes (around World War I and the Great

Depression) in the use of public offices in Figures 1 and 2, related to the argument in the

previous section. The high use of public offices by job seekers during the periods of World War I

and the Great Depression is irrelevant to the hypothesis that public offices contributed to

lowering the degree of asymmetric information between job seekers and private agencies. Public

offices performed employment services for war-time emergency during World War I and

matched job seekers and public work positions as a major tool to implement the New Deal

policies in the Great Depression.

          Given all the information provided in this section, it is clear that the impact of public


states to maintain and operate public offices (Ruttenberg and Gutchess 1970).


                                                                                                11
offices on the labor market was not influential in the first two decades of its operation. However,

the importance of public offices grew substantially, allowing them to be a major labor market

intermediary with their involvement arising from World War I.13



4. Users of Public Employment Offices
           In this section, I analyze users of public offices to test an implication of the theory

proposed in Section 2: The majority of job seekers using private agencies in the 19th and early

20th centuries were unskilled workers and immigrants who were vulnerable to the abuses of

private agencies. If these job seekers used public offices intensively, then this supports the

hypothesis that public offices contributed to lowering the degree of exploitation by private

agencies with respect to job seekers (the degree of asymmetric information between job seekers

and private agencies) by providing an alternative network during their job search process.

Therefore, I evaluate whether or not those who were vulnerable to exploitation by private

agencies, such as unskilled workers and immigrants, actually used public offices more

intensively.

           To do this, I present the gender and occupations of public office users. I also construct

the corresponding shares of workers in the population (the nation and state) from the Integrated

Public Use Microdata Series or IPUMS (Ruggles, et. al. 2004) to see how public office users

differed from other workers in the labor market in the early 20th century.14 In addition, I show

other characteristics of public office users to analyze how they were related to the argument

regarding asymmetric information.


13
   The use of public offices by job seekers was at least 4 percent of the labor force between 1916 and 1940 (see Figure 2).
14
   The estimates for the nation and state workers in Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 are constructed from the working age population (aged
between 16 and 65 inclusive) in the labor force.


                                                                                                                               12
           First, I construct the shares of public office users by gender for a few selected states

(Connecticut, Missouri, and Illinois) and compare them to those in the nation and the

corresponding states in the early 20th century (see Table 1). In Connecticut and Illinois, the shares

of female public office users were much larger than those of female workers in the nation and in

the states between 1900 and 1930, indicating that female workers used public offices more

intensively than male workers in those states. In Missouri, the share of female public office users

was larger than both the nation and the state female workers in 1900 (23.5 percent in Missouri

public offices, 14.1 percent in the state of Missouri, and 18.0 percent in the nation), while this

inequality was reversed between 1910 and 1920 (around 10 percent in Missouri public offices,

17 percent in the state of Missouri, and 20 percent in the nation). The shares of female workers in

all cases (Missouri public offices, the state of Missouri, and the nation) were almost the same in

1930. Overall, female workers used employment services through public offices more intensively

than male workers in Connecticut and Illinois, although this was not the case in Missouri.

           Table 2 gives the proportions of public office users by occupation in the selected states

over time. One clear pattern is that placements by public offices were biased toward service

workers and laborers.15 In Connecticut and Illinois, the largest proportion of public office users

was service workers, while laborers formed the majority of public office users in Missouri (see

fourth, sixth, and eighth columns in Table 2), respectively. As time went by, the importance of

agriculture tended to dwindle in Connecticut (11.5 percent in 1900, 14.9 percent in 1910, 3.7

percent in 1920, and 2.7 percent in 1930), but in Missouri, the proportion of agricultural workers

rose in 1920 (14.1 percent), declining in 1930 (8.3 percent). All three states’ distributions of

public offices show a concentration of service workers and laborers, but the degree of
15
   Most of the public office applicants’ occupations were also laborers and service workers in Connecticut, Illinois, and Missouri.
I provide only the placements of public office applicants because more information on occupations is available.


                                                                                                                                13
concentration was different. In Connecticut, approximately 60 to 70 percent of applicants placed

were service workers, whereas more laborers were placed than service workers in Missouri (see

fourth and sixth columns in Table 2). The differential between service workers and laborers was

not large in Illinois relative to that in Connecticut (see eighth column in Table 2).

            To investigate the types of public office users in more detail, I examine the occupations

of male and female public office users over time, respectively. The data show that male public

office users were largely laborers and the dominant occupation for females was service work

although there were some variations among states.16 One clear fact is that the difference between

public office users and other workers was not simply due to gender. Service work for women and

common labor for men were the main types of occupations dealt with by public offices until

1930. Both service workers and laborers also made up the majority of private agencies’ clients,

who were vulnerable to the abuses of private agencies in the early 20th century (Sargent 1912).

Therefore, the intensive use of public offices by service workers and laborers supports the

argument that public offices contributed to protecting job seekers from exploitation by private

agencies. This means that the degree of asymmetric information between job seekers and private

agencies was lowered as an alternative job matching service was provided by public offices at

that time.

            Besides the gender and occupations of job seekers using public offices, interesting facts

are revealed in Wisconsin and New York public offices in 1901. Table 3 shows some

characteristics of public office applicants in Wisconsin for 6 months (July to December 1901).

Approximately 40 percent of Wisconsin public office users were non-US citizens, 80 percent

were single, and only 4 percent were labor union members. Compared to workers in the nation,

16
     Tables for men’s and women’s occupational shares are available from the author upon request.


                                                                                                    14
the share of immigrants who used public offices in Wisconsin was higher by 13 percent.

However, the difference in place of origin disappeared between public office users and the state

workers. This may indicate that the share of immigrants using public offices was large because

the immigrant share of state workers was also high. The share of single public office users was

much larger than that of the nation or of state workers (approximately 80 percent for public

offices, 46 percent for the state population, and 43 percent for the nation). One prominent feature

was that only 26 percent of public office users were Wisconsin-born (about 49 percent for the

state and 54 percent for the nation). In terms of residence, almost half of the job seekers who

used public offices had resided in Wisconsin less than 5 years (see the last part of Table 3).

        Table 4 describes several characteristics of public office applicants in New York State in

1901. One distinction is that Table 4 also provides information on public office applicants

separately by gender. Overall, 62 percent of the applicants in New York public offices were non

US citizens (36 percent for the state). By gender, 52 percent of men and 68 percent of women

public office users were non-US citizens (versus 37 percent of men and 34 percent of women in

the state population). Over 60 percent of the public office applicants were single and 4 percent

were illiterate. In general, the share of single users was larger than that of state workers, although

this inequality is reversed for women (the proportion of female public office users was 62.1

percent while the proportion of female workers in the state was 78 percent). About 60 percent of

public office users were between 20 and 40 years of age (see the last part of the second column

in Table 4). The common similarity between Wisconsin and New York is that many of the public

office users were single around the turn of the 20th century. In New York’s case, it is clear that

immigrants used public offices more intensively than US-born workers for their job search.

        It is striking that 38 percent of public office applicants in Wisconsin were interstate


                                                                                                   15
migrants (US citizens who migrated from other regions in the US to Wisconsin). Moreover, 50

percent of them had resided in Wisconsin for less than 5 years. The large proportion of recent

migrants among public office users also supports the argument that public offices helped lower

the degree of asymmetric information between job seekers and private agencies because recent

migrants from other states were more likely to be exploited by private agencies due to lack of

information on the new environment. Even if the existence of public offices did not cause people

to migrate to Wisconsin, I can argue that once people moved to Wisconsin, they were likely to

look for jobs with the help of public offices if they could not rely on other networks, including

private agencies.

            In summary, most public office users were unskilled workers (service workers or

laborers), immigrants, or migrants in several states’ cases. These types of people were also major

clients of private agencies in the early 20th century. This fact, in part, supports the argument that

public offices provided an alternative job matching service for people who had low skills or were

unfamiliar to their new environment, and thus more likely to be exploited by private agencies.



5. Empirical Work
            Theoretically job seekers would be fully informed about the quality of private agencies

as public offices drive low-quality private agencies from the market. Consequently, job seekers

could choose to use either public offices or reputable private agencies: the establishment of

public offices can resolve adverse selection in the labor exchange market. Therefore, the most

relevant empirical question from this theory is to explore whether the introduction or

development of public offices resolved the problem of adverse selection.17 However, testing this

17
     Throughout this paper, I frequently mention “lower the degree of asymmetric information” and “resolve the problem of


                                                                                                                            16
hypothesis presents difficulties because information on private agencies in the early 20th century

is scarce.18

           Instead, I test the hypothesis that public offices helped lower the degree of asymmetric

information for uninformed job seekers. Even if this hypothesis is valid, it does not guarantee

that adverse selection disappeared. However, it does tell us that public offices were directed to

resolve the problem of adverse selection because lowering the degree of asymmetric information

between job seekers and private agencies is a part of that process. This hypothesis was proposed

in the last section and in part supported by the findings on the types of workers who used public

offices. I extend this analysis to an empirical test by examining the relationship between the use

of public offices by job seekers (in terms of the number of job seekers using public offices) and

labor market conditions related to asymmetric information.

           To test the hypothesis, a statistical model is constructed. The model describes the

relationship between the use of public offices by job seekers and labor market conditions,

including proxy variables for asymmetric information. If the use of public offices and the

asymmetric information factors are positively related, then the relationship may support the

hypothesis. A positive correlation would indicate that the use of public offices increased as the

number of people who were vulnerable to the abuses by private agencies due to lack of

information increased. Hence, public offices contributed to lessening the degree of asymmetric

information for uninformed job seekers who were more likely to be exploited by private agencies.

           I collected data for the use of public offices by job seekers from annual reports and

monthly bulletins published by the USES. I narrowed my empirical analysis to 1920 and 1930

adverse selection”. Lowering the degree of asymmetric information is a process to resolve adverse selection because eliminating
asymmetric information problem is necessary to resolve adverse selection. Therefore, when information symmetry is achieved,
low-quality private agencies are driven out of the market, and consequently adverse selection disappears.
18
   To test the problem of adverse selection directly, detailed data on private agencies are required such as fees charged by private
agencies.


                                                                                                                                  17
because most of the labor market data at state or at lower regional levels are available

decennially. Moreover, public offices were not influential as a labor market intermediary before

World War I (see Figure 2). I also limited the samples of explanatory variables to the labor force

of working age (i.e., aged between 16 and 65 inclusive) in urban areas.19 The regression model

is as follows:


           ln(USE)it = α + β1ln(WAGE)it + β2ln(EMPLOYMENT)it + β3ln(INCOME)it

                           + β4ln(WOMEN)it + β5ln(SINGLE)it + β6ln(DSE)it + β7ln(ILLITERATE)it

                           + β8ln(IMMIGRANT)it + β9ln(MIGRANT)it + β10ln(SERVICE)it

                           + β11ln(LABOR)it + Dt + XitB + εit



The dependent variable USEit measures the use of public offices by job seekers in terms of the

number of applicants who used public offices. The subscripts i and t indicate state and year (1920

and 1930), respectively. WAGE, EMPLOYMENT, and INCOME are chosen to control for general

labor market conditions.20 For the data regarding the wage and employment levels, “Estimates

of Average Manufacturing Wages by State” and “Total Employment by State” are used,

respectively (Fishback and Kantor 2000).21 To control for level of income, I employ “Realized

national income” which is an estimate consisting of “the total of payments to individuals by

business and government in the form of wages, salaries, dividends, interest, net rents and

royalties, and net profits withdrawn by unincorporated enterprises” (National Industrial

Conference Boards, Inc. 1939, p. 114).

19
   By definition, job seekers using public offices are in the labor force and most of them are in the working age population.
   Most public offices before the Great Depression were located in major cities (Kellogg 1933 and Breen 1997).
20
   These three variables are not limited to working age population in the labor force in urban areas unlike all the other
explanatory variables because of unavailability of data.
21
   “Total Employment by State”is the estimate of the number of employed workers of all kinds in each state.


                                                                                                                                18
           Other explanatory variables are selected based on the analysis of the types of public

office users in the last section and constructed from IPUMS extracts (Ruggles, et. at. 2004) of

1920 and 1930 samples. WOMEN and SINGLE are estimates of the numbers of women and

single workers. The last six variables (DSE, ILLTERATE, IMMIGRANT, MIGRANT, SERVICE,

and LABOR) are proxy variables for asymmetric information. In the early 20th century,

immigrants, migrants, and unskilled workers were vulnerable to the abuses of private agencies

due to lack of information about the area or less education. DSE is the number of people who did

not speak English and ILLITERATE is the number of people who were illiterate (i.e., cannot read

or write) in any language. I add DSE and ILLITERATE for asymmetric information proxies

because these workers were less likely to be educated and thus seemed to be vulnerable to

exploitation by private agencies. The variable IMMIGRANT is the number of non-US citizens;

MIGRANT is the total number of migrants who were US citizens; SERVICE is the number of

service workers; and LABOR is the number of laborers. MIGRANT is a measure of interstate

migration which is estimated based on whether a person lived in the state in which he or she was

born at the time of the Census (Rosenbloom and Sundstrom 2004). Dt is a time dummy and Xit

indicates the interaction terms between time and region dummies to control for unobserved

factors, in part, correlated with the explanatory variables over time or region.22

           The summary statistics for the variables are shown in Table 5 and the results of the

regression analysis are provided in Tables 6 and 7. First, I run cross-section regressions for 1920

and 1930 separately and the results are shown in Table 6. Overall, signs of the key estimates are

not significant in most specifications. However, the estimates for MIGRANT, which indicate the

relationship between the use of public offices and interstate migration, are positive and
22
  The Census division is used for the regional classification in this paper: New England, Middle Atlantic, East North Central,
West North Central, South Atlantic, East South Central, West South Central, Mountain, and Pacific.


                                                                                                                                 19
significant. This pattern may imply that public offices helped migrants who were unfamiliar to

their new environment and thus most likely to be abused by private agencies in their job search.

             Table 7 presents the results for the unbalanced panel regressions with fixed and random

effects.23 In general, like in the case of cross-section regressions, most of the signs for the

estimates are not significant. However, the estimates are significant for ILLITERATE and

MIGRANT but negative for ILLITERATE and positive for MIGRANT. The negative sign for

ILLITERATE is understandable since applicants of public offices had to fill out application forms

when they registered and had to have interviews with the agents in public offices. Positive

estimates for MIGRANT are consistent with the results in the cross-section analyses. The

magnitude and significance of the estimates for MIGRANT increase after controlling for time and

region-specific fixed effects.

             This positive and significant relationship between the use of public offices by job

seekers and interstate migration reaffirms the hypothesis that public offices contributed to

lowering the degree of asymmetric information, especially in favor of migrants who were most

lacking in information and networks in their new environment.



6. Conclusion
             Progressive Era (1890s through 1920s) social reformers viewed uninformed job seekers

as vulnerable to exploitation by private employment agencies. In response to the cries of these

people, public employment offices were introduced to restrain private employment agencies

from exploitation of job seekers. I describe this situation as a case of asymmetric information

between job seekers and private agencies that could cause adverse selection in the labor

23
     The balanced and unbalanced panel regressions produce nearly identical coefficient estimates.


                                                                                                     20
exchange market. Creation of public employment offices can be viewed as a policy device to

eliminate low-quality private employment agencies that were committing malpractices with

respect to job seekers.

          My analysis shows that the majority of job seekers who utilized public employment

offices were unskilled workers, immigrants, or migrants who were also major clients of private

employment agencies at that time. One of the most interesting findings is a positive relationship

between the use of public employment offices and interstate migration in 1920 and 1930. This

supports the hypothesis that public employment offices lessened the degree of asymmetric

information in favor of migrants in the labor exchange market. In other words, public

employment offices were especially helpful for migrants who were most lacking in information

and networks in their new environment.

          Despite the importance of public employment offices in the early 20th century, current

trends are the reduction in public funding and privatization of public employment services in

response to a decrease in their usage by job seekers.24 This could be in part due to inefficient

operation of public employment offices in recent periods (De Koning, Denys, and Walwei 1999).

However, the role of public employment offices is still relevant with respect to the asymmetric

information problem in the labor exchange market. Autor and Houseman (2005) found that

temporary help agencies provide low-skilled workers with jobs that have lower wages and

shorter employment durations than do direct-hire jobs. There is a possibility that this ineffective

outcome of temporary help agencies may result from asymmetric information between low-

skilled workers and temporary help agencies. Temporary help agencies may have an incentive to

make use of this information asymmetry to exploit their employees, which is an inefficient
24
  Approximately 19 percent of the unemployed used public employment offices in the US in 2001, while 30 percent did in the
1970s (Eberts and Holzer 2004).


                                                                                                                         21
market outcome. In addition, services by public employment offices are always pertinent for

certain groups such as illegal immigrants, very low-skilled workers, or low-educated workers

who have little information about the labor market and little recourse to recover damages if

exploited.

        As a final remark, the focus of this paper was on the supply side (job seekers) but it is

also important to investigate the demand side, the activities of private employment agencies and

their interactions with public employment offices. The direct test of adverse selection in the labor

exchange market requires detailed information on private employment agencies such as fees

charged by private employment agencies and the corresponding clients’ characteristics. I plan to

explore this in the future work.




                                                                                                 22
References

Adams, Leonard P. 1969. The Public Employment Service in Transition, 1933 – 1968: Evolution
    of a Placement Service into a Manpower Agency. Ithaca: New York School of Industrial and
    Labor Relations, Cornell University.
Atkinson, Raymond C., Odencrantz, Louis C., and Deming, Ben. 1938. Public Employment
    Service in the United States. Chicago: Public Administration Service.
Autor, David H. and Houseman, Susan N. 2005. Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor Market
    Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from Random Assignments. NBER Working
    Paper No. 11743. Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Baldwin, George B. 1951 Tulamusa: A Study of the Place of the Public Employment Service.
    Industrial and Labor Relation Review 4, No. 4: 509-526.
Bogart, Ernest L. 1900. Public Employment Offices in the United States and Germany. The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 14, No. 3: 341 – 377
Breen, William J. 1997. Labor Market Politics and the Great War: The Department of Labor, the
    States, and the First US Employment Service, 1907-1933. Kent and London: Kent State
    University Press.
Commons, John R. and Andrews, John B. 1936. Principles of Labor Legislation. 4th Edition.
    New York and London: Harper & Brothers.
Conner, J. E. 1907. Free Public Employment Offices in the United States. US Bureau of Labor
    Bulletin No. 68. pp. 1-116. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
De Koning, Jaap, Denys, Jan and Walwei, Ulrich. 1999. Deregulation in Placement Services: A
    Comparative Study for Eight EU Countries. European Commission, DG for Employment,
    Industrial relations and Social Affairs, Brussels.
Devine, Edward T. 1909. Employment Bureau for the People of New York City. Annals of the
    American Academy of Political and Social Science 33, No. 2: 1–14.
Eberts, Randall W. and Holzer, Harry J. 2004. Overview of Labor Exchange Policies and
    Services. In Labor Exchange Policy in the United States, ed. Balducchi, David E., Eberts,
    Randall W. and O’Leary Christopher J. 1-31. Kalamazoo, Michigan: W.E. Upjohn Institute
    for Employment Research.
Edwards, George W. 1935. Employment Service of Canada. Monthly Labor Review 9, No. 2
    (February): 157-68.
Finkin, Matthew W. and Jacoby, Sanford M. 2005. An Introduction to the Regulation of Leasing
    and Employment Agencies. Comparative Labor Law and Policy Journal 23, No.1: 1 – 6.
Fishback, Price V. and Kantor, Shawn E. 2000. A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of
    Workers’ Compensation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Guzda, Henry P. 1983. The US Employment Service at 50: It too had to wait its turn. Monthly
    Labor Review 106, No. 6 (June): 12-19.
Herdon Jr., John G. 1918. Public Employment Offices in the United States. US Bureau of Labor
    Statistics Bulletin No. 241. pp. 1-100. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
International Labour Office. 1955. National Employment Services, United States. Geneva.
Kellogg, Ruth M. 1933. The United States Employment Service. Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press.
Kübler, Dorothea. 1999. Coexistence of Public and Private Job Agencies: Screening with
    Heterogeneous Institutions. Public Choice 101: 85-107.


                                                                                          23
Leiserson, William M. 1915. The Movement for Public Labor Exchanges. The Journal of
    Political Economy 23, No. 7: 707–716.
Martinez, Tomás. 1976. The Human Market Place: An Examination of Private Employment
    Agencies. New Brunswick: Transaction, Inc.
Muhlhauser, Hilda. 1916. Public Employment Bureaus and Their Relation to Managers of
    Employment in Industry. Annals of the American Academy of Political Science 65, Personnel
    and Employment Problems in Industrial Management (May): 170–175.
National Industrial Conference Board Inc. 1939. National Income and Its Geographic
    Distribution 1919-1938. Conference Board Studies in Enterprise and Social Progress, New
    York.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 1979. Job Matching with State Employment Agencies and Random
    Search. The Economic Journal 89, No. 356 (December): 818-833.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L. 2002. Looking for Work, Searching for Workers: American Labor
    Markets During Industrialization. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L. and Sundstrom, William A. 2004. The Decline and Rise of Interstate
    Migration in the United States: Evidence from the IPUMS, 1850-1990. Research in
    Economic History 22: 289-325.
Ruggles, Steven, et. al. 2004. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-
    readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and
    distributor].
Ruttenberg, Stanley H. and Gutchess, Jocelyn. 1970. The Federal-State Employment Service: A
    Critique. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Sargent, Frank B. 1912. Statistics of Unemployment and the Work of Employment Offices. US
    Bureau of labor Bulletin No. 109. pp. 5-140. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Smith, Darrell H. 1923. The United States Employment Service: Its History, Activities and
    Organization. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
State of California Bureau of Labor Statistics. 20th Biennial Report of the Bureau of Labor
    Statistics 1921-1922. (Sacramento 1923).
State of Colorado Bureau of Labor Statistics. Biennial Reports. 1903 to 1915. (Denver, CO 1903-
    1915).
State of Connecticut Bureau of Labor Statistics. Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1902-
    1915, 1922, 1930. (Hartford, CT 1902-1915, 1922, 1931).
State of Illinois Bureau of Labor Statistics. Annual Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the
    Illinois Free Employment Offices. 1900-1915. (Springfield, IL 1900-1915).
State of Indiana Department of Statistics. Biennial Report. 1910-1914. (Indianapolis, IN 1911-
    1915).
State of Kansas Bureau of Labor and Industry. Annual Report. 1901-1912. (Topeka, KS 1901-
    1914).
State of Kansas Department of Labor and Industry. Annual Report. 1913-1916. (Topeka, KS
    1914-1915).
State of Kentucky Bureau of Agriculture, Labor, and Statistics. Biennial Report. 1912-1915.
    (Louisville, KY 1912-1915).
State of Maryland Bureau of Statistics and Information. Annual Report. 1903-1915. (Baltimore,
    MD 1904-1915).
State of Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor. 34th, 38th-45th Annual Reports. 1904, 1907-
    1915. (Boston, MA 1904, 1907-1915).


                                                                                                 24
State of Michigan Bureau of Labor and Industrial Statistics. Annual Report. 1906-1909. (Lansing,
    MI 1906-1909).
State of Michigan Department of Labor. Annual Report. 1910-1915. (Lansing, MI 1910-1915).
State of Minnesota Bureau of Labor. Biennial Report. 1905-1906. (Minneapolis, MN 1907).
State of Minnesota Bureau of Labor. Biennial Report. 1907-1914. (Minneapolis, MN 1907).
State of Missouri Bureau of Labor Statistics. Annual Report. 1899-1915, 1920-1922. (Jefferson
    City, MO 1900-1916, 1923).
State of Missouri Department of Labor and Industrial Inspection. Annual Report. 1930.
    (Jefferson City, MO 1930).
State of Montana Bureau of Agriculture, Labor, and Industry. Annual Report. 1902-1912.
    (Helena, MT 1902-1912).
State of Montana Department of Labor and Industry, Biennial Report. 1913-1914, 1915-1916.
    (Helena, MT 1913-1916).
State of New Jersey Department of Labor. Report. 1910-1915. (Trenton, NJ 1910-1915).
State of New York Department of Labor. Annual Report of Commissioner of Labor. 1900-1906,
    1915. (Albany, NY 1901-1916).
State of Ohio Bureau of Labor Statistics. Annual Report. 1890-1913. (Columbus, OH 1891-
    1914).
State of Ohio Department of Investigation and Statistics. Report. 1914-1915. (Columbus, OH
    1915-1916).
State of Oklahoma Department of Labor. Annual Report. 1908-1915. (Oklahoma City, OK 1908-
    1915).
State of Rhode Island Bureau of Industrial Statistics. Annual Report. 1908-1914. (Providence, RI
    1908-1914).
State of Texas Bureau of Labor Statistics. Biennial Report. 1914-1915. (Austin, TX 1914-1915).
State of Washington Bureau of Labor. Biennial Report. 1901-1916. (Olympia, WA 1903-1916).
State of West Virginia Bureau of Labor Statistics. Biennial Report. 1901-1915. (Charleston, WV
    1901-1915).
State of Wisconsin Bureau of Labor and Industrial Statistics. Biennial Report. 1900-1915.
    (Madison, WI 1902-1916).
Stewart, Annabel M., and Stewart, Bryce M. 1933. Statistical Procedure of Public Employment
    Offices. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
US Bureau of Labor Standards. 1962. Laws Regulating Private Employment Agencies. Growth of
    Labor Law in the United States. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1931. Public Employment Services. Monthly Labor Review 32,
    No. 1 (January): 10-32.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics. January 1915 – February 1918. Monthly Review 1 No. 1 – 6, No.
    2.
US Employment Service. 1919, 1920, 1921. Annual Report of the Director General US
    Employment Service to the Secretary of Labor, Fiscal Year Ending June 30 1918, 1919, 1920.
    Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
US Employment Service. January 1924 – January 1932 Monthly Report of Activities of State and
    Municipal Employment Services Cooperating with US Employment Service. Washington,
    DC: Government Printing Office.
US Employment Service. September 1934 – December 1940. Employment Service News 1, No. 1
    – 7, No. 12 Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.


                                                                                             25
US Employment Service. 1935a. Historical Sketch of Public Employment. Employment Service
   News 2, No. 2 (February): 2–8.
US Employment Service. 1935b. Twelve and One-Half Millions Registered for Work 1934.
   Washington DC: Government Printing Office.
Walwei, Ulrich. 1996. Improving Job-matching through Placement Services. In International
   Handbook of Labour Market Policy and Evaluation, ed. Günther Schmid, Jacqueline
   O’Reilly and Klaus Schömann. 402-430. Cheltenham and Brookfield: Edward Elgar.
Wier, David R. 1992. A Century of US Unemployment, 1890-1990: Revised Estimates and
   Evidence for Stabilization. Research in Economic History 14: 301-346.
Yavas, Abdullah. 1994. Middlemen in Bilateral Markets. Journal of Labor Economics 12, No. 3
   (July): 406-429.




                                                                                         26
                 Figure 1. Use of Public Employment Offices by Job Seekers

               14
    Millions


               12


               10


                8


                6


                4


                2


                0
                 90

                        93

                               96

                                      99

                                             02

                                                    05

                                                           08

                                                                  11

                                                                         14

                                                                                17

                                                                                       20

                                                                                              23

                                                                                                     26

                                                                                                            29

                                                                                                                   32

                                                                                                                          35

                                                                                                                                 38
               18

                      18

                             18

                                    18

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       19

                                                                              19

                                                                                     19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                               19
Sources:
1890 – 1914: Bogart (1900), Conner (1907), Sargent (1912), and various state reports (see references).
1915 – 1916: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, January 1915 (Vol. 1, No. 1) to February 1918 (Vol. 6, No. 2)
1917 – 1919: US Employment Service (1918, 1919, 1920)
1920 – 1921: Smith (1923), and Commons and Andrews (1936)
1923 – 1930: US Employment Service (January 1924 to January 1932).
1933: US Employment Service (1935b).
1934 – 1939: US Employment Service, September 1934 (Vol. 1, No. 1) to December 1940 (Vol. 7, No. 12).

Notes:
- 1923, 1931, and 1932 are missing.
- The following states in each year indicate missing data by state and year: 1903 to 1906 (Kansas); 1907 (Colorado);
1909 to 1910 (New Jersey); 1912 (Kansas, Montana, New Jersey, Oklahoma); 1913 (New Jersey, Oklahoma, West
Virginia); 1914 (California, Kentucky, Montana, New Jersey, Oklahoma, Texas, West Virginia).
- Data From 1915 to 1939 are reported for fiscal years (July to June).




                                                                                                                                      27
        Figure 2. Unemployment Rate and Use of Public Employment Offices by Job
                       Seekers as a Percentage of the Labor Force

   25.00%




   20.00%



   15.00%




   10.00%



     5.00%




     0.00%
          90

                 93

                        96

                               99

                                      02

                                             05

                                                    08

                                                           11

                                                                  14

                                                                         17

                                                                                20

                                                                                       23

                                                                                              26

                                                                                                     29

                                                                                                            32

                                                                                                                   35

                                                                                                                          38
        18

               18

                      18

                             18

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       19

                                                                              19

                                                                                     19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                        19
                                                  Unemployment rate             Use as a % of LF



Sources: Labor force (LF) and the unemployment rate (Wier 1992) and the use of public employment offices by job
seekers (same as Figure 1).




                                                                                                                               28
Table 1.           Gender of Public Employment Office Applicants

                   Nation                                    State                   Public Employment Offices
Year        Men             Women                    Men             Women             Men           Women

1900        82.0             18.0       CT           78.6             21.4              49.1             50.9
1910        79.1             21.0       CT           75.1             24.9              52.1             47.9
1920        79.4             20.6       CT           74.1             25.9              57.7             42.3
1930        77.7             22.3       CT           73.5             26.5              56.1             43.9

1900                                   MO            85.9             14.1              76.5             23.5
1910                                   MO            83.2             16.8              89.8             10.2
1920                                   MO            81.5             18.5              89.5             10.5
1930                                   MO            79.2             20.9              80.0             20.0

1900                                    IL           83.5             16.5              57.2             42.8
1910                                    IL           81.3             18.7              71.6             28.4
1920                                    IL           79.5             20.5              76.9             23.1
1930                                    IL           77.2             22.8              62.0             38.0

Sources: See Table 2.

Notes: The second and third columns present the percents of male and female workers in the nation, respectively.
The fifth and sixth columns present the percents of male and female workers in the corresponding states,
respectively. The seventh and eighth columns indicate the percents of male and female job seekers registered in
public employment offices in the corresponding states, respectively. All the percents of the nation and states are
calculated from the labor force of working age (i.e., aged between 16 and 65 inclusive).




                                                                                                                29
   Table 2.            Occupations of Male and Female Applicants Placed by Public Employment
                       Offices

                                               Nation              CT                  MO                     IL
                                                                     Public              Public                    Public
Occupation                                                 State     offices     State   offices      State        offices
1900
Professionals and technical workers              4.5         5.0         0.2      4.7        0.2        5.6          0.0
Agricultural workers                            33.4        10.3        11.5     39.5        3.2       24.2          2.5
Managers, officials and proprietors              5.7         5.5         0.1      6.3        0.0        7.1          0.0
Clerical and kindred                             3.4         4.0         2.2      3.8        8.3        5.3          0.4
Sales workers                                   4.5          5.2        8.0      5.2         4.0        6.1         0.7
Craftsmen & operatives                          26.9        46.1         4.2     22.3        8.2       29.7          6.1
Service workers                                  9.3         9.0        66.7      8.6       24.4        9.9         40.3
Laborers                                        12.3        14.9        5.1      9.5        47.8       12.1         36.1
1910
Professionals and technical workers              4.9         5.6         0.1      5.0        0.0        5.6          0.0
Agricultural workers                            28.6         7.4        14.9     32.8        5.8       18.7          1.6
Managers, officials and proprietors              6.0         5.7         0.1      6.5        0.0        6.8          0.0
Clerical and kindred                             5.6         7.1         0.4      6.4        0.3        8.7          0.6
Sales workers                                   4.7          4.9         4.0      5.6        1.4        5.8          0.9
Craftsmen & operatives                          27.6        43.0         4.1     23.8        6.8       31.8         10.7
Service workers                                  9.5        10.8        61.1      9.1       35.5        9.5         43.7
Laborers                                        13.1        15.6        13.4     10.9       43.8       13.1         35.6
1920
Professionals and technical workers              5.6         6.3         0.0      5.7        0.1
Agricultural workers                            24.1         6.3         3.7     28.8       14.1
Managers, officials and proprietors              6.7         6.5         0.1      7.5        0.1
Clerical and kindred                             8.3        10.2         0.5      9.0        4.2
Sales workers                                   5.0          4.3         2.8      6.0        0.2
Craftsmen & operatives                          30.8        46.0         7.1     25.0       14.5
Service workers                                  8.1         7.9        71.8      8.0       19.4
Laborers                                        11.5        12.6        13.6     10.0       46.9
1930
Professionals and technical workers              6.9         8.0         0.0      6.6        0.0
Agricultural workers                            20.1         4.6         2.7     24.3        8.3
Managers, officials and proprietors              7.3         7.4         0.0      7.7        0.1
Clerical and kindred                             9.2        12.2         1.3     10.0        1.3
Sales workers                                   6.7          6.1         3.3      7.2        0.7
Craftsmen & operatives                          29.3        41.5         6.3     25.4       10.1
Service workers                                  9.7         9.2        67.4      9.1       20.0
Laborers                                        10.7        11.1        18.8     9.8        59.6

   Sources (Tables 1and 2): For 1900 occupation and gender distributions: State of Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics
   of Labor 1904. For 1910 occupation and gender distributions: Illinois and Missouri, Sargent 1912; Connecticut,



                                                                                                                    30
State of Connecticut Bureau of Labor Statistics 1912. For 1920 occupation and gender distributions: Missouri, State
of Missouri Bureau of Labor Statistics 1923; Connecticut, State of Connecticut Bureau of Labor Statistics 1922. For
1930 occupation and gender distributions: Missouri, State of Missouri Department of Labor and Industrial
Inspection 1930; Connecticut, State of Connecticut Bureau of Labor Statistics 1931. For the nation and states’
overall occupation and gender percents, IPUMS (Ruggles, et. al 2004).

Notes: The first column is the classification of the occupations. The second column displays the percents of
occupations of workers in the nation. The third, fifth, and seventh columns are the percents of occupations of
workers in each state. The fourth, sixth, and eighth columns are the percents of occupations of job seekers placed
through public employment offices in each state. The categorization of the occupations in Table 2 is based on
IPUM’s 1950 occupation basis, which is the 1950 Census Bureau occupation classification system with some
modifications. Agricultural workers include farmers (owners, tenants, farm managers) and farm laborers. Craftsmen
and operatives are skilled and semi-skilled workers in manufacturing. All the percents of the corresponding states
and the nation are calculated from the labor force of working age (i.e., aged between 16 and 65 inclusive).




                                                                                                                31
Table 3.           Characteristics of Wisconsin Public Employment Office Applicants in 1901

                                               Public offices               State                   Nation

Place of origin
US born                                             63.8                    63.1                     77.1
Foreign born                                        36.2                    36.9                     22.9

Marital status
Married                                             20.1                    53.8                     57.0
Single                                              79.9                    46.2                     43.0

Place of birth
Wisconsin                                           26.3                    49.4                     54.3
Other U.S.                                          38.0                    13.7                     22.8
Other nations                                       36.2                    36.9                     22.9

Member of labor union
No                                                  95.9
Yes                                                  4.1

Years in the US for Immigrants
Less than 1 year                                     6.3
1 - 5 years                                         15.0
6 - 10 years                                        17.7
11 - 15 years                                       17.6
16 - 20 years                                       18.4
21 - 25 years                                       10.2
26 - 30 years                                        5.6
Over 30 years                                       9.2

Residence in Wisconsin
Less than 1 year                                    30.1
1 - 5 years                                         18.2
6 - 10 years                                         8.2
Over 11 years                                       18.1
Since birth                                         25.7

Sources: State of Wisconsin Bureau of Labor and Industrial Statistics 1902 and IPUMS (Ruggles, et. al. 2004).

Notes: Among 4,744 applicants in Wisconsin public employment offices from July to December 1901, 3,890
applicants filled at least one part of the application form. The first column describes personal characteristics of
workers. The second column shows the percents of the corresponding characteristics of public office users. The third
and fourth columns are the corresponding percents of the labor force of working age (aged between 16 and 65
inclusive) in Wisconsin and the nation in 1900, respectively.



                                                                                                                 32
Table 4.             Characteristics of New York State Public Employment Office Applicants in
                     1901

                                  Public Employment Offices                          New York State
                               Overall     Men        Women                Overall       Men        Women

 Place of origin
 US born                         38.0         47.9          32.1             63.9         63.3          66.1
 Foreign born                    62.0         52.1          67.9             36.1         36.7          33.9

 Marital status
 Married                         34.6         29.2          37.9             52.8         61.8          22.0
 Single                          65.4         70.8          62.1             47.2         38.2          78.0

 Literacy
 literate                        96.3         99.4          94.0             94.8         94.6          95.7
 illiterate                      3.7          0.5           6.0              5.2          5.4           4.3

 Age of applicants
 Under 20 years                   8.3         11.7           6.0
 20 - 30                         37.9         45.1          33.6
 30 - 40                         26.7         24.4          28.1
 40 - 50                         18.8         12.8          22.5
 50 - 60                         6.9          4.6            8.4
 Over 60                         1.3          1.3           1.3

Source: State of New York Department of Labor 1902 for public offices; IPUMS (Ruggles, et. at 2004) for New
York State.

Note: The first column describes personal characteristics of workers. The second, third, and fourth columns show
the percents of the corresponding characteristics of overall, men, and public office users, respectively. The fifth,
sixth, and seventh columns are the corresponding percents of overall, male, and female workers in the labor force of
working age in 1900, respectively.




                                                                                                                 33
Table 5.        Descriptive Statistics

                                      1920                                      1930
Variable                 Obs          Mean         Std.Dev         Obs          Mean        Std.Dev

USE                        49       52861.9       85955.8           44        54707.8       72237.6
WAGE                       48          33.3           6.3           43           31.7           6.2
EMPLOYMENT                 48      812186.8      827466.0           43       980432.3      990891.5
INCOME                     49        1398.1        1780.3           44         1606.5        2276.0
WOMEN                      49      115384.6      174173.1           44       165598.7      226613.4
SINGLE                     49      189663.1      297903.9           44       225468.7      350049.2
ILLTERATE                  49       19242.1       29545.0           44        16841.8       24218.5
DSE                        49       12205.5       25143.8           44         7618.6       15561.4
IMMIGRANT                  49       68477.5      149007.6           44        59149.3      129509.9
MIGRANT                    49      114209.6      116875.0           44       170187.3      203006.5
SERVICE                    49       49039.0       68972.4           44        76454.7      102278.1
LABOR                      49       59797.2       78326.9           44        69591.3       87410.9

Sources: USE (for 1920, US Employment Service 1921; for 1930, US Employment Service January 1930 to
December 1930). WAGE and EMPLOYMENT (Fishback, Price and Kantor 2000). INCOME (National Industrial
Conference Board Inc. 1939). Others (Ruggles, et. at. 2004).




                                                                                                34
  Table 6.             Relationship between the Use of Public Employment Offices and
                       Asymmetric Information-1: Cross-Section for 1920 and 1930 Separately

Dependent Variable: ln(USE)                 1920                  1920                   1930                  1930
                                         Coefficient           Coefficient            Coefficient           Coefficient
Explanatory Variable                   (Robust Std. Err)     (Robust Std. Err)      (Robust Std. Err)     (Robust Std. Err)

Region fixed effects                          No                    Yes                    No                    Yes

ln(WAGE)                                    1.68***                 1.17*                 1.69                   2.38
                                              (0.53)               (0.61)                (1.80)                 (1.84)
ln(EMPLOYMENT)                               -0.28**               -0.32*                 0.25                   -0.58
                                              (0.13)               (0.18)                (1.07)                 (1.04)
ln(INCOME)                                    -2.32                -3.40*                 -3.10                 -4.24
                                              (1.54)               (1.68)                (2.80)                 (2.65)
ln(WOMEN)                                      -1.05                -1.14                 -1.83               -4.84***
                                              (0.72)               (0.85)                (2.06)                 (1.80)
ln(SINGLE)                                     1.07                 2.31*                 0.43                   2.51
                                              (0.87)               (1.13)                (1.90)                 (1.78)
ln(DSE)                                     -0.27***              -0.22**                 -0.16                 -0.06
                                              (0.10)               (0.10)                (0.13)                 (0.14)
ln(ILLITERATE)                              -0.60***                -0.43                 -0.11                 -0.19
                                              (0.25)               (0.36)                (0.20)                 (0.19)
ln(IMMIGRANT)                               0.46***                 0.35                  0.37                  -0.29
                                              (0.16)               (0.24)                (0.26)                 (0.36)
ln(MIGRANT)                                  0.83**                 0.93*               1.28***               1.74***
                                              (0.37)               (0.50)                (0.41)                 (0.60)
ln(SERVICE)                                    -0.03                -0.34                 -1.10                  0.68
                                              (0.66)               (0.78)                (0.69)                 (0.97)
ln(LABOR)                                      -0.50               -1.36*                 0.64                  -0.11
                                              (0.51)               (0.70)                (0.59)                 (0.91)
Constant                                   -14.40***                -2.27                -12.79                -11.90
                                              (5.78)               (8.07)               (12.87)                (12.46)

R-squared                                     0.86                  0.91                  0.75                  0.86

Total observations                             48                    48                    43                    43

  Notes:
  - Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level;
  ***at the .01 level.
  - USE (dependent variable): the number of applicants who used public offices in a state in a year.
  - WAGE: average manufacturing wages in a state in a year.
  - EMPLOYMENT: total employment in a state in a year.
  - IMCOME: realized income in a state in a year (see page 18).
  - WOMEN: the number of women in a state in a year.


                                                                                                                       35
- SINGLE: the number of single in a state in a year.
- DSE: the number of people who did not speak English in a state in a year.
- ILLITERATE: the number of illiterate in any language in a state in a year.
- IMMIGRANT: the number of non-US citizens in a state in a year.
- MIGRANT: the number of migrants who were US citizens in a state in a year.
- SERVICE: the number of service workers in a state in a year.
- LABOR: the number of laborers in a state in a year.




                                                                               36
   Table 7.             Relationship between the Use of Public Employment Offices and
                        Asymmetric Information-2: Panel Regressions (Unbalanced)

Dependent Variable: ln(USE)                      FE                     FE                     RE                     RE
                                             Coefficient            Coefficient            Coefficient            Coefficient
Explanatory Variable                          (Std.Err)              (Std.Err)              (Std.Err)              (Std.Err)

Time Dummy (1920)                                Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes

Time*Region                                      No                     Yes                    No                     Yes

ln(WAGE)                                         -1.44                  -1.50                 0.93*                  0.94*
                                                (1.30)                 (1.69)                 (0.52)                 (0.57)
ln(EMPLOYMENT)                                   0.39                   0.46                   -0.19                  -0.27
                                                (0.48)                 (0.53)                 (0.22)                 (0.24)
ln(INCOME)                                       3.15                   2.64                  -1.10                  -1.03
                                                (2.68)                 (3.22)                 (1.28)                 (1.32)
ln(WOMEN)                                        -1.53                  -1.82                 -0.89                   0.11
                                                (1.62)                 (2.00)                 (0.64)                 (0.83)
ln(SINGLE)                                      2.49*                   1.91                   1.09                   0.24
                                                (1.43)                 (2.06)                 (0.74)                 (0.88)
ln(DSE)                                          0.15                   0.18                  -0.03                   -0.03
                                                (0.12)                 (0.14)                 (0.08)                 (0.09)
ln(ILLITERATE)                                 -1.70**                -1.82**               -0.68***               -0.69***
                                                (0.71)                 (0.72)                 (0.20)                 (0.21)
ln(IMMIGRANT)                                    -0.16                  -0.25                  0.12                   0.16
                                                (0.47)                 (0.49)                 (0.17)                 (0.18)
ln(MIGRANT)                                      1.39                  2.48**                0.68**                  0.57*
                                                (1.07)                 (1.23)                 (0.29)                 (0.31)
ln(SERVICE)                                      0.29                   0.36                   0.31                   0.04
                                                (1.11)                 (1.24)                 (0.56)                 (0.58)
ln(LABOR)                                        -0.07                  0.76                   -0.19                  0.05
                                                (1.05)                 (1.23)                 (0.43)                 (0.46)
Constant                                         9.28                   1.16                 -9.38*                   -9.11
                                               (23.70)                (29.03)                (5.39)                 (5.74)

R-squared:
Within                                           0.36                   0.56                   0.14                   0.25
Between                                          0.09                   0.34                   0.85                   0.87
Overall                                          0.12                   0.37                   0.77                   0.82

Total observations                                90                     90                     90                     90
Total group                                       47                     47                     47                     47

   Note: Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level;
   ***at the .01 level.


                                                                                                                             37
