NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BIDDER'S CURSE
Young Han Lee
Ulrike Malmendier
Working Paper 13699
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13699
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

We would like to thank Christopher Adams, Stefano DellaVigna, Darrell Duffie, Tomaso Duso, Tanjim
Hossain, Ali Hortacsu, Daniel Kahneman, Botond K¨oszegi, David Laibson, Ted O’Donoghue, Matthew
Rabin, Antonio Rangel, Uri Simonsohn, David Sraer, Adam Szeidl, Richard Zeckhauser and seminar
participants at Cornell, Dartmouth, Florida State University, LBS, LSE, Stanford, Texas A&M, Yale,
UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, Washington University, NBER Labor Studies meeting, at the NBER
IO summer institute, SITE, Behavioral Industrial Organization conference (Berlin), and the Santa Barbara
Conference on Experimental and Behavioral Economics 2008 for helpful comments. Gregory Bruich,
Robert Chang, Yinhua Chen, Yiwen Cheng, Aisling Cleary, Bysshe Easton, Kimberly Fong, Roman
Giverts, Cathy Hwang, Camelia Kuhnen, Andrew Lee, Pauline Leung, William Leung, Jenny Lin,
Jane Li, David Liu, Xing Meng, Jeffrey Naecker, Chencan Ouyang, Charles Poon, Kate Reimer, Matthew
Schefer, Mehmet Seflek, Patrick Sun, Mike Urbancic, Allison Wang, Sida Wang provided excellent
research assistance. Ulrike Malmendier would like to thank the Center for Electronic Business and
Commerce at Stanford GSB and the Coleman Fung Risk Management Research Center for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Young Han Lee and Ulrike Malmendier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Bidder's Curse
Young Han Lee and Ulrike Malmendier
NBER Working Paper No. 13699
December 2007, Revised April 2010
JEL No. D02,D12,D44,D83
ABSTRACT
We employ a novel approach to identify overbidding in the field. We compare auction prices to fixed
prices for the same item on the same webpage. In detailed board-game data, 42 percent of auctions
exceed the simultaneous fixed price. The result replicates in a broad cross-section of auctions (48 percent).
A small fraction of overbidders, 17 percent, suffices to generate the overbidding. The observed behavior
is inconsistent with rational behavior, even allowing for uncertainty and switching costs, since also
the expected auction price exceeds the fixed price. Limited attention to outside options is most consistent
with our results.
Young Han Lee
Highview Global Capital Management
younghan.lee@gmail.com
Ulrike Malmendier
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

Concerns about overbidding are as old as auctions. Already in ancient Rome, legal scholars debated whether auctions were void if the winner was infected by “bidder’s heat” (calor
licitantis).1 Previous literature in economics has raised the possibility of overbidding in auctions and auction-like settings as diverse as sports, real estate and mortgage securitization,
corporate finance, and privatization.2 However, it has been diﬃcult to prove that bidders pay
too much, relative to their willingness to pay outside the auction, given the value of the object.
We propose a novel research design to detect overbidding in the field. We examine online
auctions in which the exact same item is continuously available for immediate purchase on
the same webpage. At any point during the auction, bidders can acquire the same object at
a fixed price. To motivate the empirical test, we present a simple model with fixed prices
as an alternative to standard second-price auctions. In the basic framework, rational bidders
never bid above the fixed price. When we allow for uncertainty about the availability of the
fixed price or for switching costs between auction and fixed price, bidders may bid above the
fixed price, but the expected auction price is still strictly smaller than the fixed price. Two
leading behavioral explanations can explain that even the expected auction price exceeds the
fixed price: limited attention regarding the fixed price and utility from winning an auction
(bidding fever).
The theoretical analysis illustrates that comparing auction prices to fixed prices provides a
test of overbidding independent of bidders’ valuations, especially if it is frequent enough to raise
even the average auction price above the fixed price. We denote the overbidding phenomenon
as “bidder’s curse.” Unlike the winner’s curse, such overbidding aﬀects both private-value and
common-value settings. Moreover, even if only a few buyers overbid, they aﬀect prices and
allocations since auctions systematically pick those bidders as winners.
We test for the occurrence of overbidding using two novel data sets. Our first data set
contains all eBay auctions of a popular board game, Cashflow 101, from February to September
2004. A key feature of the data is the continuous presence of a stable fixed price for the same
game on the same eBay website throughout the entire duration of the auctions. Two retailers
continuously sold brand new games for $129.95 (later $139.95). The fixed prices are shown
together with the auction listings in the results for any Cashflow 101 search on eBay, and
users can purchase the game at the fixed price at any point. Hence, the fixed price provides
an upper limit to rational bids under the standard model. It is a conservative limit for two
reasons. First, the auction price exceeds the fixed price only if at least two bidders overbid.
Since winners who bid above the fixed price pay a price below the fixed price if the secondhighest bid is below, we underestimate the frequency and the amount of overbidding. Second,
1

The classical legal scholar Paulus argues that “a tax lease that has been inflated beyond the usual sum due
to bidding fever shall only be admitted if the winner of the auction is able to provide reliable bondsmen and
securities.” (Corpus Iuris Civilis, D. 39,4,9 pr.) See Malmendier (2002).
2
See Blecherman and Camerer (1996) on free agents in baseball, Massey and Thaler (2006) on football drafts,
Bernardo and Cornell on collateral mortgage obligations. Details on all other examples are in Section IV.

1

even if no bid exceeds the fixed price, bidders may overbid relative to their private value.
We find that 42 percent of auctions exceed the fixed price. If we account for diﬀerences in
shipping costs, which are on average higher in the auctions, even 73 percent are overbid. The
overbidding is not explained by diﬀerences in item quality or seller reputation. We also show
that the overbids are unlikely to represent shill bids. The amount of overbidding is significant:
27 percent of the auctions are overbid by more than $10, and 16 percent by more than $20.
We replicate the overbidding results in a second data set, which contains a broad crosssection of 1, 929 diﬀerent auctions, ranging from electronics to sports equipment. This broader
data set addresses the concern that overbidding may be limited to a specific item. Across three
downloads in February, April, and May 2007, overbidding occurs with frequencies between 44
and 52 percent. The average net overpayment is 9.98 percent of the fixed price and significantly
diﬀerent from zero (s.e. 1.85). While the second data set does not provide for all the controls of
the Cashflow 101 sample, the pervasiveness of the finding suggests that the result generalizes.
Our empirical findings allow us to rule out the standard rational model as well as rational
explanations based on uncertainty and transaction costs of switching. Another type of transaction costs is the cost of understanding fixed prices, so-called buy-it-now prices. Inexperienced
eBay users might not take the simultaneous fixed prices into account since they are still learning about auction and fixed-price features. We find, however, that bidders with high and low
experience overbid with identical frequencies.
Our second main result pertains to the debate about the relevance of biases in markets.
We show that a few overbidders suﬃce to aﬀect the majority of prices and allocations. While
42 percent of the Cashflow 101 auctions exceed the fixed price, only 17 percent of bidders ever
overbid. The auction mechanism allows the seller to identify the “fools” among the bidders, who
then have an overproportional impact. We further illustrate the disproportionate influence of
few (at least two) overbidders in a simple calibration that allows for the simultaneous presence
of rational bidders and overbidders. For even slight increases in the fraction of overbidders
above 0.1-0.2, the fraction of overpaid auctions increases disproportionately.
Having ruled out standard explanations for the observed overbidding, we consider two
leading behavioral explanations. One is that bidders gain extra utility from winning an auction
relative to purchasing at a fixed price. This explanation is hard to falsify; it can justify almost
any behavior with a “special utility” for such behavior. However, we can test one specific
form, the quasi-endowment eﬀect. Bidders might become more attached to auction items —
and hence willing to pay more — the longer they participate in the auction, in particular as
the lead bidder (Heyman, Orhun, Ariely, 2004; Wolf, Arkes, Muhanna, 2005). Even though it
is questionable whether the quasi-endowment eﬀect can explain bidding above the fixed price
for identical items, we test for a positive relation between overbidding and time spent on the
auction, both overall and as lead bidder. We find no evidence. We also provide a simple
calibration, which illustrates that utility from winning, more generally, cannot easily match
2

the empirically observed distribution of bids.
A second explanation is limited attention towards the fixed price. Limited attention implies
that an auction should be less likely to receive an overbid if the fixed price is listed very closely
on the same screen and, hence, more likely to capture bidders’ attention. Using a conditional
logit framework, we find that, indeed, smaller distance to fixed-price listings predicts a significantly lower probability that an auction receives a bid. This relationship is strongest for bids
just above the fixed price. It is also particularly strong for a bidder’s first bid, consistent with
one form of inattention, namely limited memory: bidders may account for the lower-price outside option initially, but fail to do so when they rebid after seeing eBay’s outbid notice (‘You
have been outbid!’). In summary, the strongest direct evidence points to limited attention. At
the same time, we cannot rule out that other explanations for overbidding are also at work.
This paper relates to several strands of literature. First, it contributes to the debate about
the role of biases in markets, “Behavioral Industrial Organization”: Are biases less relevant in
markets, e.g., due to experience, learning, and sorting (List, 2003)? Or does market interaction
with profit-maximizing sellers exacerbate their relevance (cf., Ellison, 2006)?3 Our findings
illustrate that a few behavioral bidders can have a large impact on market outcomes. Relatedly,
Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003) model firms’ choice of earnings disclosure when investors display
limited attention. Limited memory and consumers’ naiveté about their memory limitations
have been modelled in Mullainathan (2002), along with market implications such as excess
stock market volatility and over- and underreaction to earnings surprises. Simonsohn and
Ariely (2008) document that eBay bidders tend to herd on auctions with lower starting prices
and more bids, even though they are less likely to win and pay higher prices conditional on
winning. Sellers respond by setting low starting prices. Note that herding alone cannot explain
our results since bidders should still choose the fixed price once the auction exceed the fixed
price. Dodonova and Khoroshilov (2004) and Shunda (2009) suggest that sellers set high ‘buyit-now’ prices in (hybrid) auctions to move bidders’ reference points.4 While an interesting
example of market response to biases, reference dependence does not explain bidding above
fixed prices. Moreover, fixed prices in our data are stable and, hence, cannot explain variation
in overbidding.
This paper also relates to the growing literature on online auction markets, surveyed in
Bajari and Hortacsu (2004) and in Ockenfels, Reiley, and Sadrieh (2006). Roth and Ockenfels
(2002) interpret last-minute bidding as either a rational response to incremental bidding of
irrational bidders or rational equilibrium behavior when last-minute bids fail probabilistically.
Neither hypothesis, however, explains bids above the fixed price. Most relatedly, Ariely and
Simonson (2003) document that 98.8 percent of eBay prices for CDs, books, and movies are
3

Applications include DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004, 2006), Heidhues and Koszegi (2005), Oster and
Scott-Morton (2005), and Gabaix and Laibson (2006).
4
See also Standifird, Roelofs, and Durham (2004).

3

higher than the lowest online price found with a 10 minute search.5 However, the overpayment
may reflect lower transaction and information costs (search costs, creating new online logins,
providing credit card information, site awareness etc.) and higher trustworthiness of eBay
relative to other online sites. Our design addresses these explanations, given that all prices
are on the same website and the fixed-price sellers have higher reputation and better shipping,
handling, and return policy. Our approach also disentangles overbidding from mere shippingcost neglect,6 and guarantees, in the first data set, that the fixed price is available for the
entire duration of the auction rather than only after the auction.
Large and persistent overbidding has also been documented in laboratory second-price
auctions (e.g., Kagel and Levin, 1993; Cooper and Fang, 2008). It is smaller and not persistent
in laboratory ascending auctions (Kagel, Harstad, and Levin, 1987). Kirchkamp, Poen, and
Reiss (2009) find that outside options increase bidding in laboratory first-price auctions but
have no impact on laboratory second-price auctions. The latter finding suggests that we can
use outside options as a benchmark in second-price auctions and make inferences for secondprice auctions without outside options. The cause of overbidding in the laboratory is likely
to be diﬀerent from the field.7 In particular, limited attention should not play a role in the
laboratory, where subjects are directly confronted with their induced value.
There is a large theoretical and empirical literature on the winner’s curse, extensively discussed in Kagel and Levin (2002). The findings on winner’s curse in online auctions are mixed
(Bajari and Hortacsu, 2003; Jin and Kato, 2006). Compte (2004) argues that an alternative
explanation for the winner’s curse is that bidders make estimation errors and competition
induces the selection of overoptimistic bidders. Diﬀerently from the winner’s curse, the bidder’s curse is not restricted to common values. Belief-based explanations for “cursedness”
in common-value and private-value settings (Eyster and Rabin, 2005; Crawford and Iriberri,
2007) cannot explain the overbidding in our data since it is suboptimal not to switch to the
fixed price once the auction price exceeds the fixed price, independently of the belief system.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section I, we present a simple model
of bidding in second-price auctions with simultaneous fixed prices. Section II provides some
institutional background about eBay and describes the data. Section III presents the core
empirical results. Section IV discusses broader applications of the bidder’s curse and concludes.
5

Halcoussis and Mathews (2007) study auction and fixed prices for similar products (diﬀerent concert tickets).
Shipping-cost neglect, as observed in our first data set, was first documented in Hossain and Morgan (2006).
7
Experiments explore spite, joy of winning, fear of losing, bounded rationality (Cooper and Fang, forthcoming;
Morgan, Steiglitz, and Reis, 2003; Delgado, Schotter, Ozbay, and Phelps, 2008) and, for bids above the RNNE
in first-price auctions, risk aversion (Cox, Smith, and Walker, 1988; Goeree, Holt, and Palfrey, 2002).
6

4

I

Model

Overbidding is diﬃcult to identify empirically since it is hard to measure a bidder’s valuation.
Our empirical strategy overcomes this hurdle by using fixed prices as a threshold for overbidding. Auctions with simultaneous fixed prices have not been analyzed much theoretically, but
are a common empirical phenomenon.8 In this Section, we extend a standard auction model to
the availability of fixed prices. We show the assumptions under which the fixed price provides
an upper bound to rational bids. While the theoretical analysis considers the case of homogeneous bidders, the calibration in Section III.C allows for the interaction of heterogeneous
bidders.

A

Benchmark Model

The bidding format on eBay is a modified second-price auction. The highest bidder at the
end of the auction wins and pays the second-highest bid plus an increment. Buyers can also
purchase at a fixed price. For simplicity, we neglect the discrete increments, repeated bidding
within a time limit, reserve prices, and the progressive-bid framing of eBay auctions. While
these features help explain strategies such as sniping, they do not rationalize bids above the
fixed price. Unless noted otherwise, proofs are in Appendix A.
Let the set of players be {1, 2, . . . , N }, N ≥ 2, and their valuations v1 , v2 , . . . , vN . The
N.
vector v of valuations is drawn from a distribution with no atoms and full support on R+
Valuations are private information. We extend the standard second-price auction to a twostage game. The first stage is a second-price auction. Each bidder i bids an amount bi ∈ R+ .
The highest bidder wins and pays a price pw equal to the second-highest bid. Ties are resolved
by awarding the item to each high bidder with equal probability. In the second stage, players
can purchase the good at a fixed price p > 0. There is unlimited supply of the good in the
second stage, but only one unit is valuable to a player. If indiﬀerent, players purchase the
good. Conditional on winning the auction, player i’s payoﬀ is vi − pw if she does not purchase
in the second stage and vi − pw − p if she purchases. Conditional on losing the auction, her
payoﬀ is 0 if she does not purchase in the second stage and vi − p if she purchases.
Proposition 1 (Benchmark Case). (a) The following strategy profile is a Perfect Bayesian
equilibrium (PBE): In the first stage (the second-price auction), each player i bids her valuation
up to the fixed price: b∗i = min{vi , p}. In the second stage (the fixed-price transaction), player
i purchases if and only if she has lost the auction and her valuation is weakly higher than the
8

For airline tickets see skyauction.com and priceline.com versus online sales, e.g., Orbitz; for time shares bidshares.com; for cars southsideautoauctions.com.au; for equipment and real estate the General Services Administration, treasury.gov/auctions, usa.gov/shopping/shopping.shtml, and gsasuctions.gov; for online ads Google’s
AdSense versus advertising agencies’ fixed prices; and for concert tickets ticket-auction.net or seatwave.com
versus promoters’ fixed prices.

5

posted price (vi ≥ p). (b) For all realizations of valuations v and in all PBEs, the auction price
is weakly smaller than the fixed price: pw (v) ≤ p ∀v ∈ RN
+.
Proposition 1.(a) illustrates that, rather than simply bidding their valuations as in the classic
analysis of Vickrey (1961), bidders bid at most the fixed price if there is a fixed-price option.
If they do not win the auction they then purchase at the fixed price if their value is high
enough. The strategy profile described in Proposition 1.(a) is unique if we rule out degenerate
equilibria. An example of a degenerate PBE is that, for all realizations of v, one person, say
bidder 1, always bids an amount above p, b1 > p, in the first stage and does not purchase in
the second stage; all others bid 0 in the first stage and purchase in the second stage if and only
if their valuation is weakly higher than p. Proposition 1.(b) states that, even in degenerate
equilibria, the auction price never exceeds p.
One extension of the benchmark model is uncertainty about the future availability of the
fixed price. In the eBay case, the initial search results screen shows both the ongoing auctions
and the fixed prices for a given item. However, if a bidder bids in the auction but later wants
to return to the fixed price, it might have disappeared. To incorporate such uncertainty, we
assume that, at the beginning of the game, the item is available both in the auction and at the
fixed price p. Once the auction is over, however, the fixed price p remains available only with
probability α ∈ [0, 1). Formally, we add an “initial stage” to the game, called stage 0. (Stage 0
was redundant in the benchmark case because the utility of buying initially is identical to the
utility of buying after the auction.) All bidders can purchase the item at p in stage 0. In stage
1, players submit auction bids and, in stage 2, they decide again whether or not to purchase
at the fixed price – if the item is still available. We capture the decision of a player i not to
enter the auction with bi = 0.9 Proposition 1’ characterizes the equilibrium strategies in the
subgame after bidders have entered the auction and the resulting auction prices.
Proposition 1’ (Uncertainty). (a) The following strategy profile is a PBE in the subgame
after entering the auction: each player i who enters the auction bids b∗i = min{υi , (1 − α)υi +
αp} = υi − α max {υi − p, 0} and then purchases at the fixed price, insofar still available, if
and only if she has lost the auction and her valuation is weakly higher than the fixed price
(vi ≥ p). (b) In all PBEs of the (full) game with uncertainty, the expected winning price is
strictly smaller than the fixed price: E[pw ] < p.
Proposition 1’ illustrates that, under uncertainty, bidders do not necessarily bid less than
the fixed price. Instead, bidders with a valuation above the fixed price may bid up to a
convex combination of fixed price and own valuation, where the weights are determined by
the probability of the fixed price remaining available. However, the expected auction price
still does not exceed the fixed price. As we show in the proof of part (b), players with a low
vi ∈ [0, p] do not purchase in the first stage, but also do not submit bids such they would pay
9

Note that, in any PBE, a player will never enter and bid 0, because not entering is weakly better.

6

a price of p or higher, and hence more than their valuation, conditional on winning. Players
with a valuation above the fixed price, vi > p, are willing to forego the initial fixed price and
enter the auction only if the expected price is strictly smaller than p, given that there is a
chance of losing the fixed-price option after the auction. Note that our findings imply that
not all high-value players necessarily enter the auction, depending on the PBE. In any PBE,
however, the expected auction price has to be lower than p for all realizations of v and for all
players. Hence, the (unconditional) expected auction price is also strictly smaller.
Empirically, we will present a first data set in which the fixed price remains available with
certainty after the auction and where the persistent availability is easy to anticipate for any
bidder. We will also use a second, broader data set, where we cannot ensure the permanent
availability of the same fixed price. There, we will rely on part (b) of Proposition 1’ to
diﬀerentiate rational bidding above the fixed price due to uncertainty from overbidding.

B

Transaction Costs of Switching

Another explanation for auction prices above the fixed price is transaction costs of switching.
Bidders incur switching costs if it is costly for them to return to the webpage that lists all
auctions and fixed prices after they have previously bid in an auction. Such switching costs
are not too plausible in the online setting. If they exist, players may bid above the fixed price:
Once a player has decided to enter the auction she may bid up to her valuation.
We model switching costs using the three-stage structure of the game with uncertainty. In
stage 0, players can purchase at the fixed price. In stage 1, they can bid for the good. In
stage 2, they can again purchase at the fixed price, but incur a transaction cost c > 0. The
sequential game structure is a simplified way to capture that bidders initially have the choice
between purchasing or bidding and incur transaction costs only if they return to the fixed price
after the auction. As before, the vector of bidding strategies b include zero bids of those who
do not enter the auction. Bidders enter if indiﬀerent between the auction and the fixed price.
Proposition 2 (Transaction Costs of Switching). In all PBEs of the game with switching
costs, the expected winning price is strictly smaller than the fixed price: E[pw ] < p.
Proposition 2 states that even though bids above the fixed price may occur, the auction price
does not exceed the fixed price in expectations. The intuition is similar to the uncertainty
case. In any PBE, players with low valuations vi ≤ p never purchase at the fixed price, but
also do not submit bids such that they would pay a price of p or higher, and hence more than
their valuation, conditional on winning. Players with a high valuation vi > p forego the initial
fixed price and enter the auction only if the expected auction price is smaller than the fixed
price. The diﬀerence in prices has to be large enough to compensate for the times that they
lose the auction and either do not purchase in stage 2 because of the transaction cost or do
purchase and incur cost c. Since the expected price conditional on winning is lower than p for
7

all realizations of v and all players, the expected auction price is also strictly smaller.
We obtain the same result if we add uncertainty to the setting with switching costs. Consider the case that, once the auction is over, the item remains available at the fixed price p
only with probability α ∈ [0, 1) and, if available, only at an additional cost c.
Proposition 2’ (Transaction Costs of Switching and Uncertainty). In all PBEs of
the game with switching costs and uncertainty about the availability of the fixed price after the
auction, the expected winning price is strictly smaller than the fixed price: E[pw ] < p.
Uncertainty aﬀects only players who would consider purchasing in stage 2, i.e., players with
valuations vi > p + c. With uncertainty, these players demand an even higher compensation
for foregoing the fixed price in stage 0 and entering the auction, since they may not get the
item in stage 2. As a result, the expected auction price is even lower.
There are several interesting variations of the switching-cost model if we allow for irrationality. One example is that bidders also systematically underestimate the expected winning
price. In this case, they enter the auction more frequently, and we observe more frequent bidding above the fixed price. Thus, biased expectations plus transaction costs could explain our
empirical findings. An extension is that some bidders are rational and anticipate the presence
of irrational bidders. Hence, they have further incentive not to enter the auction, increasing the
proportion of biased bidders. Either variation relies on irrational overbidding of some bidders,
which is the baseline fact we aim to distinguish from traditional models, including uncertainty
or switching costs. If we do find empirical evidence of non-standard behavior, it is possible
that it is exacerbated by such traditional frictions.

C

Limited Attention

One behavioral explanation is that inattentive bidders overlook the fixed price, even though it
is available on the same webpage. A simple way to model inattention in the two-stage game
structure of the benchmark case is neglect of the fixed price in the second stage. Hence, they
only play the first-stage game, which reduces the game to a standard Vickrey auction.
Proposition 3 (Limited Attention). If players neglect the second-stage fixed price, each
player i bids her valuation, b∗i = vi , in the unique PBE. Hence, the auction price exceeds the
fixed price if and only if vi > p for at least two players.
Proof. Since every player participates only in the first-stage auction, the proof follows directly
from Vickrey (1961).
Closely related is the case of limited memory (forgetting). Bidders may notice the fixed price
when they start bidding, but forget it over time. Our static model of limited attention can
be interpreted as a reduced-form model of the forgetting dynamics.10 Limited attention and
10

Another possibility is that players learn the outside price only at a cost. If (some) players have high costs

8

limited memory diﬀer from switching costs in that the expected price is not bounded above
by p. In addition, the limited-memory interpretation predicts that bidders are unlikely to
exceed the fixed price in their first bid but are likely to do so in later bids, when the memory
of the fixed price fades away. We test this prediction in Section III.C. Finally, note that our
inattention model is a naive model: players are not aware of their limitations. In an alternative
model, rational bidders anticipate their inattention and adjust their strategies. The rational
model of uncertainty introduced above can be re-interpreted as bidders’ rational response to
anticipating the possibility of forgetting about the fixed-price option when placing a bid.

D

Utility of Winning

Another explanation for overbidding relative to the fixed price is that bidders enjoy winning
the auction. Assume that bidder i earns additional utility πi ∈ R+ if she acquires the item in
the auction. All other assumptions are as in the benchmark case.
Proposition 4 (Utility of Winning). If players obtain utility from winning the object in
an auction, there exists a PBE in which each player i places a first-stage bid b∗i = min{vi +
πi , p +πi } and, in the second stage, purchases if and only if she has lost the auction and vi ≥ p.
Hence, auction prices exceed the fixed price if min{vi + πi , p + πi } > p for at least two bidders.
Proof. The game diﬀers from the benchmark case (Section I.A) in the utility player i earns
if she wins: vi + πi − pw instead of vi − pw . Hence, the proof of Proposition 1.a applies after
substituting vi + πi − pw for vi − pw and min{vi + πi , p + πi } for min{vi , p} with the resulting
equilibrium bid b∗i = min{vi + πi , p + πi }.
Proposition 4 shows that players with utility vi ≥ p − πi bid above p up to the extra amount
of utility they get from winning the auction. The equilibrium is essentially unique if the πi are
N or, more generally, if there is
drawn from a continuous distribution with full support on R+
a positive probability of any player winning the auction. The proposition also implies that a
player may win the auction even though other bidders have a higher valuation but lower utility
of winning. The resulting allocation is eﬃcient only if we consider πi part of the surplus.
This set-up can be reinterpreted as bidding fever, including the opponent eﬀect described
by Heyman, Orhun, and Ariely (2004). During the heat of the auction, bidder i believes that
she gets an additional payoﬀ πi if she acquires the object in the auction. Once the auction
is over, the player realizes that πi = 0, i.e., that the utility from obtaining the same object
at a fixed price is identical. From the perspective of the earlier or later selves, the additional
valuation πi is a mistake, similar to the valuation of addictive goods in Bernheim and Rangel
(2004). This reinterpretation aﬀects welfare and eﬃciency but not the optimal strategies.
Hence, Proposition 4 applies. Similar results hold if πi depends explicitly on the play of the
or rely on other players learning about the outside price, overbidding can occur in equilibrium.

9

game, e.g. the auction price, the ascending-bid structure, or the time structure of the auction.
Another reinterpretation is quasi-endowment. Over the course of an auction, bidders become attached to the item and are willing to bid above their (original) willingness to pay.
However, if auction and fixed price are for identical, commodity-like items, quasi-endowment
should not induce bids above the fixed price; the bidder simply purchases the item to which
she is attached at the fixed price. Still, we will test for quasi-endowment in Section III.C.

II

Data

The success of online auctions has been linked to their low transaction costs (Lucking-Reiley,
2000). Sellers use standardized online tools and do not have to advertise. Buyers benefit from
low-cost bidding, easy searching within and between websites, and automatic email updates.
Hence, online auctions should increase price sensitivity and reinforce the law of one price.
Our main source of data is eBay auctions and fixed prices. EBay oﬀers modified sealed-bid,
second-price auctions. Bidders submit their ‘maximum willingness to pay,’ and an automated
proxy system increases their bids up to that amount as competing bids come in. The highest
bidder wins but only pays the second-highest price plus an increment ($1 for prices between
$25 and $99.99, $2.50 between $100 and $249.99). EBay also oﬀers fixed price, so-called “Buyit-now” (BIN) listings. BIN sales make up about one third of eBay transactions, mostly from
small retailers.11 Rarer are hybrid “auctions with BIN,” where the BIN option disappears
if the first bidder does not click on it but places a bid. The reliability of buyers and sellers
is measured with the Feedback Score, calculated as the number of members who left positive
feedback minus the number who left negative feedback for that buyer or seller, and the “Positive
Feedback Percentage” relative to total feedback.

A

Detailed Data on Cashflow 101 Auctions

Our identification strategy requires that homogeneous items are simultaneously auctioned and
sold at a fixed price on the same webpage. Ideally, the fixed price should be stable and
continuously present throughout the auction so that any bidder who searches for the item at
any time finds the same fixed price. Moreover, there should be multiple staggered fixed-price
listings so that it is easy to infer that the option will be continuously available.
The market for Cashflow 101 satisfies all criteria. Cashflow 101 is a board game invented by
Richard Kiyosaki “to help people better understand their finances.” The manufacturer sells the
game on his website www.richdad.com for $195 plus shipping cost of around $10.12 Cashflow
101 can be purchased at lower prices on eBay and from other online retailers. In early 2004,
11
12

See The Independent, 07/08/2006, “eBay launches ‘virtual high street’ for small businesses” by Nic Fildes.
The 2004 prices were $8.47/$11.64/$24.81 for UPS ground/2nd day air/overnight.

10

we found an online price of $123 plus $9.95 shipping cost. Later in the year (on 8/11/2004),
the lowest price we could identify was $127.77 plus shipping cost of $7.54.
Cashflow 101 is actively auctioned oﬀ on eBay. At the same time, two professional retailers
oﬀered the game on eBay at the same fixed price of $129.95 until end of July 2004 and of
$139.95 from August on.13 They charged $10.95 and $9.95, respectively, for shipping. Figure I
displays an example of listings retrieved after typing “Cashflow” in the search window. (Typing
“Cashflow 101” would have given a refined subset.) The listings are pre-sorted by remaining
listing time. On top are three smaller items, followed by a combined oﬀering of Cashflow 101
and 202. The fifth and sixth lines are two data points in our sample: a fixed-price listing of
Cashflow 101 at $129.95 by a professional retailers and an auction, currently at $140.00.
We collected all eBay listings of Cashflow 101 between 2/11/2004 and 9/6/2004. Data
are missing on the days from 7/16/2004 to 7/24/2004 since eBay changed the data format
requiring an adjustment of the downloading procedure. Our automatized process retrieved
bids and final price from the final page after an auction finished. Our initial search for all
listings in U.S. currency, excluding bundled oﬀers (e.g., with Cashflow 202 or additional books),
yielded a sample of 288 auctions and 401 fixed price listings by the two professional sellers.
We eliminated 100 auctions that ended early (seller did no longer wish to sell the item) or in
which the item was not sold.14 Out of the 188 auction listings, 20 were combined with a BIN
option, which was exercised in 19 cases. The remaining case, which became a regular auction,
is included in the sample. We dropped the other 19 cases, instead of using their lower BIN
prices,15 in order to have a conservative and consistent benchmark with a forecastable price.
For the same reason we dropped two more auctions during which a professional listing was not
always available (between 23:15 p.m. PDT on 8/14/2004 to 8:48 p.m. on 8/20/2004). Our
final auction sample consists of 167 listings with 2, 353 bids by 807 diﬀerent bidders.
The summary statistics of the auction data are in Panel A of Table I. The average starting
price is $46.56. The average final price, $131.95, foreshadows our first result: a significant
subset of auctions end above the simultaneous fixed price. Note that the winning bid is
recorded as the final price, i.e., the second-highest bid plus increment, instead of the true
(higher) bid. Shipping costs are reported for the 140 cases of flat shipping costs, $12.51 on
average. They are undetermined in 27 cases where the bidder had to contact the seller about
the cost or the cost depended on the distance between buyer and seller location. The average
auction attracts 16.84 bids including rebids. The average Feedback Scores are considerably
higher for sellers (296.17) than for buyers (37.86). Sellers’ mean positive feedback percentage
13

There were no other fixed price sellers during the sample period, and fixed-price sellers never used auctions.
Dropping the (few) auctions in which the item was not sold might inflate the percentage of overbid auctions.
Unfortunately, the downloads did not store starting prices to check whether they were above the fixed price.
Thus, all results are conditional on a sale taking place.
15
Nine BIN prices were below $100. Eight more BIN prices were below the retailers’ BIN prices.
14

11

is 59.81 percent. We also find that 33.53 percent of auctions end during “prime time”, defined
as 3-7 p.m. PDT (Jin and Kato, 2006; Melnik and Alm, 2002). Fixed-price items are always
brand new, but only 16.77 percent of the listing titles for auctions indicate new items, e.g., with
“new,” “sealed,” “never used,” or “NIB.” 27.54 percent of titles imply that standard bonus
tapes or videos are included. (The professional retailers always include both extras.) Finally,
about one third mention the manufacturer’s price of $195.
Panels B and C provide details about the 807 bidders and 2, 353 bids. Due to the eBayinduced downloading interruptions, we have the complete bidding history only for 138 auctions
out of 167. Bidders bid on average twice in an auction and three times among all Cashflow
101 auctions. About 6 percent of bids come during the last hour of a listing, 3 percent during
the last 5 minutes.16 The vast majority of bidders, with only two exceptions, do not acquire a
second game after having won an auction. We also collected the entire history of feedback for
each of the bidders in our sample and verify that they are regular eBay participants who bid
on or sell a range of objects, reducing concerns about shill bidding or mere scams.

B

Cross-sectional Auction Data

We also downloaded 3, 863 auctions of a broad range of items with simultaneous fixed prices.
This data allows us to analyze whether the results in the first data set generalize to diﬀerent
item types, price ranges, and buyer demographics (gender, age, and political aﬃliation). The
drawback is that the fixed prices are not necessarily as stable as in our detailed first data set.
The primary item selection criterion was comparability across auctions and fixed prices.
Ensuring homogeneity is not trivial since items are identified verbally. Typical issues are
separating used from new items, accessories, bundles, and multiple quantities. We repeatedly
refined the search strings using eBay’s advanced search options. Details are in Appendix B.
We undertook three downloads of all “ongoing” auctions at three points in time in 2007:
February 22 (3:33-3:43 a.m.), April 25 (4:50-4:51 a.m.), and May 23 (9:13-9:43 p.m.).17 The
product lists contained 49, 89, and 80 diﬀerent items with overlaps between the three sets,
amounting to 103 diﬀerent items. The items fall into twelve categories: consumer electronics,
computer hardware, financial software, sports equipment, personal care, perfumes/colognes,
toys and games, books, cosmetics, home products, automotive products, and DVDs. The
distribution of items across categories and downloads is summarized in Table II. The full
list of all items and the complete search strings are in Online-Appendix Table 1. From the
resulting 3, 863 auctions, we dropped those that did not reappear in our final download of the
auction outcome page (e.g. since they were removed by eBay), that ended too shortly after the
snapshot to allow capturing the simultaneous fixed price, that did not receive any bids, those
16

Bidders can automatize last-minute bidding, using programs such as http://www.snip.pl.
The resulting auctions ended between 5:42 am on 2/22 and 12:01 am on 3/1 (Download 1), between 2:22
am on 4/26 and 9:42 pm on 5/44 (Download 2), and 9:20 pm on 5/23 and 9:29 am on 6/2 (Download 3).
17

12

in foreign currency, and those misidentified (wrong item). As summarized in Online-Appendix
Table 2, we arrived at a final list of 1, 926 auctions. After extracting the auction ending times
from our snapshot of auctions, we scheduled 2, 854 downloads of fixed prices. The details
are in Appendix B. We matched each auction to the fixed price of the same item that was
downloaded closest in time to the auction ending, typically within 30 minutes of the auction
ending. We undertook this matching twice, accounting and not accounting for shipping costs
being available.18 Ambiguous shipping fields such as “See Description” or “Not Specified”
prohibited some matches. Some auctions did not match because there were no BINs. The
resulting data consists of 688 (571) auction-BIN pairs without (with) shipping in Download 1,
551 (466) in Download 2, and 647 (526) in Download 3.

C

Other Data Sources

Survey. We also conducted a six-minute survey about eBay bidding behavior and familiarity
with diﬀerent eBay features, administered by the Stanford Behavioral Laboratory in four waves
in 2005, on March 1, April 28 (in class), May 18/19, and July 13/14, with a total sample of
399. Subjects are largely Stanford undergraduate and MBA student and are not identical to
those in our main data sets. The full survey is available from the authors.
Choice Experiment. We conducted a choice experiment, also administered by the Behavioral
Laboratory, with 99 Stanford students on April 17, 2006. Subjects had to choose one of three
items from our Cashflow 101 data based on their description, two randomly drawn auction
descriptions and one of the two professional BIN descriptions. The choice was hypothetical,
and there was no payment conditional on the subjects’ choice. More details follow below. The
instruction and item descriptions are in the Online Appendix.

III
A

Results
Overbidding

In our detailed Cashflow 101 data, we find significant bidding above the fixed price (Table III):
Finding 1 (Overbidding in Cashflow 101 Data). In 42 percent of all auctions, the
final price is higher than the simultaneously available fixed price for the same good.
Hence, the bidding strategy of a significant number of auction winners is inconsistent with
the simple benchmark model in Section I.A. According to Proposition 1, rational bids never
exceed the fixed price. As discussed, the estimated 42 percent is conservative since, first, we
18

The median time diﬀerences between auction endings and BIN download in Downloads 1, 2, and 3 were 21,
22, and 25 minutes for the matches without shipping costs and 21, 21, and 26 minutes with shipping costs.

13

only observe overbidding if at least two bidders exceeded the fixed price and, second, even
auction prices below the fixed price may exceed the winner’s private value.
The construction of the data set rules out that buyers bid more than the fixed price due
to uncertainty about the future availability of the fixed price. The observed behavior may,
however, reflect other frictions not accounted for in the benchmark model.
1. Noise. Even if a significant share of auctions exceeds the fixed price, the diﬀerence in
price could be small, possibly just cents, for example due to bidding in round numbers. The
lower part of Table III shows, however, that more than a quarter of all auctions (and 64 percent
of overbid auctions) exceed the fixed price by more than $10. In 16 percent of all auctions (39
percent of overbid auctions), the winner overpays by more than $20.
The six graphs of Figure II display the full distribution of Final Prices in bins of $5 width
(Panel A) and in bins of $1 width (Panel B). The histograms are overlaid with a kernel density
estimate, using the Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 4.8. A significant share of auction
prices is above the fixed price both in the early sample period, when the fixed price is $129.95,
and in the later sample period, when the fixed price is $139.95. We also observe some evidence
of bunching just below the fixed price.
The distribution of bids further addresses concerns about shill bidding for the seller. Even
if some overbids were shills, overbid auctions typically receive more than one overbid, leading
to the final overbidding price. A shill bidder, who tries to artificially drive up the price, would
have little incentive to place multiple bids over the fixed price and risk the loss of a sale.
2. Shipping Costs and Sales Taxes. Another hypothesis is that shipping costs are
higher for the fixed-price items. We find the opposite. In the subsample of 139 auctions for
which we can identify the shipping costs, the mean shipping cost is $12.51, compared to $9.95
for the fixed-price items of one of the professional retailers. Accounting for shipping costs, 73
percent of the auctions end above the fixed price plus the shipping cost diﬀerential. Table III
shows that the entire distribution is shifted upwards: Almost half of the auctions have closing
prices that exceed the fixed price by $10 and 35 percent by more than $20.
Another explanation is that buyers from the same state as the professional sellers do not
buy from them to avoid sales taxes.19 The two fixed-price retailers are, however, located in
diﬀerent states, Minnesota and West Virginia. Moreover, even if we add 6-6.5 percent sales
tax to the fixed prices and no tax to the auction, overbidding remains substantial.
3. Retrieval of Fixed Prices. Another concern is that bidders do not retrieve the fixed
prices. However, regardless of whether they search by typing a core word or by going to the
item category and then searching within this category, the output screen shows both fixed
prices and auctions. If the search includes additional qualifiers, fixed prices are more likely to
be retrieved than most auctions since their descriptions are more detailed and without typos.
19

Buyers owe their state’s sales tax also when buying from another state, but they may not declare it.

14

A related concern is that buyers may not take the fixed prices into account due to past (bad)
experiences with such transactions. Our survey indicates the opposite. The 50.83 percent
of respondents who are eBay users were well aware of the meaning of “buy-it-now” and, if
anything, expressed a preference for buy-it-now transactions.
4. Seller reputation. Another explanation is lower seller reputation. The two fixedprice retailers have, however, Feedback Scores of 2849 (with a Positive Feedback Percentage
of 100 percent, i.e., zero negative feedback) and 3107 (with a 99.9 percent Positive Feedback
Percentage) as of October 1, 2004. In contrast, the average score of auction sellers is 262 (with
only 63 percent positive feedback).20 In addition, both retailers allow buyers to use PayPal,
which increases the security of the transaction, while several auction sellers do not.
5. Quality Diﬀerences. Finding 1 could be explained by higher item quality in auctions.
However, the quality of auction items is, if anything, lower. Some games are not new; others
are missing the bonus items. The two retailers, instead, oﬀer only new items with all original
bonus items and, occasionally, additional bonuses, such as free access to a financial-services
website. The retailers also oﬀer the fastest delivery and a six month return policy.
A remaining concern is unobserved quality diﬀerences, such as wording diﬀerences. Our
choice experiment addresses this concern. Subjects were asked which of three items they
prefer, assuming that prices and listing details such as remaining time and number of bids
were identical. Two descriptions were randomly drawn from auctions in our sample and one
from the fixed-price items. The same three listings were shown to all subjects but the order
was randomized. (See Online-Appendix Table 3.) Seller identification and prices were removed
from the description, as was the indication of auction versus fixed price. Three subjects did not
provide answers. Among the remaining subjects, 35 percent expressed indiﬀerence, 50 percent
chose the oﬀer of the professional retailer, and 15 percent preferred one of the two auction
items. Hence, it is unlikely that unobserved quality diﬀerence explain the bidding behavior.
Overbidding in the Cross-section. Our results so far indicate significant overbidding for
a specific item, Cashflow 101. It remains possible that overbidding is an isolated phenomenon
that does not apply to most items. To address this concern, we analyze a broad cross-section
of items oﬀered both in auctions and at fixed prices. The results are in Table IV.
Finding 2 (Overbidding in Cross-Sectional Data). In the cross-section of auctions,
the final price is higher than the corresponding fixed price in 48 percent of the cases.
Overbidding is even more prevalent in the cross-sectional data, ranging from 44 percent
to 52 percent across the three downloads (Table IV). As Figure III, Panel A, illustrates, we
observe at least 30 percent overbidding in 10 out of 12 item categories. We find no significant
relation between price level and overbidding. Expensive hardware (around $150) triggers little
20

Feedback Scores have been used as proxies for reputation and been linked to higher prices in Dewan and
Hsu (2004), Houser and Wooders (2006), and Melnik and Alm (2002), among others.

15

overbidding, while overbidding for expensive sports equipment (exercise machines around $200)
is frequent, 56 percent across the three downloads. Detailed scatterplots of the frequency of
overbidding for diﬀerent price levels in the Online-Appendix show that it is no less prevalent
for more expensive goods. Overbidding is slightly lower after accounting for shipping costs,
diﬀerently from what we found in the Cashflow 101 data. We also explore diﬀerences in
overbidding by bidder demographics, as far as we can infer from the auction object (gender,
age group, liberal versus conservative). A detailed analysis in the Online -Appendix finds that
overbidding is sizeable and significant within each demographic subset. The results suggest
that the pattern of overbidding identified in our first data set generalizes across auction items.
As discussed above, the larger-scale cross-sectional data comes at the cost of some loss of
control. In particular, we cannot be sure about the availability of the same fixed prices in the
future or about diﬀerences in seller reputation between the auction and the fixed-price listings.
Uncertainty and Transaction costs. As a final step in establishing the overbidding
result, we consider rational explanations based on uncertainty about the future availability of
the fixed price, transaction costs, and a combination of both. As modeled in Section I.A, a
fixed price may not remain available after the corresponding auction. We have argued that
such uncertainty is not present in data set 1, but it is in data set 2. And, as modeled in I.B,
it might be costly for a bidder to return to the screen with the fixed-price listings after having
bid in the auction. In either case, however, the expected auction price will be significantly
lower than the fixed price (Propositions 1’ and 2). We find the opposite:
Finding 3 (Overpayment on Average). The average auction price is higher than the
simultaneous fixed price, in data set 1 by $0.28 without shipping costs and by $2.69 with shipping
costs, and in data set 2 by 9.98 percent without and by 4.46 percent with shipping costs.
In the first data, the diﬀerence without shipping costs, $0.28, is not significant (s.e.= $1.30
and 95 percent confidence interval of [−$2.27; $2.84]), but the diﬀerence with shipping costs,
$2.69, is significant (s.e.= $1.27 and 95 percent confidence interval of [$0.19; $5.20]), as shown
in Table III. This comparison is, however, a conservative test: the expected auction price should
be significantly lower than the fixed price in order to induce a bidder to enter the auction rather
than purchasing at the fixed price. In the second, cross-sectional data, the computation of the
price diﬀerential is less straightforward because of the heterogeneity in prices across items.
We calculate the percentage of over- or underbidding for each item (final bid minus BIN, as a
percentage of BIN) and then average over all percent diﬀerences. Here, the net overpayment
of 9.98 percent is significantly diﬀerent from 0 percent (s.e.= 1.85 percent), also if accounting
for shipping costs, 4.46 percent (s.e.= 1.99 percent). Overall, the prediction that on average
auction prices are lower than the fixed prices is rejected in the data.
Finding 3 rejects all rational “frictions” modeled in the theory section, which require that
the average auction price is significantly lower than the fixed price.

16

Another type of transaction costs is the cost of understanding the buy-it-now system. We
have already argued — and confirmed in our survey — that complete unawareness is unlikely
since fixed prices are very common, intuitively designed, and similar to any fixed price on the
internet. Still, inexperienced eBay users may not yet take them suﬃciently into account. We
test whether overbidding is lower for high-experience users using the Cashflow 101 sample and
a median split by Feedback Scores (Panel B of Figure III).21
Finding 4 (Eﬀect of Experience). There is no diﬀerence in the prevalence of overbidding
among more experienced and among less experienced auction winners.
The percentages of overbidding are almost identical for low-experience and high-experience
users, 41.7 and 42.2 percent. Also if we partition auction experience more finely, we find no
relationship between overbidding and experience. For example, splitting the sample of auction
winners into those with Feedback Scores of 0 (17 percent of winners), 1 (19 percent), 2-4 (14
percent), 5-14 (20 percent), 15-92 (20 percent) and higher (remaining 10 percent of winners),
we find propensities to overbid of 31 percent, 55 percent, 35 percent, 47 percent, 36 percent,
and 44 percent, indicating no systematic pattern.22
Finding 4 does not rule out that experience reduces overbidding; we do not have longitudinal
bid histories for each bidder. However, it does rule out that only eBay novices overbid. The
result also helps to further alleviate concerns about shill bids since fake IDs are unlikely to be
used for many transactions and, hence, have low feedback scores.
The results so far indicate that the standard rational framework does not explain the
observed behavior, even if we allow for a wide range of possible frictions. Our findings do not
rule out that these frictions exist. In fact, they may exacerbate overbidding if interacted with
consumer biases, as we emphasized in the Section I. Also, there are behavioral twists of the
above explanations, which can explain the overbidding phenomenon. For example, it might be
hard to form expectations about the future availability and prices of buy-it-now items.23 The
conclusion so far is that, without allowing for non-standard preferences or beliefs, we are not
able to explain the observed overbidding.
21

Since the vast majority of ratings is positive (e.g., 99.4 percent in Resnick and Zeckhauser, 2002), Feedback
Scores track the number of past transactions. The measure is imperfect since some users do not leave feedback,
since the measure does not capture bids, and since users may ‘manufacture reputation’ (Brown and Morgan,
2006). However, the measure is suﬃcient to reject the hypothesis that only unexperienced bidders overbid; users
with a high feedback score do necessarily have experience.
22
Our results are consistent with Bajari and Hortacsu (2003) and Garratt, Walker, and Wooders (2007).
23
Note, however, that information about current and past BIN prices is available via eBay Marketplace
Research, which informs subscribers about average selling prices, price ranges, average BIN prices, and average
shipping costs. Using this service, or researching past transactions themselves, bidders can easily find out that
the fixed price (or its upper bound) is constant over long periods.

17

B

Disproportionate Influence of Overbidders

Before we turn to the leading behavioral explanations for the observed overbidding, we show
that a high frequency of overbid auctions does not imply that the ‘typical’ buyer overpays.
Instead, it is generated by a relatively small fraction of overbids (Table V). We document this
phenomenon returning to our first data set, in which we have detailed bidder- and bid-level
data for 138 auctions. (Summary statistics are in Panels B and C of Table I.)
Finding 5 (Disproportionate Influence of Overbidders). The share of bidders who
ever submit a bid above the fixed price is 17 percent and the fraction of overbids among all bids
11 percent, significantly less than the share of winners who pay more than the fixed price.
The reason why 42 percent of overbid auctions involve only 17 percent of overbidders is that
there are many more bidders than auctions. The vast majority of bidders submit bids below the
fixed price and drop out of the auction once the price crosses the fixed-price threshold. Each
auction only needs two overbidders for the auction price to end above the fixed price. Therefore,
the existence of a few overbidders suﬃces to generate a significant amount of overbidding.
This finding reflects, of course, the nature of auctions. By definition, the highest bidder
wins and will thus have a ‘disproportionate influence’ on the price. However, the traditional
interpretation is that auctions identify the bidder with the highest valuation. The insight
from our data is, instead, that bidders may submit high bids for other, non-standard reasons.
Whatever the reason for their overbidding, the auction design implies that the bidders with
particularly high bids determine prices and allocations. The calibrations at the end of the next
subsection further illustrate this point.

C

Explanations for Overbidding

Having established the extent of bidding above the fixed price and addressed rational explanations, we consider non-standard explanations.
Limited Attention and Limited Memory. One possible explanation is that bidders do
not pay attention to fixed prices, even if listed on the same screen (Proposition 3). In that case,
we expect more overbidding when fixed prices are less salient. The further apart fixed prices
are listed from an auction, the more likely is an inattentive bidder to miss them. Salience also
varies with absolute screen position: The higher an auction is positioned, the more likely will it
capture the attention of a bidder, an eﬀect known as “above the fold” in internet marketing.24
To test these two implications, we reconstruct, for each bid observed in our data, the set of
all auctions and fixed prices available at the time of the bid. That is, we augment the sample
of bids by all listings that were simultaneously available but did not receive a bid, separately
24

The expression was coined in reference to the newspaper industry where text above the newspaper’s horizontal fold is known to attract significantly more attention from readers.

18

for each bid. We drop the first seven days of our sample period and after the period of missing
data (7/16-7/24/2004) to ensure that we observe all simultaneous auctions. The resulting data
set captures 2, 187 of the 2, 353 bids of the full sample and, including the simultaneous listings,
consists of 14, 043 observations. We assume that listings are ordered by remaining listing time,
as it is the eBay default, and that bidders only see Cashflow 101 listings. In reality, users may
reorder, e.g., by price, and irrelevant listings may show up, depending on the search. This
is likely to introduce noise but not bias. The two independent variables of interest are (1)
Distance to nearest BIN listing, coded as 0 if there are no rows between the auction and the
closest BIN (one row above or below), 1 if there is one row between them, etc.; and (2) Position
on screen, coded as 1 for auctions on top of the screen, 2 for auctions in the second row, etc.
We use a conditional logit framework, relating the probability of receiving an auction bid
to the closeness of the nearest fixed price and to the absolute screen position of the auction.
We condition the estimation on one of the auctions receiving a bid at a given time.25 The
0 B +ε ,
utility from bidding on auction i in bidding instance b is Uib = β1 Dib + β2 Pib + Xib
ib
where D is the distance to the nearest fixed-price listing, P is the screen position, and X
are auction-specific controls.26 Assuming that, conditional on the choice of making a bid at
bidding instance b, εib is i.i.d. extreme value, the probability of bidding in auction i is
0 B)
exp(β1 Dib + β2 Pib + Xib
.
Pib = P
0
j exp(β1 Djb + β2 Pjb + Xjb B)

The null hypothesis of rational bidding is that the distance to the fixed price listing D and
the screen position P do not aﬀect the probability of receiving a bid, that is, β1 and β2 equal
zero. Limited attention predicts that the coeﬃcient estimate β1 is positive and β2 negative.
In Table VI, Column 1, we present the baseline results. Coeﬃcients are reported as odds
ratios. Standard errors are clustered by bid. We find a significantly positive eﬀect of distance
on receiving a bid. The odds that an auction receives a bid are 1.176 times greater when there
is one more row between the between fixed price and auction. We also find a significantly
negative eﬀect of screen position. An auction is less likely to receive a bid if its position on the
output screen is lower (odds 0.988 lower). The results are robust to controlling for the price
outstanding (and its square), starting price, seller feedback score, auction length, a prime-time
dummy (3-7 p.m. Pacific Time), and remaining auction time; see Column 2. Also the inclusion
25

We do not model the selection into the bidding process. One could embed the decision on which auction to
bid as the lower nest of a nested logit where the upper nest involves the decisions to participate in the auction.
Under the assumptions of McFadden (1978), the estimation of the lower nest is consistent for the selected
subsample of consumers, conditional on the decision in the upper nest.
26
In a standard nested logit model, consumers make one choice from a standard set of alternatives. In our
setting, a bidder may make repeated choices. For the estimates to be consistent, we need to make the additional
assumption of no serial correlation of errors in the bottom nest. This assumption does not hold to the extent
that bidders tend to bid again on the same auctions.

19

of more time controls (the square and cube of remaining auction time, dummies for the last
auction day and the six last hours of the auction) does not aﬀect the results.
In order to link inattention to over-bidding, we estimate the eﬀect of nearby fixed prices
in the subgroup of auctions whose price outstanding exceeds the fixed price. We introduce
dummies for auctions with prices outstanding ‘just below’ the concurrent fixed price, auctions
with prices ‘just above,’ and auctions with ‘very high’ prices. ‘Very low’ is the left out category.
For prices just below or above we use either [−$5; $5] or [−$10, $10]. (Any range in between
and up to $30 leads to similar results.) We test for an interaction eﬀect with Distance to
nearest BIN and include the full set of controls. Columns 3 and 6 show that Distance to BIN
has no significant eﬀect on auctions with prices below or far above, but a significantly positive
eﬀect on the probability of receiving a bid for auctions with prices just above the fixed price.
An increase in distance by one row increases the odds of receiving a bid by 1.4-2 (depending
on the interval for ‘just above’). Hence, closeness of fixed prices directly aﬀects overbidding.
We also find that the eﬀect of nearby fixed prices is particularly strong for bidders’ first bids
in a given auction. After splitting the sample into first bids and later bids, the interaction of
Distance to BIN and Price just above is significant only in the subsample of first bids (Columns
4-5 and 7-8).27 This finding is consistent with limited memory: Bidders account for the fixed
price initially, but fail to do so when they increase their bids. Limited memory is plausible
because of the design of eBay’s outbid notices, in which eBay provides a direct link to increase
a bid, but no link to the page with all ongoing auctions and buy-it-now listings.
In summary, limited attention and limited memory emerge as plausible explanations for
the observed overbidding. Note that the results also suggest that bidders are naive about their
memory limitations. If they were aware of their memory constraint they could easily remedy it,
for example, by always submitting only one bid (up to the fixed price) and never responding
to outbid notices. The bidding behavior described in the (rational) model of uncertainty
introduced in Section I.C can be re-interpreted as bidders’ rational response to forgetting the
fixed-price option. Hence, Finding 3 about the average auction price exceeding the fixed price
also rejects the rational model of limited attention or limited memory.
Utility from Winning, Bidding Fever, and Quasi-Endowment Eﬀect. Another
behavioral explanation is utility from winning an item in an auction relative to purchasing it at
a fixed price.28 This type of explanation is hard to falsify empirically given that any behavior
can be interpreted as revelation of preferences for such behavior. We can address specific
forms, though, such as the quasi-endowment eﬀect. The quasi-endowment eﬀect postulates
27

Column 5 also shows a negative interaction eﬀect of Position on screen in the subsample of later bids, but
not in the subsample of first bids. This finding is not easily explained by limited attention.
28
Our survey evidence suggests that bidding fever applies to some extent. For example, of the 216 subjects
who have previously acquired an item on eBay, 42 percent state that they have sometimes paid more than they
were originally planning to, and about half of those subjects later regretted paying so much.

20

that bidders become psychologically more endowed to auction items, and hence more likely to
submit high bids, the longer they participate in the auction, in particular as the lead bidder
(Heyman, Orhun, Ariely, 2004; Wolf, Arkes, Muhanna, 2005). One could argue that the
quasi-endowment eﬀect cannot explain bidding above the fixed price, given that bidders can
always obtain the identical item at the fixed price. Still, we test whether bidders become more
attached to auction items, and submit higher bids, the longer they participate, in particular
as the lead bidder.
A simple comparison of means reveals no relation between overbidding and the length of
bidding. Winners who overbid enter the auction 1.27 days before the auction ends; winners
who do not overbid enter the auction earlier, 1.52 days before the auction ends. The same
pattern emerges for time as lead bidder: Winners who overbid have been lead bidders for 0.55
days by the time of their last bid (1.03 days by the end of the auction); winners who do not
overbid have been lead bidders for 0.74 days (1.24 overall).
We then test in a regression framework whether the time a bidder has spent as the leader
aﬀects overbidding, conditional on having been outbid. The regression framework allows us to
control for the value of the bidder’s last lead bid and the time and price outstanding when she
is outbid for the final time. Appendix-Table A.1 shows a probit estimation where the binary
dependent variable equals 1 if the bidder ultimately overbids. We find no significant relationship between the total time a bidder has led the auction and the probability of overbidding.
The same holds if we restrict the sample to bidders whose first bid in the auction is not an
overbid or whose first lead bid is not an overbid. Another prediction in the literature on the
quasi-endowment eﬀect is that it is reduced by experience. We have already shown that more
experienced bidders are no less likely to overbid (Finding 4).
In summary, we find no direct evidence for quasi-endowment explaining overbidding relative to the fixed price. The lack of a positive relation between time spent in the auction and
overbidding also rules out other stories based on sunk-cost sensitivity and escalation of commitment (Staw, 1976; Ku, Malhotra, and Murnighan, 2005), which should both be increasing
in time. However, our findings do not rule out more general versions of utility from winning.
Calibration. In a simple calibration, we provide more insights into the plausibility of limited attention and utility from winning. Our calibration allows for bidder heterogeneity, with
only a fraction of bidders having non-standard preferences. We vary this fraction from 0 to 1.
We consider a variety of distributions of bidder valuations, including χ2 , uniform, exponential,
and logarithmic distributions, and a range of possible moments. We draw eight players from
an infinite population, corresponding to the empirical moment. For each distribution of valuations, we draw 1,000,000 i.i.d. realizations for each player. We then draw another 1 million
values, separately for each of the eight players, from a uniform distribution on [0, 1], determining whether a player is a rational or a behavioral type. For example, when the proportion of
behavioral players is 0.1, only player-auction pairs for which we draw values between 0 and
21

0.1 are behavioral. We assume that the utility of winning is uniformly distributed between $0
and $10. Values are independently drawn. Hence, we generate a third (1 million x 8)-matrix
of winning utilities drawn from a uniform [0, 10] distribution. These values are added to the
values in the first matrix if the player is behavioral in the respective auction. We compute the
equilibrium strategies as specified in Propositions 1 for rational players and in Propositions 3
and 4 for behavioral players,29 setting the simultaneous fixed price equal to $130.
Figure IV shows the calibrations for χ2 (130) and U [80, 180], i.e., two distributions whose
first moment is equal to the fixed price and, in the case of the uniform distribution, reflects
the observed minimum and maximum prices.30 The left graphs show the results for Limited
Memory, the right graphs for Utility from Winning. In each graph, we show the percentages of
auctions with a price above the fixed price (Percent overpaid) and of bidders who submit a bid
above the fixed price (Percent overbidders). The leftmost values correspond to our benchmark
rational model and the rightmost values to everybody having non-standard preferences.
In all graphs, the ‘Percent overpaid’ increases steeply starting from a probability around
0.1-0.2 and crosses the 45-degree line. The ‘Percent overbidders’ increases more slowly and
always has a slope below 1, illustrating the disproportionate impact of few overbidders. Both
models match the observed frequency of overbidding (43 percent) and frequency of overbidders
(17 percent) for plausible parameter values. They diﬀer, however, in how well they match
other empirical outcomes. Utility from Winning has the shortcoming that the maximum of
overbidding is limited to the maximum utility from winning, i.e. $10 in our calibration. The
calibration illustrates that a simple utility-of-winning model that imposes an upper limit on
bidders’ willingness to pay for winning fails to produce price distributions similar to those
in Figure II.A, unless we allow for a large maximum amount of utility of winning. Limited
attention emerges as better suited to capture all aspects of the empirical distributions of
outcomes since it do not impose an upper bound on overbids relative to the fixed price p.

IV

Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we provide clean evidence on overbidding in the field. We exploit the availability
of fixed prices for identical items on the same eBay webpage. A significant fraction of bidders
bid more than predicted by a simple rational model, even accounting for uncertainty and
transaction costs. We provide evidence that bidders fail to pay suﬃcient attention to their
outside options, especially when re-bidding. The leading behavioral alternative, utility from
winning, is hard to test in the data, though we can rule out the quasi-endowment eﬀect.
We also provide a calibrational argument that utility from winning cannot easily match the
29

It is easy to see that Propositions 1, 3, and 4 hold under bidder heterogeneity, given that bidders’ choices
solely reflect whether they benefit from winning with a given bid, relative to the safe outside option.
30
Alternative calibrations with the above mentioned distributions are available from the authors.

22

empirically observed distribution of bids. The second main finding is that a small fraction of
bidders who overbid aﬀect a disproportionately large fraction of auction prices and allocations.
Auctions select overbidders as winners and thus amplify the eﬀect of biases in the market.
Our findings suggest that design elements such as the wording of eBay’s outbid message
(“You have been outbid!”) may have a larger eﬀect on bidding behavior and prices than
traditional auction theory suggests. Profit-maximizing sellers should account for consumers’
behavioral preferences and beliefs when choosing auctions over other price mechanisms and
when selecting a specific type of auction. This implication is explored by Malmendier and
Szeidl (2009), who compare diﬀerent auction formats and auction designs from the revenue
and welfare perspective after accounting for overbidding biases.31
While our paper analyzes online auctions, overbidding and the disproportionate influence
of few overbidders apply to auctions more broadly. For example, Ashenfelter and Genesove
(1992) document overbidding in real estate auctions in New Jersey relative to face-to-face
negotiations. A large number of auction participants appears to be key to ensure the presence
of overbidders. Even in mobile-phone auctions, such as the British 3G auctions in 200001, it has been argued that the winners “paid too much” (Binmore and Klemperer, 2002).
Klemperer (2002) attributes the large revenues of the British auction to the low hurdles to
entry32 and argues that the large diﬀerences in revenues across diﬀerent Western European
3G auctions strongly covary with the number of participants. This paper oﬀers an alternative
interpretation: facilitating entry is important to ensure that the auction attracts at least two
overbidders. Another example is mergers and acquisitions. Contested transactions, in which
several bidders aim to acquire the same target, are often suspected to induce overpayment.
Malmendier and Moretti (2006) show that winners of merger fights perform on average worse
than the losers after the merger fight. While not all firms overvalue the target, a few overbidders
suﬃce to generate large losses. A last example are initial public oﬀerings, some of which are
actual auctions (e.g. Google) and all of which are later bought and sold in the auction-like
stock market setting. A long-standing view (Stoll and Curley, 1970; Ritter, 1991) is that the
pattern of initial stock-price rise and subsequent decline reflects that the initial aftermarket
price is too high. Relatedly, Sherman and Jagannathan (2006) argue that IPO auctions have
been abandoned in the 24 countries that have used them in the past because of overbidding.
While IPO underwriters might favor overbidding, it appears to discourage informed investors
and prevent price discovery. Even in non-auction settings, the same logic may induce sellers
to set exceedingly high prices in the hope of encountering a consumer who, for behavioral or
31

In a similar spirit, Kagel and Levin (2009) attribute the popularity of dynamic multi-object auctions, versus
their one-shot counterparts, to bidders’ bounded rationality. Eliaz, Oﬀerman, and Schotter (2008) contrast the
high revenues and the empirical popularity of “right-to-choose” auctions with the predictions of lower revenues
in a rational auction framework.
32
Similarly, McAfee and McMillan (1996) explain the variation in the 1994/5 FCC auction prices for broadband
licenses across cities with variation in the number of competitors.

23

other reasons, is willing to pay such a price (Ellison, 2005; Ellison and Ellison, 2009).
Our findings have more general implications about consumer choices. They suggest that
consumers might not always choose the lowest-price good, even when the goods are homogeneous and search costs are low. Understanding the extent of this phenomenon could help us
understand the large and persistent price dispersion documented, for example, by Pratt, Wise,
and Zeckhauser (1979) when searching by phone, or by Baye, Morgan, and Scholten (2004) and
(2006), including online searches. In the long run, a better understanding of this phenomenon
might help us make our models of competition more accurate.

24

Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1.(a) In the second stage, it is optimal for player i not to purchase
if she has won the auction in the first stage since the payoﬀ after purchasing, vi − pw − p, is
strictly smaller than the payoﬀ after not purchasing, vi − pw . If she has lost the auction in the
first stage, it is optimal to purchase in the second stage if and only if vi ≥ p since the payoﬀ
from purchasing, vi − p, is weakly higher than the payoﬀ from not purchasing, 0, if and only
if vi ≥ p.
Taking into account the second-stage behavior, we now show that bidding b∗i = min{vi , p}
in the first-stage game is part of a PBE. We distinguish two possible deviations bi 6= b∗i .

Case 1: bi < min{vi , p}. There are three subcases. Either both bi and b∗i are the highest
bid, or neither is, or b∗i is the highest bid and bi is not. In the first subcase, player i obtains
the object at the same auction price and, hence, makes the same second-stage decision after
both bids. In the second subcase, i does not win the auction and, again, makes the same
second-stage decision after both bids. In the last subcase, bi induces payoﬀ max{vi − p, 0},
while b∗i induces vi − pw , where pw ≤ b∗i = min{vi , p}. Thus, i’s payoﬀ from bidding bi is the
same as after b∗i in the first two subcases and is weakly lower in the third subcase. Hence, bi
induces weakly lower expected utility than b∗i .
Case 2: bi > min{vi , p}. By the same reasoning as before, i attains the same utility with
bi and b∗ if either both are the highest bid or neither is. If, instead, b∗i is not the highest bid
but bi is, then bi induces payoﬀ vi − pw with pw ≥ min{vi , p}, while b∗i induces max{vi − p, 0}.
Thus, again, bi leads to weakly lower expected utility than b∗i .
Hence, i has no incentive to deviate from b∗i , and bidding b∗i in the first stage along with
the second-stage strategies detailed above is a PBE.
(b) (By contradiction.) Assume that there is a PBE and a realization of valuations vb =
(b
v1 , vb2 , ..., vbN ) such that pw (b
v) > p. Denote the bidder who wins the auction in this case, i.
e., under realization vb in this equilibrium, as w, her strategy as sw (vw ), and the strategies of
all N players by s. We show that, under an alternative strategy s0w (vw ), w’s payoﬀ is weakly
higher for all realizations of valuations and strictly higher for some realizations. (We denote
the strategies of all players, with only w’s strategy changed from sw to s0w , as s0 .) For all
realizations v where vw 6= vbw , we define s0w to be identical to sw . For vw = vbw , we prescribe
bidding min{b
vw , p} and not purchasing in the second stage unless the auction is lost and vbw ≥ p.
The resulting payoﬀs are:
(i) For all v 6= vb with vw 6= vbw , w’s payoﬀ is the same under s0w and sw .

v) or vbw − pw (b
v ) − p, depending on the second(ii) For v = vb, strategy sw earns vbw − pw (b
0
stage strategy. With strategy sw , instead, w loses the auction (since pw (b
v ) > p) and earns
max{b
vw − p, 0}, i. e., strictly more than under sw .
(iii) For all remaining realizations v 6= vb with vw = vbw , we distinguish three subcases. If
25

both the bid prescribed by sw , bw (b
vw ), and the bid prescribed by s0w , b0w (b
vw ) = min{b
v, p}, win
0
the auction or if both lose the auction, w obtains the same payoﬀ under sw and sw (or a higher
payoﬀ under s0w if sw prescribes to purchase in the second stage after winning, to purchase after
losing even though vbw < p, or not to purchase after losing even though vbw > p ). If, instead, bw
wins the auction and b0w loses the auction, then the payoﬀ under s0w , max{b
vw − p, 0}, is weakly
higher than the payoﬀ under sw , where w wins the auction and pays at least min{b
vw , p }.
Thus, s0w induces a weakly higher payoﬀ than sw ∀v and a strictly higher payoﬀ for some
realizations of v. Given full support of the continuous distribution of v, w’s expected utility is
higher under s0w than under sw , and w has an incentive to deviate from sw .

Proof of Proposition 1’. (a) In the proof of Proposition 1(a), substitute b∗i = min{vi , p}
with b∗i = υi − α max {υi − p, 0}. The optimal second-stage strategy is unaltered if the item is
available. (If the item is not available the player does not choose an action.) To show that b∗i =
υi − α max {υi − p, 0} is part of a PBE in the subgame after entering the auction, distinguish
the two possible devitiations bi < υi −α max {υi − p, 0} (Case 1) and bi > υi −α max {υi − p, 0}
(Case 2), and the proof of Proposition 1(a) applies.
(b) We show that, in any PBE,
Z
pw (b1 (v1 ), ..., bN (vN ))dF (v) < p
v

with b(v) = (b1 (v1 ), ..., bN (vN )) denoting the bidding strategies and F the cdf of v. As before,
the decision of a player i not to enter is denoted by bi = 0. We also denote the marginal cdf
of the ith component as Fi , the conditional cdf of all other components, given vi , as F−i|i , and
the corresponding pdf’s by f , fi , and f−i|i . The fixed price sale is available before the auction
and remains after the auction with probability α ∈ [0, 1).

In any PBE, player i enters the auction iﬀ the expected utility from bidding in the auction
is higher than max{vi − p, 0}, i.e., the utility of either never purchasing nor bidding (a positive
amount) or purchasing in the first stage. Thus, all players i with vi ≤ p enter and bid a positive
amount bi (vi ) > 0 iﬀ
Pr (i wins|vi ) · E [vi − pw (b(v))|vi , i wins] ≥ 0
Z
⇐⇒
pw (b(v)|vi )dF−i|i (v−i ) ≤
{v−i |i wins}

Z

vi dF−i|i (v−i )

{v−i |i wins}

And all players i with vi > p enter iﬀ
Pr (i wins|vi ) · E [vi − pw (b(v))|vi , i wins] + αPr (i loses|vi ) · (vi − p) ≥ vi − p
Z
Z
Z
pw (b(v)|vi )dF−i|i (v−i ) ≤ p −
vi dF−i|i (v−i ) + α
(vi − p) dF−i|i (v−i )
⇐⇒
{v−i |i wins}

{v−i |i loses}

26

{v−i |i loses}

Taking expectations of pw with respect to vi , including both types of players, we obtain
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v)
{v|i wins}

=

Z

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

≤

Z

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

=

Z

=

pw (b(v))dF (v)

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v) −
Z

Z

Z

vi dF (v) + α

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v) + (1 − α)

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

Z

{v|vi >p}

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

Z

Z

pw (b(v))dF (v) +

Z

Z

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v) − (1 − α)

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v) + (1 − α)

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

Z

(vi − p) dF (v)
Z

vi dF (v).

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

(p − vi ) dF (v)

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

N , we get
Since the last term is strictly negative, given continuous support of v on R+
Z
Z
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v) <
vi dF (v) +
pdF (v)
{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

{v|i wins}

=

Z

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

min{vi , p}dF (v)

{v|i wins}

≤

Z

pdF (v).

{v|i wins}

Adding up the left-hand side and the right-hand side for all i, we obtain
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v) < p.
v

Proof of Proposition 2. We show that, in any PBE,
Z
pw (b1 (v1 ), ..., bN (vN ))dF (v) < p
v

with b(v) = (b1 (v1 ), ..., bN (vN )) denoting the bidding strategies and F the cdf of v. As before,
the decision of a player i not to enter is denoted by bi = 0. We also denote the marginal cdf
of the ith component as Fi , the conditional cdf of all other components, given vi , as F−i|i , and
the corresponding pdf’s by f , fi , and f−i|i . We denote with c the cost of switching, i.e., of
purchasing at the fixed price after having bid in the auction.
27

In any PBE, player i enters the auction iﬀ the expected utility from bidding in the auction
is higher than max{vi − p, 0}, i.e., the utility of either never purchasing nor bidding (a positive
amount) or purchasing in the first stage. Thus, all players i with low valuations vi ≤ p enter
and bid bi (vi ) > 0 iﬀ
Pr (i wins|vi ) · E [vi − pw (b(v))|vi , i wins] ≥ 0
Z
pw (b(v)|vi )dF−i|i (v−i ) ≤
⇐⇒
{v−i |i wins}

Z

vi dF−i|i (v−i )

{v−i |i wins}

Players i with medium valuations p + c ≥ vi > p enter iﬀ
Pr (i wins|vi ) · E [vi − pw (b(v))|vi , i wins] ≥ vi − p
Z
Z
pw (b(v)|vi )dF−i|i (v−i ) ≤ p −
⇐⇒
{v−i |i wins}

vi dF−i|i (v−i )

{v−i |i loses}

And players i with high valuations vi > p + c enter iﬀ

⇐⇒

Pr (i wins|vi ) · E [vi − pw (b(v))|vi , i wins] + Pr (i loses|vi ) · (vi − p − c) ≥ vi − p
Z
Z
Z
pw (b(v)|vi )dF−i|i (v−i ) ≤ p −
vi dF−i|i (v−i ) +
(vi − p − c) dF−i|i (v−i )

{v−i |i wins}

{v−i |i loses}

{v−i |i loses}

Taking expectations of pw with respect to vi , including all three types of players, we obtain
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v)
{v|i wins}

=

Z

pw (b(v))dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

≤

Z

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

=

Z

=

Z

pdF (v) −
Z
Z

pdF (v) −
Z

(vi − p − c) dF (v)

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c}

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v) −

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

Z

vi dF (v) +
Z

pdF (v)

{v|vi >p}

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v) +

Z

pw (b(v))dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ p+c≥vi >p}

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

Z

{v|vi >p}

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

Z

Z

Z

vi dF (v) −

{v|i loses ∧ p+c≥vi >p}

(vi − p) dF (v) −

{v|i loses ∧ p+c≥vi >p}

Z

Z

(p + c) dF (v).

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c}

cdF (v).

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c}

N,
Since the sum of the last two terms is strictly negative, given continuous support of v on R+
we get
Z
Z
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v) <
vi dF (v) +
pdF (v)
{v|i wins}

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

28

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

Z

=

min{vi , p}dF (v)

{v|i wins}

Z

≤

pdF (v).

{v|i wins}

Adding up the left-hand side and the right-hand side for all i, we obtain
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v) < p.
v

Proof of Proposition 2’. Following the proof of Proposition 2, the uncertain availability
of the fixed price after the auction aﬀects only the auction participation condition for players
with high valuations vi > p + c. They enter iﬀ
Pr (i wins|vi ) · E [vi − pw (b(v))|vi , i wins] + αPr (i loses|vi ) · (vi − p − c) ≥ vi − p
Z
Z
Z
pw (b(v)|vi )dF−i|i (v−i ) ≤ p −
vi dF−i|i (v−i ) + α
(vi − p − c) dF−i|i (v−i )
⇐⇒
{v−i |i wins}

{v−i |i loses}

{v−i |i loses}

The other two participation constraints (for players with low valuations vi ≤ p and for players
with medium valuations p + c ≥ vi > p) are unaﬀected. Taking expectations of pw with respect
to vi , including all three types of players, we now obtain
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v)
{v|i wins}

≤

Z

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

=

Z

Z

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

−(1 − α)

Z

pdF (v) −

{v|vi >p}

vi dF (v) +

Z

Z

vi dF (v) + α

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

vi dF (v) − α

Z

Z

Z

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

−(1 − α)

Z

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

−(1 − α)

pdF (v) + (1 − α)

vi dF (v) −

α

Z

vi dF (v) − α

vi dF (v)

{v|i loses ∧ p+c≥vi >p}

Z

pdF (v) +

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

pdF (v). − α

Z

cdF (v).

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c} {v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c} {v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c}

29

α

Z

pdF (v)

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

vi dF (v)

{v|i loses ∧ p+c≥vi >p}

Z

Z

(p + c) dF (v).

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

{v|i loses ∧ p+c≥vi >p}

Z

Z

(vi − p − c) dF (v)

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c}

pdF (v) −

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c} {v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c}

=

Z

=

Z

vi dF (v) +

{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

−(1 − α)

Z

Z

pdF (v)

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

(vi − p) dF (v) − α

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p}

Z

(vi − p) dF (v) −

{v|i loses ∧ p+c≥vi >p}

Z

cdF (v).

{v|i loses ∧ vi >p+c}

N,
Since the sum of the last three terms is strictly negative, given continuous support of v on R+
we get
Z
Z
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v) <
vi dF (v) +
pdF (v)
{v|i wins ∧ vi ≤p}

{v|i wins}

=

Z

{v|i wins ∧ vi >p}

min{vi , p}dF (v)

{v|i wins}

≤

Z

pdF (v).

{v|i wins}

Adding up the left-hand side and the right-hand side for all i, we obtain
Z
pw (b(v))dF (v) < p.
v

Appendix B
Search Criteria for Cross-sectional Auction Data
The primary selection criterion was that a given set of search words retrieves homogeneous
items of exactly the same quality. We took several steps to avoid mismatches. First, we identified products with unique identifiers, such as model numbers or brand names (electronics,
perfumes). Secondly, we focused on products that are highly likely to be new (hygiene products), or boxed products that could be easily identified as new (electronics). We also found
that eBay users have conventions for denoting product quality (new, almost new, used, etc.).
We required that the applicable naming convention for new products be present in the every
item description. For example, items in boxes needed to be described with “new in box,”
“nib,” “sealed,” “unopened,” or “never opened.” We also employed several advanced eBay
search features:
1. Search title and description. We searched not only the item title (default), but also the
item description. Product quality is often denoted in the description.
2. Browsing hierarchy. eBay assigns products to detailed categories. Narrowly chosen categories allowed us to eliminate diﬀering products.
30

3. Minimum and maximum price. For each item in our cross-sectional data, we carefully
determined a price below which a brand new item could not possibly be listed, and a price
above which it could never sold. Minimum prices eliminated accessories and blatantly used
products in the BIN results. Maximum prices eliminated bundled items in both the auctions
and BIN results. We conducted test downloads where we simply searched for the item names,
then hand-checked for false positives (e.g. an iPod case instead of an iPod). This allowed us
to derive boundaries for the item prices.
4. NOT. This eBay search feature allows specifying words that cannot be in the product
description. We used this feature to eliminate related but diﬀerent products.
5. OR. This eBay search feature allows specifying a group of words, at least one of which must
be in the product description. We used this feature mainly to account for the multiple ways to
refer to a new product. We also used it in cases of multiple descriptions of an identical feature
such as “4gb” or “4 gb,” “3.4oz” or “100ml.”
BIN Extraction for Cross-sectional Auction Data
Buy-it-now downloads were usually scheduled to take place within 30 minutes of the respective auction close. For some auctions ending in the middle of the night the BINs were
downloaded within a few hours of the auction close, most often within two hours. (The likelihood of the cheapest BIN changing within the space of two hours at that time of day was
very low.) The purpose of extracting the BIN prices right before the close of the auction is to
find the cheapest fixed-price match to each auction item. Overall, 91.86 percent of fixed prices
were within 120 minutes of the auction ending time in Download 1, 94.56 percent in Download
2, and 94.28 percent in Download 3.
After removing a few mismatched items, we identified the cheapest fixed price for each
item type without accounting for shipping costs and the cheapest fixed price accounting for
shipping costs. We obtained a final data set of 5, 708 fixed-price listings, 1, 876 for the auctions
of Download 1, 1, 726 for Download 2, and 2, 106 for Download 3.

31

References
[1] Ariely, Dan and Itamar Simonson. 2003. “Buying, Bidding, Playing, or Competing? Value
Assessment and Decision Dynamics in Online Auctions.” Journal of Consumer Psychology,
13(1 & 2): 113-123.
[2] Ashenfelter, Orley and David Genesove. 1992. “Testing for Price Anomalies in Real-Estate
Auctions.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 82(2): 501-505.
[3] Bajari, Patrick and Ali Hortacsu. 2003. “The Winner’s Curse, Reserve Prices and Endogenous Entry: Empirical Insights From eBay Auctions.” Rand Journal of Economics,
3(2): 329-355.
[4] Bajari, Patrick and Ali Hortacsu. 2004. “Economic Insights from Internet auctions.” Journal of Economic Literature, 42: 457-486.
[5] Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten. 2004. “Persistent Price Dispersion
in Online Markets.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 52(4): 463-496.
[6] Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten. 2006. “Information, Search, and
Price Dispersion.” In: Handbook on Economics and Information Systems, ed. Terrence
Hendershott, 323-376. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[7] Bernardo, Antonio E. and Bradford Cornell. 1997. “The Valuation of Complex Derivatives
by Major Investment Firms: Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Finance, 52(2): 785-798.
[8] Bernheim, Douglas and Antonio Rangel. 2004. “Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision
Processes.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1558-1590.
[9] Binmore, Ken and Paul Klemperer. 2002. “The Biggest Auction Ever: the Sale of the
British 3G Telecom Licences.” Economic Journal, 112: C74—C96.
[10] Blecherman, Barry and Colin Camerer. 1996. “Is there a winner’s curse in baseball free
agency? Evidence from the field.” California Institute of Technology Social Science Working Paper 966.
[11] Brown, Jennifer and John Morgan. 2006. “Reputation in Online Markets: The Market for
Trust.” California Management Review, 49(1): 61-81.
[12] Compte, Olivier. 2004. “Prediction errors and the winner’s curse.” Working Paper.
[13] Cooper, David J. and Hanming Fan, 2008. “Understanding Overbidding in Second Price
Auctions: An Experimental Study.” Economic Journal, vol. 118 (532), pp. 1572-1595.

32

[14] Cox, James C., Vernon L. Smith, and James M. Walker. 1988. “Theory and individual
behavior of first-price auctions.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1: 61—99.
[15] Crawford, Vincent P. and Nagore Iriberri. 2007. “Level-k Auctions: Can a NonEquilibrium Model of Strategic Thinking Explain the Winner’s Curse and Overbidding in
Private-Value Auctions?” Econometrica, 75(6): 1721—1770.
[16] Delgado, Mauricio R., Andrew Schotter, Erkut Ozbay, and Elizabeth A. Phelps. 2007.
“Understanding Over- bidding: Using the Neural Circuitry of Reward to Design Economic
Auctions.” Science, 321(5897), 1849-1852.
[17] Dodonova, Anna and Yuri Khoroshilov. 2004. “Anchoring and Transaction Utility: Evidence from On-line Auctions.” Applied Economics Letters, 11: 307-310.
[18] DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier. 2004. “Contract Design and Self-Control :
Theory and Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2): 353-402.
[19] DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
American Economic Review, 96(3): 694-719.
[20] Dewan, Sanjeev and Vernon Hsu. 2004. “Adverse Selection in Electronic Markets: Evidence from Online Stamp Auctions.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 52(4): 497-516.
[21] Eliaz, Kfir, Theo Oﬀerman, and Andrew Schotter. 2008. “Creating Competition Out of
Thin Air: An experimental Study of Right-to-Choose Auctions.” Games and Economic
Behavior, 62(2): 383-416.
[22] Ellison, Glenn. 2006. “Bounded Rationality in Industrial Organization.” In: Advances in
Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World Congress, Volume
II, ed. Richard Blundell, Whitney Newey, and Torsten Persson. New York, Cambridge
University Press.
[23] Ellison, Glenn. 2005. “A Model of Add-on Pricing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120(2): 585-637.
[24] Ellison, Glenn and Sara Fisher Ellison. 2009. “Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities
on the Internet.” Econometrica, 77(2): 427-452.
[25] Eyster, Erik and Matthew Rabin. 2005. “Cursed Equilibrium.” Econometrica, 73: 16231672.
[26] Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia,
and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
121(2): 505-540.
33

[27] Garratt, Rod, Mark Walker, and John Wooders. 2007. “Behavior in Second-Price Auctions by Highly Experienced eBay Buyers and Sellers.” UC Santa Barbara Department of
Economics Working Paper.
[28] Goeree, Jacob K., Charles A. Holt, and Thomas R. Palfrey. 2002. “Quantal Response
Equilibrium and Overbidding in Private-Value Auctions.” Journal of Economic Theory,
104: 247-272.
[29] Halcoussis, Dennis and Timothy Mathews. 2007. “eBay Auctions for Third Eye Blind
Concert Tickets.” Journal of Cultural Economics, 31: 65-78.
[30] Heidhues, Paul and Botond Köszegi. 2005. “The Impact of Consumer Loss Aversion on
Pricing.” Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 4849.
[31] Heyman, James, Yesim Orhun, and Dan Ariely. 2004. “Auction Fever: The Eﬀect of Opponents and Quasi-Endowment on Product Valuations.” Journal of Interactive Marketing,
18: 7-21.
[32] Hirshleifer, David and Siew Hong Teoh. 2003. “Limited Attention, Information Disclosure,
and Financial Reporting.” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 36: 337-386.
[33] Houser, Daniel and John Wooders. 2006. “Reputation in Auctions: Theory, and Evidence
from eBay.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 15(2): 353—369.
[34] Hossain, Tanjim and Morgan, John, 2006. “...Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue
(Non)Equivalence in Field Experiments on eBay.” In: Advances in Economic Analysis
& Policy, vol. 6(2), Article 3.
[35] Jin, Zhe and Andrew Kato. 2006. “Price, Quality and Reputation: Evidence from an
Online Field Experiment.” RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4): 983-1004.
[36] Kagel, John, Ronald Harstad, and Dan Levin. 1987. “Information Impact and Allocation
Rules in Auctions with Aﬃliated Private Values: A Laboratory Study.” Econometrica,
55: 1275-1304.
[37] Kagel, John and Dan Levin. 2009. “Implementing Eﬃcient Multi-Object Auction Institutions: An Experimental Study of the Performance of Boundedly Rational Agents.” Games
and Economic Behavior, 66(1): 221-237.
[38] Kagel, John and Dan Levin. 2002. Common Value Auctions and the Winner’s Curse.
Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
[39] Kagel, John and Dan Levin. 1993. “Independent private value auctions: bidder behavior
in first-, second-, and third price auctions with varying number of bidders.” Economic
Journal, 103: 868-879.
34

[40] Kagel, John and Dan Levin. 1986. “Winner’s Curse and Public Information in Common
Value Auctions.” American Economic Review, 76: 894-920.
[41] Kirchkamp, Oliver, Eva Poen, and J. Philipp Reiss. 2009. “Outside options: Another
reason to choose the first-price auction.” European Economic Review, 53(2): 153-169.
[42] Klemperer, Paul. 2002. “How (Not) to Run Auctions: the European 3G Telecom Auctions.” European Economic Review, 46: 829-845.
[43] Ku, G., D. Malhotra, and J. Keith Murnighan. 2005. “Towards a Competitive Arousal
Model of Decision-Making: A Study of Auction Fever in Live and Internet Auctions.”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 96: 89-103.
[44] List, John A. 2003. “Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(1): 41-71.
[45] Lucking-Reiley, David. 2000. “Auctions on the Internet: What’s Being Auctioned, and
How?” Journal of Industrial Economics, 48(3): 227-252.
[46] Malmendier, Ulrike. 2002. Societas Publicanorum. Cologne and Vienna: Böhlau Verlag.
[47] Malmendier, Ulrike and Enrico Moretti. 2006. “Winning by Losing: Evidence on Overbidding in Mergers.” Unpublished.
[48] Malmendier,
Ulrike and Adam Szeidl. 2008. “Fishing for Fools.” http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/ ulrike/research.html.
[49] Massey, Cade and Richard Thaler. 2006. “The Loser’s Curse: Overconfidence vs. Market
Eﬃciency in the National Football League Draft.” NBER Working Paper No. W11270.
[50] McAfee, Preston and John McMillan. 1996. “Analyzing the Airwaves Auction.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 10(1): 159-175.
[51] McFadden, Daniel. 1978. “Modelling the Choice of Residential Location.” in: A. Karlqvist,
L. Lundqvist, F. Snickars, and J. Weibull (eds.), Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning
Models, North Holland: Amsterdam: 75-96.
[52] Melnik, Mikhail and James Alm. 2002. “Does a Seller’s eCommerce Reputation Matter?
Evidence from eBay Auctions.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 50: 337-349.
[53] Morgan, John, Ken Steiglitz, and George Reis. 2003. “The Spite Motive and Equilibrium
Behavior in Auctions.” Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy , 2(1): Article 5.

35

[54] Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2002. “A Memory-Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 735-774 .
[55] Ockenfels, Axel, David Reiley, and Abdolkarim Sadrieh. 2006. “Online Auctions.” In
Handbook on Economics and Information Systems, ed. Terrence J. Hendershott, 571-628.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[56] Oster, Sharon and Fiona Scott-Morton. 2005. “Behavioral Biases Meet the Market: The
Case of Magazine Subscription Prices.” The B.E. Journals in Advances in Economic
Analysis and Policy, 5(1): Article 1.
[57] Pratt, John, David Wise, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1979. “Price Diﬀerences in Almost
Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93: 189-211.
[58] Resnick, Paul and Richard Zeckhauser. 2002. “Trust Among Strangers in Internet Transactions: Empirical Analysis of eBay’s Reputation System.” In: The Economics of the
Internet and E-Commerce, ed. M. R. Baye, 127-157. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[59] Ritter, Jay. 1991. “The Long-Run Underperformance of Initial Public Oﬀerings.” Journal
of Finance, 46(1): 3-27.
[60] Roth, Alvin and Axel Ockenfels. 2002. “Last-Minute Bidding and the Rules for Ending
Second-Price Auctions: Evidence from eBay and Amazon Auctions on the Internet.”
American Economics Review, 92: 1093-1103.
[61] Sherman, Ann and Ravi Jagannathan. 2006. “Why Do IPO Auctions Fail?” NBER Working Paper No. W12151.
[62] Shunda, Nicholas. 2009. “Auctions with a Buy Price: The Case of Reference-Dependent
Preferences.” Games and Economic Behavior, 67(2): 645-664.
[63] Simonsohn, Uri and Ariely, Dan. 2008. “When Rational Sellers Face Non-Rational Consumers: Evidence from Herding on eBay.” Management Science, 54(9):1624-1637.
[64] Standifird, Stephen, Matthew R. Roelofs, and Yvonne Durham. 2004. “The Impact of
eBay’s Buy-It-Now Function on Bidder Behavior.” International Journal of Electronic
Commerce, 9: 167-176.
[65] Staw, Barry. 1976. “Knee-Deep in the Big Muddy: A Study of Escalating Commitment
to a Chosen Course of Action.” Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16:
27-44.
[66] Stoll, Hans and Anthony Curley. 1970. “Small Business and the New Issues Market for
Equities.” Journal of Finance and Quantitative Analysis, 5: 309-322.
36

[67] Vickrey, William. 1961. “Counterspeculation, Auctions and Competitive Sealed Tenders.”
Journal of Finance, 16(1): 8-37.
[68] Wolf, James, Hal Arkes, and Waleed Muhanna. 2005. “Is Overbidding in Online Auctions
the Result of a Pseudo-Endowment Eﬀect?” SSRN Working Paper.
[69] Wolf, James, Hal Arkes, and Waleed Muhanna. 2006. “Do Auction Bidders ’Really’ Want
to Win the Item, or Do They Simply Want to Win?” Working Paper.

37

Table I. Summary Statistics: Cash-Flow 101 Data
Panel A. Auction-Level Data
The sample period is 02/11/2004 to 09/06/2004. Final Price is the price paid by the winner excluding
shipping costs; it is equal to the second-highest bid plus the bid increment. Shipping Cost is the flat-rate
shipping cost set by the seller. Total Price is the sum of Final Price and Shipping Cost. Auction Starting
and Ending Hours are defined as 0 for the time interval from 12 am to 1 am, 1 for the time interval from 1
am to 2 am etc. Prime Time is a dummy variable and equal to 1 if the auction ends between 3 pm and 7
pm PDT. Delivery Insurance is a dummy variable and equal to 1 if any delivery insurance is available.
Title New is a dummy and equal to 1 if the title indicates that the item is new. Title Bonus Tapes/Video is
a dummy and equal to 1 if the title indicates that the bonus tapes or videos are included. Explicit195 is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the item description mentions the $195 manufacturer price.
Variable
Obs.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min.
Max.
Starting Price
167
46.56
43.96
0.01
150
Final Price
167
131.95
16.84
81.00
179.30
Shipping Cost
140
12.51
3.81
4.95
20.00
Total Price
140
144.27
14.96
110.99
185.50
Number of Bids
167
16.84
9.21
1
39
Number of Bidders
138
8.41
3.84
1
18
Feedback Score Buyer
138
37.86
104.37
-1
929
Feedback Score Seller
138
296.17
1,567.47
0
14,730
Positive Feedback Percentage Seller
138
59.81
48.88
0
100
Auction Length [in days]
167
6.27
1.69
1
10
one day
167
1.20%
three days
167
11.38%
five days
167
17.37%
seven days
167
65.27%
ten days
167
4.79%
Auction Ending Weekday
Monday
167
11.98%
Tuesday
167
7.78%
Wednesday
167
15.57%
Thursday
167
11.98%
Friday
167
9.58%
Saturday
167
18.56%
Sunday
167
24.55%
Auction Starting Hour
167
14.84
5.21
0
23
Auction Ending Hour
167
14.84
5.21
0
23
Prime Time
167
33.53%
Title New
167
16.77%
Title Bonus Tapes/Video
167
27.54%
Explicit195
167
31.14%

Table I. Summary Statistics: Cash Flow 101 Data (continued )
Panel B. Bidder-Level Data
Bids are submitted bids, except in the case of the winning bid which is displayed as the winning
price (the second-highest bid plus the appropriate increment).
Variable

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

Number of auctions per bidder

807

1.44

1.25

1

17

Number of bids per bidder (total)
Number of bids per bidder (per auction)

807
807

2.92
2.03

3.35
1.76

1
1

33
22

Average bid per bidder [in $]
Maximum bid per bidder [in $]

807
807

87.96
95.14

38.34
39.33

0.01
0.01

175.00
177.50

Winning frequency per bidder (total)
Winning frequency per bidder (per auction)

807
807

0.17
0.14

0.38
0.34

0
0

2
1

Variable
Bid value [in $]
Bid price outstanding [in $]
Leading bid [in $]

Obs.
2,353
2,353
2,353

Mean
87.94
83.99
93.76

Std. Dev.
36.61
38.07
35.18

Min.
0.01
0.01
0.01

Max.
177.5
177.5
177.5

Feedback Score Buyer
Feedback Score Seller
Positive Feedback Percentage Seller

2,353
2,353
2,353

32.40
273.23
64.72

104.65
1422.55
47.40

-1
0
0

1,378
14,730
100

Starting time of auction
Ending time of auction
Bidding time

2,353
2,353
2,353

15.63
15.68
13.70

4.91
4.93
5.54

0.28
0.28
0.20

23.06
23.41
24.00

Last-minute bids
during the last 60 minutes
during the last 10 minutes
during the last 5 minutes

2,353
2,353
2,353

6.25%
4.25%
3.48%

Bid on auction with Explicit195
Bid on auction with delivery insurance
Bids on auction with bonus tapes/videos

2,353
2,353
2,353

0.32
0.46
0.25

0.47
0.50
0.43

0
0
0

1
1
1

Panel C. Bid-Level Data

Table II. Summary Statistics: Cross-sectional Data
The sample consists of all downloaded auctions in US currency for the items listed in Appendix-Table
A.1 unless the auction was removed by eBay during the listing period, received no bids, ended before
corresponding fixed-price data could be collected, or could otherwise not be downloaded.
Download 1
Download 2
Download 3
Item Category
# Items
# Auctions
# Items
# Auctions
# Items
# Auctions
Consumer electronics
16
197
28
129
26
140
Computer hardware
8
62
11
83
10
55
Financial software
7
125
3
15
3
12
Sports equipment
3
16
6
24
3
17
Personal care products
2
23
16
100
13
160
Perfume / cologne
3
18
4
23
4
36
Toys / games
4
99
5
24
5
42
Books
6
175
6
106
6
117
Cosmetics
0
0
2
16
2
5
Home products
0
0
2
8
2
21
Automotive products
0
0
1
3
1
6
DVDs
0
0
5
36
5
38
Total
567
49
715
89
80
649

Table III. Overbidding: Cashflow 101 Data
Overpayment (Final Price) is equal to Final Price minus the simultaneous buy-it-now price set by
the professional retailers. Overpayment (Total Price) is equal to Total Price minus the sum of the
simultaneous buy-it-now price and the cheapest shipping cost for the buy-it-now item charged by
the professional retailers. The exact auction date is missing for one auction, reducing the sample
to 166 (from 167 in Table I).
c
Variable
Obs.
Mean Std. Dev.
Min.
Max.
Overpayment (Final Price)
166
0.28
16.70
-48.95
47.55
Overpayment (Total Price)
139
2.69
14.94
-28.91
45.60

Overpayment (Final Price)
> $0
> $10
> $20
> $30
Overpayment (Total Price)
> $0
> $10
> $20
> $30

Obs.

Fraction of Total
Number of Auctions

Fraction of Overbid
Auctions

166
166
166
166

42%
27%
16%
6%

100%
64%
39%
14%

139
139
139
139

73%
48%
35%
25%

100%
66%
48%
35%

Table IV. Overbidding: Cross-sectional Analysis
The sample consists of all auctions matched to buy-it-now prices for the same item, available at the end of the auction period.
Download 2
Download 1
Download 3
%
%
Sample
%
%
Sample
%
%
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Item Category
Overbid (w/ship) Overbid
Overbid (w/ship) Overbid
Overbid (w/ship) Overbid
Consumer electronics
Computer hardware
Financial software
Sports equipment
Personal care
Perfume / cologne
Toys / games
Books
Cosmetics
Home products
Automotive products
DVDs
Total

173
62
125
13
23
18
99
175

36%
29%
62%
8%
39%
67%
48%
75%

145
54
94
13
14
10
85
156

41%
35%
49%
15%
50%
40%
56%
69%

688

52%

571

51%

124
73
15
25
99
23
23
106
16
8
3
36
551

44%
32%
53%
68%
43%
30%
43%
68%
44%
13%
0%
61%
48%

108
66
13
24
74
17
15
93
16
7
1
32
466

39%
24%
38%
25%
38%
24%
47%
55%
31%
14%
0%
50%
39%

138
55
12
17
160
36
42
117
5
21
6
38
647

38%
35%
42%
76%
29%
31%
36%
72%
60%
29%
0%
74%
44%

111
41
12
15
127
31
32
96
5
19
4
33
526

31%
24%
25%
40%
39%
23%
9%
60%
40%
11%
0%
64%
37%

Table V. Disproportionate Influence of Overbidders
Auction-level sample
Does the auction end up overbid?

Observations

(Percent)

No
Yes

78
60
138

56.52%
43.48%
100.00%

No
Yes

670
137
807

83.02%
16.98%
100.00%

Total
Bidder-level sample
Does the bidder ever overbid?
Total
Bid-level sample
Is the bid an over-bid?

No
Yes

2,101
89.29%
252
10.71%
Total
2,353
100.00%
Overbidding is defined relative to the buy-it-now price (without shipping costs).

Table VI. Bidding and Limited Attention
McFadden conditional logit model where the dependent variable is equal to 1 for items that are bid on at a particular time, and 0 for items
that are available but are not chosen by the bidder at that time. The sample consists of all auctions listed at each actual bidding instance.
Reported are the exponentiated coefficients (odds ratios). Standard errrors are clustered by bidding instance. Auction controls include
Seller reputation [measured by feedback score], Auction length [in days], a dummy for Prime time (6-9pm Pacific Time), and Remaining
auction time [measured in days and fraction of days]. Extended time controls include Remaining auction time squared and cubed,
dummies for Last day, six dummies for the six last hours of the auction.
Dependent variable: binary variable equal to 1 for items bid on (at a given time)
"Just above/below" = +/-$5
Full Sample
Full
First Bids Later Bids
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Distance to nearest BIN listing
1.176
1.106
1.021
1.061
0.995
[rows between]
[0.025]*** [0.029]*** [0.028]
[0.042]
[0.037]
(Price just below)*(Distance to BIN)
0.894
0.868
0.939
[0.160]
[0.245]
[0.204]
(Price just above)*(Distance to BIN)
2.083
2.948
1.785
[0.487]*** [0.911]*** [0.670]
(Price far above)*(Distance to BIN)
1.159
0.640
1.325
[0.137]
[0.236]
[0.152]**
Price outstanding just below BIN price
1.164
1.326
1.164
[dummy]
[0.207]
[0.357]
[0.279]
Price outstanding just above BIN price
1.747
0.966
2.920
[dummy]
[0.453]** [0.381]
[1.004]***
Price outstanding far above BIN price
2.152
1.761
2.844
[dummy]
[0.449]*** [0.617]
[0.781]***
Position on screen
0.988
0.918
0.974
1.000
0.983
[row number]
[0.005]** [0.009]*** [0.013]** [0.019]
[0.004]***
Price outstanding
0.975
0.99
0.983
1.006
[0.003]*** [0.003]*** [0.004]*** [0.005]
2

1.002
[0.002]
0.994
[0.001]***
Yes

(Price outstanding)
Starting price

Auction controls
Extended time controls
N
Pseudo R-squared

14,043
0.01

14,043
0.14

0.989
[0.003]***
0.994
[0.001]***
Yes
Yes
14,043
0.18

0.988
[0.004]***
0.998
[0.001]**
Yes
Yes
6,712
0.25

0.983
[0.004]***
0.99
[0.001]***
Yes
Yes
7,331
0.15

"Just above/below" = +/-$10
Full
First Bids Later Bids
(6)
(7)
(8)
1.025
1.056
1.006
[0.028]
[0.043]
[0.038]
0.822
0.933
0.752
[0.128]
[0.232]
[0.147]
1.372
1.538
1.469
[0.239]*
[0.324]** [0.421]
1.231
0.861
1.261
[0.118]** [0.346]
[0.133]**
1.205
0.835
1.799
[0.179]
[0.198]
[0.347]***
1.861
1.027
3.255
[0.412]*** [0.345]
[0.992]***
2.746
1.213
5.922
[0.729]*** [0.575]
[2.057]***
0.973
0.998
0.945
[0.013]** [0.019]
[0.018]***
0.991
0.981
1.013
[0.003]*** [0.005]*** [0.005]**
0.988
[0.003]***
0.994
[0.001]***
Yes
Yes
14,043
0.18

0.991
[0.004]**
0.998
[0.001]*
Yes
Yes
6,712
0.25

0.977
[0.004]***
0.991
[0.001]***
Yes
Yes
7,331
0.16

Figure I. Listing Example

Figure II. Distribution of Final Prices
The six graphs display histograms and kernel densities of the Final Prices. The histograms in Panel A are in bins of $5 width. The histograms in Panel B
are in bins of $1 width. The histograms are overlaid with a kernel density estimate, using the Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 4.8.
Panel A. Bin-width $5
Subsample with fixed price at $139.95

(Dashed line at $129.95)

(Dashed line at $139.95)

80

100

120
140
Final Price

160

180

Density
.02
.03
.01
0

0

0

.01

.01

Density
.02
.03

Density
.02
.03

.04

Subsample with fixed price at $129.95

.04

.04

Full Sample

80

100

120
140
Final Price

160

180

80

100

120
140
Final Price

160

180

Panel B. Bin-width $1
Subsample with fixed price at $129.95

Subsample with fixed price at $139.95

(Dashed line at $129.95)

(Dashed line at $139.95)

80

100

120
140
Final Price

160

180

.14
Density
.06 .08 .1
.04
.02
0

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

Density
.08

Density
.06 .08 .1

.1

.12

.12

.12

.14

.14

Full Sample

80

100

120
140
Final Price

160

180

80

100

120
140
Final Price

160

180

Figure III. Overbidding
Panel A. Overbidding By Item Category
The leftmost column shows the percent of auction prices above the BIN in the Cashflow 101 data. The other
columns show the percent of auction prices above the corresponding BIN in the cross-sectional data, split by
item category.
100%
90%
80%

72%

70%

68%

59% 56%

60%
50%

42%

40%

39%
32%

35%

39%

45%

48%

24%

30%
20%
10%

0%

Co

Co

ns
u

m

er

Ca

el

sh
f

lo

w

10

1

(N

=1
6

7)
ec
m
tro
pu
ni
te
cs
r
Fi
(N
na ha r d
=4
nc
w
35
ar
ia
ls
e(
)
of
N
Sp
=1
tw
or
a
90
ts
)
eq re (
N
ui
pm = 1
Pe
52
rs
)
on e n t
Pe
(
a
N
rfu
lc
=
ar
55
m
e
e/
)
c o (N =
To
28
lo
gn
2)
ys
/ g e (N
am
=7
es
7)
(
Bo N=
16
ok
Co s (N 4)
sm
=3
H
om
et
98
i
c
A
)
ep
s(
ut
N
r
om
od
uc =21
ot
iv
e p ts (N )
ro
du =29
)
c ts
(N
D
V
=9
D
)
s(
N
=7
4)

0%

Panel B. Overbidding By Experience
The sample consists of all Cashflow 101 auctions. The Below Median sample contains all winners with a
Feedback Score of 4 or lower; the Above Median sample contains all winners with a Feedback Score above
4. Subsamples sizes are in the second pair of parentheses.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Below Median (<=4) (N=83)

Above Median (>4) (N=83)

Figure IV. Calibrations
Limited Memory

Utility of Winning

Percent Overpaid/Overbidders
Percent overpaid
43% Line

Percent Overpaid/Overbidders

Percent overbidders
17% Line

Percent overpaid
43% Line

Chi2(130)

Chi2(130)
100.00%

75.00%

75.00%
Percent

100.00%
Percent

Percent overbidders
17% Line

50.00%
25.00%

50.00%
25.00%

0.00%
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5 0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.00%

1

0

Probability of Forgetting

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.8 0.9

1

Probability of Utility from Winning

U[80, 180]

U[80, 180]
100.00%

75.00%

75.00%

Percent

Percent

100.00%

50.00%
25.00%

50.00%
25.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Probability of Forgetting

0.8

0.9

1

0

0.1 0.2

0.3 0.4

0.5 0.6 0.7

Probability of Utility from Winning

Appendix - Table A.1 Overbidding and Quasi-endowment
Probit model where the binary dependent variable is 1 if the bidder ultimately overbids. In Column 1,
we consider the sample of all bidders who have been lead bidder at some point and who have been
outbid at some point. Column 2 restricts the sample of Column 1 to those bidders whose first bid was
not an overbid. Column 3 restricts the sample of Column 1 to those bidders whose first bid that made
the lead bidder was not an overbid. Total lead time is the total length of the times a bidder was lead
bidder. We also control for the value of the bidder's last lead bid and the time and price outstanding
when she is ultimately outbid. Coefficients are reported as marginal effects.

Total lead time
Value of last lead bid
Time of the last outbid
Price outstanding at the time of the last outbid
N
Pseudo R-squared

(1)
0.123
(0.220)
0.001
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)
784
0.2232

(2)
0.161
(0.207)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.002
(0.004)
742
0.1889

(3)
0.139
(0.201)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)
0.002
(0.004)
732
0.1902

Online-Appendix
A. Cross-Sectional Data: Construction of the Data Set
The full list of all items contained the cross-sectional data set (data set 2) as
well as the complete search strings are shown in Online-Appendix Table 1.
Online-Appendix Table 2 presents a matrix that summarizes the data construction and composition, starting from the initial number of dowloaded auctions to the final list used in the empirical analysis.

B. Cross-Sectional Data: Results on Demographics
With our cross-sectional data, we also explore diﬀerences in overbidding by
demographics. While we do not observe bidder demographics directly, our data
includes objects associated with a consumer demographic. To examine gender
diﬀerences, we compare for example perfumes of the same brand for men and
women. As shown in Online-Appendix 3, the frequency of overbidding is higher
for products that target men than for those targeting women, though the diﬀerence is not large (38 percent versus 33 percent) and, in aggregate, not significant
(s.e.= 5.03 percent). We also examine diﬀerences by target age groups, comparing toys for kids (Elmo), teenagers (games and playstations), and adults
(electronics). We find no systematic diﬀerences. Comparing books of liberal
versus conservative authors (Obama versus O’Reilly), we find again no systematic pattern. Finally, to capture the impact of income, we compare the prices
for cheap versus expensive products, such as financial software (Quicken 2007
Basic versus Home Business). Again, overbidding is significant in each category
and not systematically correlated with the price level. Overall, we do not detect
any significant correlation with features of the target consumer. Overbidding is
sizeable within each demographic subset.
As discussed above, the larger-scale cross-sectional data comes at the cost of
some loss of control over the setting. In particular, diﬀerently from the Cashflow
101 data, we cannot be sure about the availability of the same buy-it-now prices
in the future or about diﬀerences in seller reputation between the auction and
the fixed price listings.

C. Cross-Sectional Data: Results on Price Level
Our cross-sectional data allows us to test whether overbidding frequencies are
lower for more expensive items. The scatterplots in Online-Appendix Figure I
show the share of bidders that overbid for each price level, as determined by
the corresponding fixed price. Panel A uses the full data across all items in the
cross-sectional data. Panel B shows overbidding by price level separately for
diﬀerent item categories. We find no significant relation between price level and
overbidding.

1

D. Choice experiment
We conducted a choice experiment with 99 students at the Stanford Behavioral
Laboratory on April 17, 2006. Subjects had to choose among three items from
our Cashflow 101 data based on their description, namely, two randomly drawn
auction descriptions and one of the two professional buy-it-now descriptions.
Seller identification and prices were removed from the description, as was the
indication of auction versus fixed price. Subjects were asked which of three
items they would prefer to purchase, assuming that prices and listing details
such as remaining time and number of bids were identical. The choice was
hypothetical, and there was no payment conditional on the subjects’ choice. The
same three listings were shown to all subjects but the order of the descriptions
was randomized, following the scheme shown in Online-Appendix Table 4. We
used three diﬀerent ways to number the items, depending on the order: as A, B,
C, as 1, 2, 3, or as i, ii, iii. One example and detailed instructions are included
below.
As discussed in Section 4.1 of the main paper, three subjects did not provide
answers. Among the remaining subjects, 35 percent expressed indiﬀerence, 50
percent chose the oﬀer of the professional retailer, and 15 percent preferred
one of the two auction items. When asked to explain their choice, the 14 students who chose an auction item most commonly said that the fixed price oﬀer
provided too much information — a reaction that may have been driven by time
pressure in the six-minute experiment. Students who chose the retailer’s oﬀer
most commonly mentioned the retailer’s money-back-guarantee and more professional layout. Hence, it is unlikely that unobserved quality diﬀerence explain
the bidding behavior.

2

Onnline-Appendix Table 1. List of All Items in Cross-sectional Data
Item
Category
Nokia N93 cell phone
Motorola V3 Razr cell phone (gold)
Motorola KRZR K1 cell phone (black)
Motorola KRZR K1 cell phone (blue)
Garmin StreetPilot c330 Vehicle GPS Navigator
Garmin StreetPilot c550 Vehicle GPS Navigator
1GB Apple iPod Shuffle (pink)
1GB Apple iPod Shuffle (blue)
1GB Apple iPod Shuffle (orange)
1GB Apple iPod Shuffle (green)
4GB Apple iPod Nano (blue)
4GB Apple iPod Nano (green)
4GB Apple iPod Nano (pink)
4GB Apple iPod Nano (silver)
Consumer 80GB Apple iPod (black)
electronics 80GB Apple iPod (white)
30GB Microsoft Zune (black)
30GB Microsoft Zune (white)
XM2Go AC power cord for MyFi, Helix, Inno, Nexus
Texas Instruments TI-89 Titanium graphing calculator
Texas Instruments TI-83 Plus graphing calculator
InFocus Play Big 480p IN72 DLP projector
Bose Lifestyle 48 speaker system (black)
Garmin StreetPilot c320 Vehicle GPS Navigator
Kenwood KDC-MP2032 automotive CD player
Canon PowerShot SD600 6 megapixel digital camera
Canon PowerShot SD630 6 megapixel digital camera
Canon PowerShot SD900 10 megapixel digital camera
Canon PowerShot A630 8 megapixel digital camera
T-Mobile Sidekick 3 cell phone
Western Digital My Book 500GB external hard drive
Western Digital My Book 400GB external hard drive
Western Digital My Book 320GB external hard drive
Sandisk 4GB Secure Digital Ultra USB flash drive
D-Link DI-524 wireless router
Linksys WRT300N wireless router
Omni Verifone 3750 credit card terminal
Computer Nurit 2085 credit card terminal
hardware Sandisk 1GB Cruzer Micro U3 USB flash drive
Belkin F5D7230 wireless router
HP Laser Jet 3050 All in One printer/copy/scanner/fax
Lexmark P450 photo printer
Linksys WUSB11 wireless USB network adaptor
Linksys WRE54G wireless router
Netgear WGR614 wireless router
Netgear WGR624 wireless router
QuickBooks Premier Accountant Edition 2007
QuickBooks Premier Accountant Edition 2007 (5-User)
Quicken Basic 2007
Financial
Quicken Deluxe 2007
software
Quicken Home Business 2007
H&R Block Taxcut 2006 Premium Federal and State
QuickBooks Payroll 2007

Number of Auctions
Download 1 Download 2 Download 3
7
2
2
14
7
9
4
0
2
3
0
0
12
2
3
8
0
11
4
4
7
3
4
5
1
1
30
2
3
17
0
2
24
3
5
31
3
5
21
5
1
6
1
0
17
24
11
4
1
16
15
11
14
3
0
0
4
7
9
0
0
2
1
3
8
2
4
8
11
17
21
10
10
1
2
15
9
0
3
7
6
10
4
3
29
8
5
17
7
0
1
3
3
5
7
5
5
0
4
1
0
38
8
5
12
28
5
6
44
2
2
1

Callaway HX Tour golf balls (6 dozen)
Titleist Pro V1 golf balls (4 dozen)
Titleist Pro V1 golf balls (2 dozen)
Sports
Omron HJ-112 Premium digital pedometer
equipment Super Gym 3000 Total Fitness Model exercise machine
Oakley Wisdom ski goggles (khaki, gold, iridium)
Oakley Wisdom ski goggles
Bones Reds skateboard bearings
Braun 8995 electric shaver
Braun 8985 electric shaver
T3 Tourmaline hair dryer
Farouk Chi Turbo Big 2” ceramic flat iron hair straightener
Murad Acne Complex kit
Farouk Chi 1” ceramic flat iron hair straightener
Farouk Chi 1” ceramic flat iron hair straightener (red)
Personal
T3 Tourmaline ceramic flat iron hair straightener
care
Oral-B Vitality Sonic rechargeable toothbrush
products
Oral-B Sonic S-320 power toothbrush
Oral-B Professional Care 7850 DLX power toothbrush
Oral-B Professional Care 9400 Triumph power toothbrush
Sonicare 7300 power toothbrush
Bumble & Bumble Hair Tonic (8oz)
Norelco 8140 Speed XL shaver
Proactive Renewing Cleanser
Lovely by Sarah Jessica Parker perfume (3.4oz)
Perfume / Calvin Klein Eternity Cologne for Men (3.4oz)
cologne
Calvin Klein Eternity Perfume for Women (3.4oz)
Escada Island Kiss perfume
PlayStation3 Sixaxis wireless controller
Nintendo Wii Play: 9 games, wireless remote, & nunchuck
Toys /
Xbox 360 wireless controller
games
Tickle Me Elmo TMX
Parker Brothers Monopoly Here & Now
Nintendo DS Super Mario Brothers game
You on a Diet , by Craig Wynett and Lisa Mehmet
The Audacity of Hope , by Barack Obama
Culture Warrior , by Bill O'Reilly
Books
For One More Day , by Mitch Albom
The Secret , by Rhonda Byrne
The Best Life Diet , by Bob Greene
Lancome Fatale mascara (black, full size)
Cosmetics
Lancome Definicils mascara (black, full size)
Home
Roomba Scheduler 4230 robotic vacuum cleaner
Yankee Housewarmer Christmas-cookie-scented candle (22oz)
products
Automotive
Inline auto ignition spark plug tester
products
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles The Movie DVD
Scrubs Complete Fourth Season on DVD
DVDs
Lost First Season on DVD
Grey's Anatomy Second Season on DVD
Lost Second Season on DVD
Total

11
3
2

4
19

3
6
9
12
3
23
61

41
11
14
6
70
33

715

0

18
2
0
0
4
2
8
0
0
6
12
1
1
8
1
9
25
0
5
5
17
9
9
3
2
4

11
5

6
10
3
1
28
4
6
1
51
16
6
10
5
3

14
14
2
2
31
5
1
1
60
19
2
3
16
5

3
0
10
10
6
10
567

6
0
12
10
5
11
649

1
19
13

8
22
4
8
14
8
31
17
11
4
1
6
5
18
7
10

Online-Appendix Table 2. Sample Construction of Cross-Sectional Data

Initially downloaded auctions
Auctions not retrieved at auction ending time
(removed by eBay; outages in internet connection)
Ended before BINs downloaded
Auctions with no bids
Auctions in non-US currency
Auctions for items not on list
Final list of auctions (pre-matching)

Download 1 Download 2 Download 3
(Feb. 22)
(Apr. 25)
(May 23)
1,136
1,643
1,084
107
0
307
1
6
715

582
107
378
0
14
562

18
0
372
22
23
649

Total
3,863
707
107
1,057
23
43
1,926

Online-Appendix Table 3. Overbidding by Demographics
in Cross-Sectional Data
The sample consists of all auctions matched to buy-it-now prices for the same item, available at the end of the auction period.
Male products are electric shavers (Braun 8995/8985, Norelco 8140xl), hair tonics (Bumble & Bumble), colognes (Calvin Klein
Eternity), and dark iPods (blue, green, silver); female products are hair straighteners (Fourk Chi, T3 Tourmaline), cosmetics
(Lancôme Fatale/Definicils mascara), perfumes (Calvin Klein Eternity, Lovely Jessica Parker, Escada Island Kiss), and bright
iPods (pink). Products for kids are toys (Tickle Me Elmo), for teenagers games and playstations (Super Mario Brothers, Sixaxis
Wireless PS3 Controller, Wireless Xbox 360 Controller), and for adults all consumer electronics. The book “Audacity of Hope”
by Obama is liberal, the book “Cultural Warriors” by O’Reilly conservative. Price level comparisons are made with financial
software (Quicken 2007 Basic vs Home Business), navigation systems (Garmin C320, C330, and C550), iPods (shuffle, nano,
and 80gb), and digital cameras (Canon A630, SD600, and SD630).

Target Consumer
Male
Female
Kids
Teenagers
Adults
Liberal
Conservative
Cheap
Expensive
More expensive
Most expensive

Without Shipping
Sample Percent Overbidding
212
38%
160
33%
85
28%
72
61%
435
39%
20
40%
21
33%
114
45%
159
38%
34
41%
10
40%

Sample
165
136
68
58
364
18
16
98
133
26
9

With Shipping
Percent Overbidding
45%
29%
54%
31%
37%
17%
38%
36%
48%
35%
56%

Online-Appendix Table 4. Choice Experiment
The order in which subjects received the item descriptions varies by Ordering and is indicated in
italics below the number of subjects choosing that description.
Ordering 1

Ordering 2

Ordering 3

Aggregate

14
(retailer)
1
(individual 1)
1
(individual 2)
14
0

2
(individual 1)
5
(individual 2)
15
(retailer)
11
1

3
(individual 2)
19
(retailer)
2
(individual 1)
9
2

34
3

30
30

34
33

35
33

99
96

Percent Indifferent

47%

33%

27%

35%

Percent Preferring Retailer Item

47%

45%

58%

50%

Percent Preferring Auction Item

7%

21%

15%

15%

First item description
Second item description
Third item description
Indifferent
Did not answer
Total
Total (answered)

Online-Appendix Figure I: Overbidding by Price Level
The following graphs show the share of bidders that overbid for each price level. Price levels are determined by the matching
fixed price for each item. Panel A shows overbidding by price level across all items that have a matching fixed price in the
cross-sectional data, and Panel B shows overbidding by price level separately for different item categories.

Panel A. Overbidding across All Items

0

.2

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8

1

All Items (N=1886)

0

50

100
150
Price Level in $10 Increments

200

250

Panel B. Overbidding by Item Category
Computer Hardware(N=190)

Financial Software(N=152)
1
Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8
.2
0

0

0

.2

.2

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8

.8

1

1

Consumer Electronics(N=435)

0

50

100
150
Price Level in $10 Increments

200

250

0

10
20
Price Level in $10 Increments

1
.2

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8

0

.2
0
10
Price Level in $10 Increments

15

20

0

5
10
Price Level in $10 Increments

Home Products (N=29)

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8
6

8
10
Price Level in $1 Increments

12

14

20

9.4
9.6
Price Level in $1 Increments

9.8

10

7

8

DVDs(N=74)

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8

Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8

.2

.2

0

0
10
15
Price Level in $10 Increments

9.2

1

1

1
Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8
.2

5

9

Automotive Products (N=9)

0
0

18

0
4

8

16

.2

.2
0

6

14
Price Level in $2 Increments

1

1
Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.8

1
.8
Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.2

4
Price Level in $10 Increments

12

Cosmetics (N=21)

0

2

10

15

Books (N=398)

Toys and Games(N=164)

0

30

.8

1

1
.8
Share of Overbidding
.4
.6
.2
0

5

10
20
Price Level in $10 Increments

Perfumes and Colognes(N=77)

Personal Care Products (N=282)

Sports Equipment (N=55)

0

0

30

25

3 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4
Price Level in $1 Increments

3

4

5
6
Price Level in $5 Increments

