NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM LEVEL HETEROGENEOUS PRODUCTIVITY AND DEMAND SHOCKS:
EVIDENCE FROM BANGLADESH
Hiau Looi Kee
Kala Krishna
Working Paper 13698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13698

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

We are grateful to Jonathan Eaton, Caroline Freund, Bernard Hoekman, James Harrigan, Susumu Imai,
Hajime Katayama, and participants at a seminar at Syracuse, at the World Bank, and at the joint NYU/NewYork
Fed seminar for comments on earlier drafts. We thank the World Bank for providing research funding.
Krishna thanks Princeton University for support as an International Economics Section Research Fellow
for 2006-2007. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those
of the institutions to which they are affiliated.
© 2007 by Hiau Looi Kee and Kala Krishna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Firm Level Heterogeneous Productivity and Demand Shocks: Evidence from Bangladesh
Hiau Looi Kee and Kala Krishna
NBER Working Paper No. 13698
December 2007
JEL No. F12,F13
ABSTRACT
This paper looks at the predictions of a standard heterogeneous firm model regarding the exports of
firms across markets in response to a particular trade policy "experiment" and compares these predictions
to the data. A unique feature of our data is that it has information on the exports of the same firm to
different markets which allows us to look for a new set of predictions of such models. We argue that
while certain predictions seem consistent with the data, others are not. We then describe the patterns
found in the data and argue that firm and market specific demand shocks help explain a number of
these anomalies. These parsimoniously capture factors, like business contacts or networks, or even
fashion shocks, that make buyers more attracted to one firm rather than another in a particular market.

Hiau Looi Kee
The World Bank
Development Research Group - Trade
1818 H Street, NW (MSN MC3-303)
Washington, DC 20433
hlkee@worldbank.org
Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu

Firm Level Heterogeneous Productivity and Demand Shocks: Evidence from Bangladesh,
Hiau Looi Kee and Kala Krishna∗
This paper looks at the predictions of a standard heterogeneous firm model regarding the
exports of firms across markets in response to a particular trade policy “experiment” and
compares these predictions to the data. A unique feature of our data is that it has information
on the exports of the same firm to diﬀerent markets which allows us to look for a new set
of predictions of such models. We argue that while certain predictions seem consistent with
the data, others are not. We then describe the patterns found in the data and argue that
firm and market specific demand shocks help explain a number of these anomalies. These
parsimoniously capture factors, like business contacts or networks, or even fashion shocks,
that make buyers more attracted to one firm rather than another in a particular market.

I

A Natural Policy Experiment

The apparel sector in Bangladesh has two sub-sectors: garments made from woven cloth, and
those made from non-woven material, namely, sweaters and knitwear. These diﬀer in terms
of the “eﬀective” trade policy put on them by the US and EU which are Bangladesh’s main
markets. The EU had an MFN tariﬀ rate of 12-15% on the various categories of apparel
with GSP preferences of 20%. But under the “Everything-But-Arms” (EBA) initiative
implemented in 2001, Bangladesh had access to the EU, duty and quota free, provided
that the rules of origin (ROOs) were satisfied. However, these ROOs were restrictive: for
origin to be granted, the product had to start its local manufacturing process from yarn so
that the use of imported cloth was precluded.1 The US, on the other hand, had tariﬀs of
about 20%, as well as quota restrictions in place on Bangladesh, but origin was granted as
∗

The World Bank, Development Research Group - Trade, 1818 H ST NW (MSN MC3-303), Washington,
DC 20433; 202-473-4155; hlkee@worldbank.org and Pennsylvania State University, Department of Economics,
University Park, PA 16802; 814-865-1106; kmk4@psu.edu. We are grateful to Jonathan Eaton, Caroline
Freund, Bernard Hoekman, James Harrigan, Susumu Imai, Hajime Katayama, and participants at a seminar
at Syracuse, at the World Bank, and at the joint NYU/NewYork Fed seminar for comments on earlier drafts.
We thank the World Bank for providing research funding. Krishna thanks Princeton University for support
as an International Economics Section Research Fellow for 2006-2007. The views expressed here are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the institutions to which they are aﬃliated.
1
See Svetlana Demidova, Hiau Looi Kee and Kala Krishna (2006) for more on this natural experiment.

long as the product was assembled in Bangladesh. Thus, imported cloth could be used when
exporting to the US.
These ROOs have very diﬀerent implications for the non-woven and woven garments.
Due to current production techniques, non-woven (NW) firms are able to easily manufacture
garments from yarn and domestic yarn is abundant. But woven (W) firms need to use
domestic cloth, which commands a premium price, to obtain origin and meeting ROOs
raises costs by about as much as the tariﬀ. In a nutshell therefore, EU eﬀective trade policy
is slightly less restrictive than that of the US in wovens, but is much less restrictive in
nonwovens. This is our natural experiment.

II

Implications of a Heterogeneous Firm Model

Firms make varieties of a good which enter utility in a symmetric manner. However, they
have diﬀerent productivities, and hence, diﬀerent constant marginal costs of production. In
such models, more restrictive trade policy makes the market tougher for a firm exporting to
it for two reasons. First, there is the direct eﬀect of more protection which reduces a firm’s
profits. Second, there is an indirect eﬀect via the equilibrium aggregate price index in the
market. Marc Melitz and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano (2005) show that in such models, as long
as the fixed cost of exporting is large so that only the more productive firms export, a fact
borne out in a number of studies, a more protectionist stance increases the market potential
of a country and results in more firms locating there, more varieties competing with each
other, and hence, a lower price index. But a lower price index means more competition and
lower profits. Thus, more restrictive trade policy in a market results in lower profits to a
firms exporting to it via both channels.2
Assuming that the US and EU are otherwise similar, this yields the result that profits to
Bangladeshi firms from exporting to the US should be lower than those from exporting to
2

Some evidence that this occurs in the data can be found in Imbs et. al. (2006) who show that for
EU countries, trade openness seems to exert a competitive eﬀect in the short run, with prices and markups
falling. However, these eﬀects diminish, and may even be reversed, in the longer run as more protected
economies attract entry.

Figure 1: Composition of firms by export destinations
Firm shares by markets
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Non-wovens

0.4

W ovens

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
OEU

OUS

A US

the EU (as the EU trade policy is more lax). As a result, the minimum productivity required
to survive in the US should be higher than that for the EU, especially in nonwovens where
their trade policy stand diﬀers by more. Productivity, thus, provides a natural hierarchy of
firms, with more productive firms being able to export to increasingly tougher markets.

A

The Data and the Predictions

Next we look at the data we have, the predictions the standard model delivers for our natural
experiment, and how the predictions fit with our data. We conduct our analysis based on a
complete customs data set of Bangladeshi garment exporters. This data set consists on all
firms exporting in 2004, with information on their total value and volume of export by the
major markets, namely, the EU and the US. There are a total of 2387 firms, of which 2211
export to the EU, the US or both. By matching these firms to the garment firm directory
in 2004, we were able to identify the industry origins of 1997 firms.
The model sketched above makes the following predictions:
1. As the EU is an easier market, especially in nonwovens, the fraction of firms in
Bangladesh that export only to the EU (OEU firms) in nonwovens should exceed that in
wovens while the reverse should be the case for firms that also export to the US (AUS firms).
This prediction is consistent with our data. From Figure 1 it is clear that the fraction of
OEU firms in nonwovens (≈ 75%) exceeds that in wovens (≈ 53%). The fraction of AUS
firms in nonwovens (≈ 22%) is smaller than in wovens (≈ 28%).

Figure 2: Market shares of firms by export destinations
M arket shares by markets
0.014
0.012
0.01
0.008

Non-wovens
W ovens

0.006
0.004
0.002
0
OEU

OUS

Both-EU

Both-US

2. OEU firms should have smaller average market shares in the EU than AUS firms,
especially in nonwovens, since OEU firms should be less productive than AUS ones, especially
in nonwovens, and as market shares are higher for more productive firms. Figure 2 shows
that, as predicted, the average market share of OEU firms is smaller than the average market
share (in both the US and EU) of AUS firms, and this is more pronounced in nonwovens.
3. If a firm sells to the US it must also sell to the EU as the US is the tougher market.
There can be no firms selling only to the US (OUS firms).3 Here the data is clearly at odds
with the theory. In both industries together a small fraction of firms export only to the US.4
This might be classified as error, except for the fact that these firms are very diﬀerent from
the remainder. The average market share of firms that only export to the US in Figure 2
is an order of magnitude higher than that of the others, which would be a sign that they
are very productive in the standard model, and which makes their not exporting to the EU
even more of a puzzle! It is worth pointing out that the fraction OUS firms is far smaller
and their share is much larger in nonwovens than in wovens.
4. As market share is increasing in productivity, which is firm specific, firms that sell
to both markets should have market shares in the two markets that are strongly positively
correlated. Consider the group of 548 firms that export to both the EU and the US in both
U
industries. Let sE
ij be the market share of firm i in the EU in industry j, while sij is the
3

This result is similar to Mark J. Melitz (2003), where all exporters must also sell in the domestic market,
given that the cutoﬀ productivity for exporting is higher.
4
Jonathan Eaton, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz (2004) have a similar finding: while more productive firms tend to export to more markets, a strict heirarchy does not emerge.

Figure 3: Unit values of firms by export destinations
Unit values by markets
40
35
30
25
Non-wovens

20

W ovens

15
10
5
0
OEU

OUS

Both-EU

Both-US

market share of the same firm in the US. This market share is relative to Bangladeshi exports
to the country in question. The model predicts that the log of the market shares of firm i
in both markets are positively correlated.5 Let

(1)

U
ln sE
ij = Dj + β ln sij , j = {NW, W } .

The data clearly rejects this prediction. Not only is β not close to one, it is not even
statistically diﬀerent from zero. The estimated elasticity is 0.02 with a robust standard error
of 0.04. Similar results are obtained when we run the regression separately by industries.
5. Since higher cost (lower productivity) firms can remain exporters to the EU, and as
higher costs translate into higher prices, the price of OEU exporters should also be higher
than that of AUS ones. This is not borne out in the data. Figure 3 plots the mean unit
value of OEU firms, OUS firms, and AUS firms (here the unit value for US exports is given
separately from the unit value of EU exports) in both wovens and nonwovens. The unit
value of firms that export to the EU is slightly less than the unit value of EU exports of
those firms that also export to the US, and this is less than the unit value of firms that
export only to the US, which in turn is less than the unit value of US exports of those
firms that also export to the EU. This pattern is the same for both wovens and nonwovens,
though these diﬀerences are not statistically significant. An alternative explanation for more
productive firms charging a higher price, namely they produce a higher quality good, is worth
5

In the standard Marc J. Melitz (2003) framework it predicts that the coeﬃcient β below should be unity.

considering. Firm quality, like its productivity, is likely to be common across all the market
served by a firm (as noted by Richard Baldwin and James Harrigan, 2007). If this were an
important reason for unit values to vary, then we would expect that for AUS firms, their
price in the EU market would be positively correlated with their prices in the US market.
We regress the log of unit value in the EU market on the log of unit value in the US market
for these firms, controlling for industry-year specific eﬀects. The partial correlation between
the two prices is not statistically significant, with a point estimate of 0.069 and a robust
standard error of 0.044.
What could explain these facts? Below, we argue that firm and market specific shocks
can provide such an explanation.

III

Demand Shocks

In what follows, we will look at the implications of the EU being an easier market than the
US for Bangladeshi firms, assuming that everything else is the same in the two countries,
and focusing on the price charged, p, productivity, φ, and demand shock, μ. The demand for
a firm with shock μ is q(p, μ), with qμ (p, μ) > 0. Both additive demand shocks q(p) + μ, or
multiplicative ones, q(p)μ, are consistent with this specification. The profits of a firms with
demand shock μ and productivity φ are given by

π(p, φ, μ) = [p − c(φ)] q(p, μ) − f.
The profit maximizing price, p(φ, μ), is given by the p that solves π p (p, φ, μ) = 0. Let

π(p(φ, μ), φ, μ) = [p(φ, μ) − c(φ)] [q(p(φ, μ), μ)] − f
be the maximized value of profits of the firm with (firm and market specific) demand shock
μ, where p(φ, μ) is the profit maximizing price for such a firm.
Note that π pp (p, φ, μ) < 0 by the second order conditions for a maximum, and π pμ (p, φ, μ) is
positive if demand shocks are additive but zero if they are multiplicative. Some simple com-

Figure 4: Export Cutoﬀ Loci
φ

6

US Export Locus

@ A
@AU
A@
@
@
U
@
@
F
G@ B
¢̧@
@
¢ Export
@ Locus@
EU
@
@
0

μ

-

parative statics results follow from these observations. First, firms with positive demand
shocks charge higher prices if demand shocks are additive (since such shocks make demand
less elastic) but the same prices if demand shocks are multiplicative (as such a shock results in a monotonic transformation of profits) while firms with a higher productivity always
charge lower prices.
Second, assuming demand is positive, a positive demand shock raises sales, and hence,
market share of the firm if demand shocks are multiplicative. If demand shocks are additive,
then sales and market share may fall in this event. This follows from
dq (p(φ, μ), μ)
dp(φ, μ)
= qp (p(φ, μ), μ)
+ qμ (p(φ, μ), μ) .
dμ
dμ
The first term above is zero if shocks are multiplicative, and as the second term is always
positive, the result follows. If shocks are additive, the first term is negative from Result 1
and works against the second term.
Third, a positive demand shock or a higher productivity raises the maximized value of
profits. This follows from the envelope theorem. As firms with profits high enough to cover
fixed costs of exporting choose to export, the export productivity cutoﬀ falls as the demand
shock rises.

This is depicted in Figure 4 where the demand shocks in the US and EU are

both depicted on the horizontal axis and productivity is on the vertical one. The cutoﬀs for

exporting to the US are depicted by a downward sloping locus. Even less productive firms
can aﬀord to export to the tougher US market if they have a good enough demand shock.
This locus is drawn to be linear but need not be.6 The cutoﬀ locus for exporting to the EU
lies inside that for exporting to the US as the EU is the easier market.
It follows that for the same demand shock in both markets, firms that export to the
US, which is the tougher market (whether as AUS or OUS firms), have higher productivity
than those that export to the EU, and so have lower prices. For a given productivity, and
assuming that the demand shocks for the US and EU are drawn from the same distribution,
firms that export to the US (whether as AUS or OUS firms) have higher US demand shocks
than the EU demand shocks of those firms that export to the EU (whether as OEU or AUS
firms). This follows from the cutoﬀ locus for the EU being inside that for the US as depicted
in Figure 4 since the US is the tougher market. Of course, the distance between the loci is
smaller for wovens than nonwovens since the trade policy stance of the EU is much more
liberal than that of the US in non wovens.

IV

The Evidence Revisited

What does the augmented model with demand shocks predict, and are these predictions
consistent with the evidence?
Predictions 1 and 2: Though the evidence is consistent with Predictions 1 and 2, these
predictions need not hold due to the trade oﬀ between productivity and demand shocks in
determining the export destinations of firms. For example, it is possible, without controlling
for demand shocks, for the productivity of OEU exporters to exceed that of AUS firms
if the US demand shocks of the AUS firms are large enough to compensate for their low
productivity. For the same reason, the average market share of OEU firms could exceed that
of AUS firms.
6
For example, if demand shocks are multiplicative and preferences are CES, then this locus cannot
intersect the axes. This follows from the observation that no matter what the productivity, and hence, cost,
there will be some demand for each good when preferences take a CES form. However, if demand shocks are
additive, this need not be the case.

Suppose, for example, that there are only high productivity firms and low productivity
ones, with the former tending to receive low demand shocks, while the latter tending to
receive high demand shocks.7 In Figure 4, let the demand shocks in the US and EU for high
productivity firms be clustered in the region around A while those for low productivity firms
be clustered near B. Then both high and low productivity firms will export to the EU, but
only low productivity firms will tend to have demand shocks high enough to export to the
US. Note that the productivity of OEU exporters could easily exceed that of AUS firms if
we do not control for demand shocks. Also, the average market shares of OEU firms need
not be less than that of AUS ones since the greater productivity of the former raises their
share, but their lower demand shock reduces it, so that the net eﬀect is ambiguous.8
Prediction 3: With two dimensions of heterogeneity, it is possible for a firm to export
to the US and not to the EU. In Figure 4, take a firm with productivity U and draw a
horizontal line at this level. This line intersects the EU cutoﬀ locus at F and the US one at
G. If this firm gets a demand shock in the US above (below) G, then it will (will not) export
to the US. Similarly, if this firm gets a demand shock in the EU above (below) F, then it
will (will not) export to the EU. Thus, if it gets a bad demand shock (one that is below F)
in the EU and a good demand shock (one that is above G) in the US, it will export to the
US but not to the EU.
Does the augmented model oﬀer anything else to look for in the data? For a firm to
export only to the US it needs to have a demand shock in the US that is large enough and
a demand shock in the EU that is small enough. The less restrictive trade policy is in the
EU, or the more restrictive trade policy is in the US, the less likely this is to happen. Thus,
this outcome will be more likely in wovens than in nonwovens. Consistent with this, in the
data, the fraction of firms in nonwovens that export only to the US is much smaller (2.1%)
than the fraction of firms in wovens that do so (19%).
7

This could happen, for example, in a transition country. Low productivity firms in transition countries
are old firms. However, they have access to a good network of buyers, and so tend to have better demand
shocks than new entrants who have higher productivity.
8
Loosely speaking, predictions 1 and 2 will tend to hold if productivities and demand shocks are positively
correlated, or if most of the variation is in productivities, rather than demand shocks.

Moreover, as higher demand shocks result in larger market shares, the market share of
OUS exporters should be higher than that of others, especially in nonwovens, where OEU
firms need to have far more positive demand shocks in the US than in the EU. Consistent
with this, the distribution of market shares in nonwovens of OUS firms is far to the right of
that for OEU firms with a mean of 1.3% versus 0.01%.9 The distribution of market shares
in wovens is much closer together. The mean market share for firms that only export to the
EU is 0.1%, while that of firms only exporting to the US is 0.2%, or about double.
Prediction 4: With demand shocks, it is no longer necessary for larger market shares
to reflect higher productivity or for the market shares of firms that export to both EU
and US to be strongly positively correlated, as market shares could be higher because of
better demand shocks. By omitting the relative US demand shock in (1) , which is positively
correlated with the US market share and negatively correlated with the EU market share, the
least square estimate is biased toward zero which could explain our findings in this regard.
In the absence of capacity constraints, market shares in one market should be independent
of demand shocks in the other, but with capacity constraints, market shares across markets
would be negatively correlated and larger capacity associated with serving more markets.10
Suppose capacity constraints make marginal costs vertical when they become binding. A
firm would then look at the horizontal sum of its demands in the two markets and equate
the marginal revenue associated with this total demand curve to marginal costs. Given
productivity, a firm with a larger capacity would be more likely to sell to both markets
and a better relative demand shock in one market would raise a firm’s market share in that
market while reducing it in the other one. This would provide another source of downward
bias in β.
Prediction 5: OEU firms have lower demand shocks as well as productivities. The
former predicts higher prices for them, but the latter predicts lower prices if demand shocks
are additive. The unit values of OEU firms being lower than the unit value of EU exports of
AUS firms is consistent with the latter eﬀect dominating and the unit values of OUS firms
9
10

All the mean values are calculated after removing outliers at the tail ends of the distributions.
This might provide a new test for the existence of capacity constraints in such models.

exceeding those of other firms is consistent with their having more positive demand shocks.

V

Conclusions

Firm heterogeneity is likely to be multifaceted, with firm and market specific demand shocks
playing a prominent role. We provide supporting evidence for the importance of demand
shocks looking at unit values and the market shares of all exporters using a complete custom
data of these exporters. We cannot estimate TFP for these firms, but by looking at the data
on market shares and unit values, we paint a picture that is inconsistent with heterogeneity
in productivity alone and much more in line with both demand shocks and productivity
being important.
Recognizing the importance of firm demand shocks has several important implications
for work in this area. First, it implies that the standard approach taken of estimating
firm productivity ignoring demand shocks is likely to produce biased estimates and any
subsequent analysis based on such estimates may not be meaningful. In the revised version
of Demidova, Kee and Krishna (2006), we address these estimation issues in detail and are
also able to back out estimates of these market specific demand shocks. Second, one can
interpret demand shocks in a static model in terms of access to a network of buyers in a
market. This would make such shocks persistent but market specific (compared to firm
specific productivity shocks which are common across markets). Small young firms would
tend to have lower access to such a network and so have less persistent shocks. This could
help explain why exporter status changes so often for such firms, while it is more permanent
for older firms as documented by Jonathan Eaton et. al. (2008). Third, trade liberalization
will move resources from the less productive firms to more productive ones and from firms
with unfavorable demand shocks to those that have favorable ones. If these two are positively
correlated, then gains from trade may be larger than in the absence of demand shocks, while
if they are negatively correlated, as may well be the case in transition countries or countries
with an old, ineﬃcient, but well connected public sector, they could be smaller.

References
[1] Baldwin, Richard and James Harrigan. 2007. “Zeros, Quality and Space: Trade
Theory and Trade Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. W13214.
[2] Demidova, Svetlana, Hiau Looi Kee, and Kala Krishna. 2006. “Do Trade Policy
Diﬀerences Induce Sorting? Theory and Evidence from Bangladeshi Apparel Exporters.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12725.
[3] Eaton, Jonathan, Marcela Eslava, Maurice Kugler, and James Tybout. 2008.
“The Margins of Entry into Export Markets: Evidence from Colombia.” In The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thiery
Verdier, forthcoming, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[4] Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2004. “Dissecting
Trade: Firms, Industries and Export Destinations.” American Economic Review, 94(2):
150-154.
[5] Imbs, Jean, Natalie Chen, and Andrew Scott. 2006. “The Dynamics of Trade and
Competition.” Unpublished.
[6] Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71: 1695-1725.
[7] Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. 2005. “Market Size, Trade, and
Productivity.” National Bureau of Economic Research 11393.

