                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ECONOMICS APPROACH TO CITIES

                                         Edward L. Glaeser

                                        Working Paper 13696
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13696


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2007




I am grateful to the Taubman Center for State and Local Government for financial support. Kristina
Tobio provided excellent research assistance. This essay was written for an edited multi-disciplinary
volume on how different disciplines approach cities and it is meant to give non-economists a sense
of the economic approach to cities. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Economics Approach to Cities
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 13696
December 2007
JEL No. R0

                                              ABSTRACT

The economic approach to cities relies on a spatial equilibrium for workers, employers and builders.
The worker's equilibrium implies that positive attributes in one location, like access to downtown
or high wages, are offset by negative attributes, like high housing prices. The employer's equilibrium
requires that high wages be offset by a high level of productivity, perhaps due to easy access to customers
or suppliers. The search for the sources of productivity differences that can justify high wages is the
basis for the study of agglomeration economies which has been a significant branch of urban economics
in the past 20 years. The builder's equilibrium condition pushes us to understand the causes of supply
differences across space that can explain why some places have abundant construction and low prices
while others have little construction and high prices. Since the economic theory of cities emphasizes
a search for exogenous causes of endogenous outcomes like local wages, housing prices and city growth,
it is unsurprising that the economic empirics on cities have increasingly focused on the quest for exogenous
sources of variation. The economic approach to urban policy emphasizes the need to focus on people,
rather than places, as the ultimate objects of policy concern and the need for policy to anticipate the
mobility of people and firms.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
    I.      Introduction


Why are some cities so much more productive than others? What are the environmental
and social costs of density? Why are there ghettos? How does living close to others
change us? Why do cities rise and fall? Why is housing so expensive in some places?
Urban economics addresses all of these disparate questions and all of them can be seen as
components of urban economics’ great puzzle: why do so many people cluster next to
each other in cities? That question is itself one part of the even grander quest of economic
geography to understand all of the location decisions of people and firms.


The economic approach to understanding location choices, like living in cities, focuses on
understanding the motives might underlie those choices. Are places attracting people by
offering high wages or cheap housing or good weather? Why do firms stay in places
where they must pay high wages? Since urban development reflects millions of
individual choices to live in cities, understanding that development requires us both to
understand the relative importance of the different urban attributes and to understand why
cities have those attributes. For example, high wages certainly help attract people to New
York City. However, for us to understand the eight million people who choose to live in
that city, we would also need to understand why its wages were so high. The sub-
discipline of agglomeration economics has developed to understand the productivity
differences that presumably lie behind the observed income differences across space.


This essay explores the key elements of the economic approach to cities and how they
reflect the core elements of my discipline. Economics has three great pillars, two of
which help us to understand the world and one of which helps us to offer policy advice.
The first pillar of economics is that people respond to incentives. This assumption is
caricatured by some who suggest that economists think that people only respond to
financial incentives, which is surely false. Still, it is true that the incentive principle leads
economists to look at the financial incentives that might explain location choices.




                                               2
The second pillar of economics is our concept of a no arbitrage equilibrium. Adam Smith
used an early version of the no arbitrage equilibrium to make sense of wages; Milton
Friedman popularized the concept with the phrase “there is no such thing as a free
lunch.”1 This pillar enables us to not only examine individual decision, but also to make
predictions about how an entire system will look.


In urban economics, there are three key no arbitrage relationships. First, individuals must
be indifferent across space, which has been taken to mean that the flow of wages plus
amenities minus housing costs is roughly equal in every location. Second, firms must be
indifferent over space and over hiring new workers. This condition implies that
differences in wages must be offset by differences in productivity. Third, builders must
be indifferent about building or not building new units. This condition implies that
housing prices cannot rise too far above the total costs of construction, as long as those
costs are understood to include physical building costs, the price of land and the
difficulties involved in dealing with land use regulations.


Economics’ third pillar is the assumption that good policies increase the range of choices
that an individual can make. Economists’ enthusiasm for income is driven by the view
that more wealth gives people more choices. Our enthusiasm for political freedom has
the same source. Economists talk about good policies increasing “utility levels” which is
often misunderstood as suggesting that these policies will make people happier.
Happiness is an important emotion, but there is no sense in which it is particularly related
to economists’ definition of utility. Formally, higher level of utility is equivalent to
having more options, not wearing a smile.


These three pillars have shaped the economic approach to cities. In Section II of this
essay, I discuss the central theoretical construct of economic geography and urban
economics: the spatial equilibrium. The power of the spatial equilibrium assumption is
that it predicts that if something is particularly good in one location, then we should


1
 Robert Heinlein is usually given as the original source of the phrase, although there do appear to be earlier
antecedents.

                                                      3
expect to see something bad offsetting it. In the intra-urban Alonso-Muth-Mills model,
high prices close to the city center are offset by short commutes. In the inter-urban
Rosen-Roback model, high incomes are offset by either high prices or disamenities. The
spatial equilibrium assumption has been particularly effective in making sense of urban
housing markets.


In Section III, I turn to the equilibrium condition for employers and builders. The firms’
equilibrium condition leads us to explain the differences in incomes across space by
understanding why productivity levels would differ across space. Productivity levels
might be higher because of access to natural resources like productive land or rivers or
because of increased ease of transportation to suppliers or customers. The builders’
equilibrium condition means that to understand differences in housing costs across
growing areas, we must understand why it costs more to build in some areas than in
others.


Section IV turns to the empirical approaches favored by urban economists. Economics’
theoretical definition of a city differs significantly from the empirical implementation of
that definition. Conceptually, cities are the absence of physical space between people
and firms. Cities are density or proximity, perhaps combined with sufficient scale.
Empirically, cities are either the formal and somewhat arbitrary political units that bear
that name or the name “metropolitan areas,” which are themselves somewhat arbitrary
combinations of counties, which are also arbitrary political units. While one might
wonder about the mismatch between concept and data, economics is a pragmatic
discipline that has generally happily used the imperfect available data.


The empirical methods used by urban economics are driven by the attachment of urban
economists toeconomic theory. This attachment has produced two different styles of
empirical research. One style of structural empirical research focuses on using data to
estimate formal models. A second style of research emphasizes exogenous sources of
variation, or instruments, such as rivers or sharp political boundaries. The importance
that economists place on exogenous sources of variation comes from a core disciplinary

                                             4
view that our theoretical models are meant to map connections between exogenous
variables and outcomes.


Finally, in Section V, I turn to the economic approach to urban policy-making. The core
insight of the field is the primacy of person over place. Economics judges policies by
whether they increase the choices available to people, not on whether they help rebuild a
particular locale. Economics does not preclude place-based policies, such as urban
redevelopment, if they are the best way to help people, but economists do insist that these
policies be judged on whether they improve individual’s lives, not on whether they make
a place more pleasant.


Beyond putting people first, urban economics has two other themes that run through its
policy prescriptions. First, urban economics has often assumed that governments only
imperfectly represent their constituencies. As a result, individual economists have
offered favored institutions that might increase competition across governments and
mitigate this problem. Second, since urban economics starts with the mobility decisions
of people and firms, urban economists tend to argue that policies need to be designed not
just on the basis of current location patterns but also with an understanding of how new
policies will alter individual location choices.


   II.     The Spatial Equilibrium Approach


The theoretical centerpiece of urban economics is the concept of a spatial equilibrium
which assumes that there are no free lunches to be gained by changing location. While
this assumption is often treated with more general utility functions, economists often
assume a linear utility function, which then implies that the elements of utility that are
related to location choice are captured by:


   (1) Income + Amenities – Housing Costs – Transportation Costs.




                                              5
The spatial equilibrium assumption is that this flow is constant over space. While this
assumption is obviously a simplification, it has had a remarkable ability to generate
hypotheses that have been in accord with the evidence. Within metropolitan areas, the
Alonso-Muth Mills model assumes that income is constant and looks at whether high
housing costs are offset by low amenities or low transport costs. Across metropolitan
areas, the Rosen-Roback model looks at the tradeoff between income, amenities and
housing costs.


The spatial equilibrium approach is often augmented in different ways. For example,
information about transportation costs and technologies can yield sharp predictions about
how housing prices will change with distance from the city center. When there are
different types of people, these models can predict where different people will live. The
incorporation of housing supply into the model enables these equations to predict density
levels within a city and population patterns across cities.


The Alonso-Muth-Mills Model


The most significant piece of urban economic theory remains the spatial equilibrium
model of William Alonso (1964), which was extended by Mills (1967) and Muth (1969).
Alonso’s model looks within a metropolitan area and assumes that both income and
amenities are constant. These assumptions then imply that housing costs plus transport
costs are constant across space, which means that housing costs will decline as transport
costs rise with distance to the city center. In the simplest case, where everyone works at
the center of the city and transport costs rise linearly with distance to that center, i.e. if
costs equal “t” times distance, then housing costs must equal costs at the center minus “t”
times distance.


The model is simple, elegant and contains a far amount of truth. Figure 1 shows the
relationship between median housing prices across 187 cities in the greater Boston region
and distance between those cities and downtown Boston.2 On average, an extra mile

2
    Housing prices are based on the 2000 Census. Distance to Boston is defined in Glaeser and Ward (2006).

                                                     6
from the city center is associated with housing prices dropping by $1100. If an $1,100
drop in price is roughly associated with a $110 increase in annual cost, then the Alsonso-
Muth-Mills model suggests that an extra mile of distance is associated with added travel
costs of two dollars per week, which seems low but not implausible since so many people
are not commuting into the city center.


The relationship is far from perfect. Distance explains only 15 percent of the
heterogeneity in prices among those towns. Other factors, including housing quality and
both exogenous and man-made amenities, differ across towns. Such amenities, like
school quality, are often far more important in determining housing prices than proximity
to downtown. Still, the model has made a prediction that is certainly not rejected by the
data. Thousands of variants of this regression have been run by economists since
Alonso’s model was first published, and almost all of them have found this general
pattern.


In some cases, economists have found a convex, rather than a linear relationship between
distance and price, where housing prices drop steeply with distance over some initial
distance and the relationship between prices and distance flattens out. A slight variant on
the basic model can explain this pattern. Assume that individuals have access to two
different transportation technologies, such as walking and driving. One technology
involves no fixed costs, but imposes a cost of t times distance. The other technology
involves a fixed cost, like having to buy a car, but imposes a lower cost of t times
distance.


Optimal use of these technologies implies that the technology without fixed costs
(perhaps walking) should be used until a point where t − t times distance equals the fixed
cost. People should be willing to pay the fixed cost only when the time savings from
driving is big enough to pay for that fixed cost. Even if this calculation is a
simplification, there is little doubt that car usage gets much higher further away from city
centers (Glaeser, Kahn and Rappaport, 2007). This simple change to the model predicts


                                              7
that housing costs will decline by t times distance in areas that are close to the city and
decline by t times distance in areas that are further away from the city. The slope of
prices on distance should therefore flatten out as distance from the city increases, which
delivers the convex relationship seen in the data.


Alternatively, the cost of commuting “t” per unit distance might be a function of
investment in technologies, like owning a bike or car, that reduces the price of
commuting per unit distance. If we let k(t) denote cost of investing in these technologies
where k(t) is continuously differentiable, k’(t)<0 and k”(t)>0, then cost minimization
requires minimizing k(t)+t*distance. The first order condition is that -k’(t)=distance and
the cost of commuting per unit distance falls with commute distance. People who live
further away invest in better technology and this also implies the convex relationship that
often appears in the data. Sensible use of transportation technologies implies that slower
technologies will be used closer to the city center, which in turn implies that the
relationship between prices and distance will be higher close to the center.


A second important permutation to the model allows densities to respond to demand.
This change allows the model to speak not only to prices, but also to the degree of
development at different locations. The model can be adapted either by making land
consumption flexible so that people consume less land where it is expensive and close to
the city. Alternatively, we can assume that living space is manufactured with land and
physical capital. As land gets more expensive, builders use more capital and build up.
High densities close to the city center can be seen as an application of the incentive
principle, because a greater willingness to pay for living area that is valuable because of
its proximity then induces a greater supply of living area per unit of land. Either version
of the model predicts that densities will be higher closer to the city center.


Figure 2 shows the relationship between the logarithm of people per square mile and
distance to Boston across the same 187 cities and towns. Again, there is a robust positive
relationship and distance explains 45 percent of the variation in density levels across
those cities and towns. For each extra mile of distance from Boston, the predicted

                                              8
density level drops by .08 log points or about eight percent. Again, the predictions of the
simple model are supported by the data.


The attraction of the Alonso-Muth-Mills model to economists illustrates a central point
about economics that differentiates it from other fields. The model’s strength lies in its
ability to make predictions that hold generally, not in its ability to explain the exact
peculiarities of particular places. While some disciplines place great value in adding
complexity and nuance, economists like the ability to produce general rules that hold
most of the time. Economists are usually more interested in common patterns than in
particular idiosyncrasies.


One objection to the Alonso-Muth-Mills model is that it is increasingly at odds with a
world that is no longer monocentric. In most cities, employment is located far away from
the old city center (Glaeser and Kahn, 2001). But even this can be incorporated into the
Alonso-Muth-Mills, framework. For example, Henderson and Mitra (1994) extend this
model to include multiple employment centers. One general prediction of these
extensions is that in cities where employment is more decentralized, the relationship
between distance from the city and housing prices will be flatter. Glaeser and Kahn
(2001) find exactly that. The tendency of prices to fall with distance to the center is
much higher in those areas with centralized employment, which can be seen as support
for using this type of model to explain differences in price patterns across cities.


The application of the spatial equilibrium concept in the Alonso-Muth-Mills model is
useful not only in predicting housing prices and density levels, but also in predicting the
locations of different population groups. In particular, the model has been particularly
effective at looking at the location decisions of the rich and the poor. One of the most
striking facts about American cities is that poverty rates are much higher in city centers
than on the outskirts of town. This poverty does not mean that central cities make people
poor, but rather that city centers attract the poor (Glaeser, Kahn and Rappaport, 2007).




                                              9
This fact may seem initially to be a puzzle for the Alonso-Muth-Mills framework.
Usually, we think that travel costs are higher for the rich than they are for the poor,
because the rich have a higher opportunity cost of time since their wages are higher.
After all, lost time is often the most important element in commuting costs. Economics
suggest that someone who earns 20 dollars an hour should be willing to pay more to
avoid an hour of commuting than someone who earns 10 dollars an hour. This logic
suggests that the rich should pay more for low commuting costs at the city center, yet
they generally are not the high bidders for land close to the urban core.


There are two explanations for this phenomenon. One is given by Becker (1965) who
argues that the greater value of time for the rich can be offset if the rich also want to own
more land. The greater desire for land pushes the rich to live where land is cheap, on the
edge of the city, just as a greater desire for warmth pushes sun-lovers to move south.
While this hypothesis is theoretically elegant, the desire of the rich to own more land
does not seem to be great enough to justify their decisions to live on the urban edge.


An alternative view is that the rich and the poor use different transportation technologies
(LeRoy and Sonstelie, 1983). If the rich drive and the poor take public transportation,
then the rich can have lower costs of commuting per mile even if their time is worth
more. Glaeser, Kahn and Rappaport (2007) find that access to public transportation does
seem to explain the decisions of the poor to live in urban centers. Indeed, poverty rates
even seem to rise in areas that are close to new subway stops. The connection between
public transportation and poverty is not a problem, but rather a reflection of the valuable
role that public transportation plays in serving and attracting the poor.


The Rosen-Roback Model


While the Alonso-Muth-Mills model is the core tool for understanding prices and density
levels within metropolitan areas, the Rosen-Roback model is economics’ core tool for
understanding prices across metropolitan areas. The Rosen-Roback model is more
complex than the Alonso-Muth-Mills model in that it allows income and amenities to

                                             10
differ across space. The Rosen-Roback model compensates for this added complexity by
treating the metropolitan area as a single homogeneous entity, so that everyone in the
area is assumed to have the same housing costs, transport costs and amenity levels.


The core prediction of a spatial equilibrium across metropolitan areas is that high housing
prices must reflect either high income or high amenities or both. People wouldn’t be
willing to pay for nice places if they weren’t getting something for their money. Rosen
(1979) presents the core theory that emphasizes that the price of amenities across space
requires us to look at both wages and prices. Roback (1982) took this model to the data
and found that people did take home less money, net of housing costs, in places with
more amenities. Gyourko and Tracy (1991) expanded the set of studied amenities and
focused on the willingness to pay for different types of government.


Figure 3 shows the basic empirical value of this approach by graphing housing costs on
incomes across metropolitan areas. Forty percent of the variation in metropolitan area
prices is associated with differences in income. On average, a one thousand dollar
increase in income is associated with a $3,700 increase in housing values. While the
strong association supports the model, the coefficient seems low. After all, a $3,700
increase in housing values suggests an increase in annual costs of no more than $400,
given reasonable assumptions on interest rates, maintenance levels and local taxes. If it
really only cost $400 dollars more to move into an area with $1,000 higher income levels,
then people should flock to those high income, high cost areas.


There are at least two good explanations for why this relationship is still compatible with
the Rosen-Roback model, but these explanations make it clear that the model’s
predictions are a little fuzzy. First, differences in income are not fully correcting for
differences in human capital. It isn’t clear that someone who moves to an area that we
think has $1000 more income per year will actually earn that extra income, because the
people in that high income area may also have higher skills. Second, high income places
may also have unattractive amenities, like long commutes, that offset the higher income
levels.

                                              11
A second way to use the spatial equilibrium assumption is to work directly with incomes
that correct for local prices. The American Chamber of Commerce Research Association
(ACCRA) has created a set of these indices for a subset of metropolitan areas. Using
these indices, we can look at real income levels which allegedly correct for housing price
differences across the U.S. Perhaps the most natural amenity to investigate is warmth,
and Figure 4 shows the relationship between real incomes and median January
temperature across metropolitan areas.


Across the sample of approximately 200 metropolitan areas, median January temperature
explores 23 percent of the variation. As January temperature rises by 10 degrees, real
income drops by 720 dollars. People do seem willing to require higher real income to
live in places that are colder, which certainly does support the idea that places with higher
real income levels are worse in other dimensions, just as the spatial equilibrium
assumption predicts.


Another negative amenity is long commutes. Figure 5 shows the relationship between
income and commute times across a sample of approximately 230 cities with populations
of 100,000 or more. In this case, I am looking at purely nominal income levels and
median commutes. As income increases by 10,000 dollars, median commute time
increases by 1.5 minutes. This relationship confirms the view that high income places
also have other negative amenities which offset high financial returns.


Hedonic Pricing and Housing Supply


The spatial equilibrium assumption holds out the possibility that housing prices can be
used to accurately assess people’s willingness to pay for location-specific amenities. If a
particular amenity is always associated with a 500 dollar increase in housing costs,
holding income and everything else constant, then it might be reasonable to infer that
people place a value of 500 dollars on that amenity. In many cases—like crime and
school quality—there may not be an independent way of assessing the value placed on an

                                             12
amenity, so that hedonic pricing models offer the only hope of figuring out the value that
people place on a particular public service. Since economists would like to weigh costs
and benefits when they determine the optimal amount of public investment in these
amenities, hedonic pricing models offer the hope of delivering an assessment of the
public benefits associated with some forms of publicly provided goods.


A healthy body of research on housing price hedonics has emphasized at least two major
issues with this type of analysis. First, on a purely conceptual level, housing prices can
only tell us about the willingness to pay of the marginal resident in a particular area. This
marginal resident’s willingness to pay may not represent the average willingness to pay
across the population. For example, the premium paid by the residents of tony Fifth
Avenue to look out on Central Park, represents the valuation placed on park views by an
extremely rich swath of the population. This valuation might be considerably higher than
the valuation that a poor person might place on park views. There are no perfect
solutions to this problem and it means that all hedonic estimates need to be thoughtfully
interpreted.


The second problem with hedonic estimates is that they require us to hold everything else
constant. Even the simplest models emphasize the difficulty of doing that. An attractive
amenity will attract the people who are willing to pay the most for it. If those people are
rich, and if people like living around rich people, then the first natural amenity will be
correlated with the second amenity of living around richer people. A second example is
that when comparing across jurisdictions, we have scores of differences in tax levels,
public service provision and regulation that can all potentially impact the desire to live in
an area. In principle, we can try to control for a rich array of area characteristics, but we
may often doubt our ability to measure such things perfectly. As a result, hedonic
estimates are almost always compromised of correlations between the observed
neighborhood attributes and the error term in the regression.


This potential bias has generally led researchers away from metropolitan area level
analysis, such as the correlation between weather and prices at the area level, to a lower

                                             13
level of analysis where we can be more confident that neighborhoods are comparable,
except for the variable in question. For example, older studies looking at the impact of
school quality on housing prices had compared across school districts. These districts are
usually coterminous with other governmental boundaries so it is hard to ensure that any
observed effects reflect only schools. Moreover, high human capital people sort into area
with better schools, so it is hard to know whether a correlation between schools and
property values reflects the schools themselves or the people attracted by the schools.


In response to these problems, Black (1999) turned to using attendance districts.
Attendance districts operate within jurisdictions and determine which of the lower
schools that the children in a particular house will attend. People within the same school
district who are in different attendance districts pay the same taxes and receive all of the
same other government services. Black addressed the omitted neighborhood
characteristic problem by comparing smaller and smaller geographic units, until she was
literally comparing houses on opposite sides of the same street, which just happen to be
associated with different lower schools. Black’s estimates still find a significant
willingness to pay for better schools, but the estimates are also much lower than those
found in the earlier area level studies.


   III.    Agglomeration Economies and Housing Supply


In the previous section, I discussed the equalizing difference implications of the need for
individuals to be in a spatial equilibrium. The spatial equilibrium framework focuses on
individual location choice and the implication that bad things in a location, like high
housing prices, are offset by good things in a location, like high wages. This indifference
condition delivers only one side of the labor market and one side of the housing market.
In the labor market, these individual choices deliver labor supply but do not give us labor
demand. In the housing market, these individual choices deliver housing demand but not
housing supply. To understand fully the distribution of people, prices and wages across
space, we must also turn to the decisions of employers and builders or the determinants of
labor demand and housing supply.

                                             14
The usual purpose of economic models is to explain differences in endogenous variables,
like prices and quantities, with exogenous variables, like geography or long-standing
historical conditions. Since the spatial indifference condition of workers gives us little
idea about where differences in wages or housing prices might come from, we need to
bring in labor demand and housing supply to give us a chance of linking prices, wages
and population with exogenous factors.


The Location of Firms and Labor Demand


In the previous section, we argued that a spatial equilibrium required that people be
indifferent across space. A similar condition applies to firms. If we see firms operating in
a particular locale, economists infer that the firm could not earn greater profits by moving
somewhere else. As usual, economists think of this condition holding only
approximately. Obviously, there are many factors, from moving costs to the spatial
preferences of the CEO, that might mean that firms don’t perfectly profit maximize when
they choose locations. While economists’ accept these caveats, the no-arbitrage
equilibrium assumption still seems like the best available tool for understanding spatial
decisions. This assumption pushes us towards the view that where firms face higher
costs, then there must be something else that is good for those firms. Otherwise, they
would leave.


High wages are perhaps the most obvious locational attribute which is bad from a firm’s
point of view. To workers, high wages are an attraction. To firms, high wages (holding
worker quality constant) are a negative since high wages mean high costs. The logic of
the spatial equilibrium suggests that there must be something good about high wage
areas, from a firm’s perspective, which offsets the high cost of doing business. The most
natural explanation is that high wage regions are also areas that are more economically
productive.


Labor economists would come to the same conclusion—high wages imply high
productivity—as urban economists, but they might arrive through a slightly different

                                             15
route. In a competitive labor market, economic theory suggests that firms should keep on
hiring workers until the cost of an extra worker, i.e. the wage, is equal to the marginal
benefit of that worker, i.e. the increase in total profits generated by that work. If final
goods prices are constant across space, then this condition suggests that wages are, at
least approximately, equal to the marginal product of labor. This reasoning suggests that
wages are almost a direct measure of the marginal revenue product of labor in a given
place.


Why are some places productive enough that firms are willing to pay substantially higher
wages to locate there? Perhaps the simplest explanation is that a given place has some
sort of innate geographic advantage, such as access to a valuable natural resource like a
coal mine or a deep sea port. We should not be surprised that wages seem to have been
high in nineteenth century Chicago, since that city had an unparalleled position as the hub
of America’s inland water network. Today, workers in Alaska earn high wages. From
the worker’s angle, these high wages compensate individuals for the discomfort of the
cold. From the firm’s angle, these high wages are compensated for by the natural-
resource based Alaskan productivity.


While some locational advantages are innate, many more are man-made. A long tradition
in urban economics, going back to von Thunen, emphasizes the advantages of proximity
to customers and suppliers. If a firm is closer to its suppliers, then it is more productive
because it can save on the shipping costs of its inputs. If a firm is closer to its customers,
then it is more productive because it can save on the shipping costs of its final goods.
The desire to save on these transport costs explains why great industrial cities grew up
around America’s early ports: an initial concentration of activity attracted firms that
wanted to sell to the first residents and take advantage of the area’s transport network.
The ability to save on transport costs makes firms more productive and can offset the
costs associated with higher wages.


Of course, throughout much of the 20th century, transport costs for goods have declined.
Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004) document a roughly 90 percent reduction in the real cost of

                                              16
moving a ton a mile by rail. This remarkable decrease becomes even more striking when
we consider the general growth of the economy and the introduction of newer transport
technologies like trucks and airplanes. The result of this decline is that erstwhile
locational advantages associated with reduction in the cost of shipping goods have
become far less important. The decline of cities that were built around the waterways of
the Midwest was a natural consequence of the decreased importance of the costs of
shipping goods. A second consequence of the decline in transport costs is that wages in
areas that had a transportation advantage have fallen relative to the rest of the country.


While locational advantages associated with reductions in the cost of shipping goods are
less important today than in the past, wage and productivity differences across space are
as large as ever. The economic interpretation of that fact is that other forces must
continue to make some places more productive than others. While transport costs for
goods have dropped dramatically, the costs of moving people have not declined so
steadily. Since time is the major input in the cost of moving people, and the value of time
rises roughly with the wage rate, the cost of moving people remains high. As a result,
many cities increasingly specialize in services that require face-to-face interactions.


The highest wage metropolitan areas tend today to specialize not in manufacturing, but in
business services. These industries—including law, finance, consulting, and
accounting— are more productive in some places than others because they are close to
customers and each other. The complementarity between different types of services
means that the productivity of a lawyer in Manhattan is generally higher than the
productivity of the same lawyer in rural Montana, because in Manhattan the lawyer is
physically proximate to potential clients in the financial services industry.


Proximity to people doesn’t just reduce standard transport costs, but it also increases the
access to the ideas of those people. A body of research following Alfred Marshall has
emphasized a connection between local productivity and access to new ideas in particular
locales. The great nineteenth century economist Alfred Marshall famously declared that
in some concentrated locales “the mysteries of the trade become no mystery but are, as it

                                             17
were, in the air.” Jane Jacobs followed Marshall’s lead in The Economy of Cities and
emphasized the role that cities have historically played in generating new innovations.
Jacobs argued that new ideas are formed by combining old ideas and the wealth of
inspiration within dense urban areas made intellectual cross-fertilization easier.


Economists have become increasingly sympathetic to the view that cities serve as forges
of human capital and incubators of innovation (Duranton and Puga, 2001). This view
has been fused with the idea of human capital spillovers: location-specific productivity
depends on the density of well educated smart people, since those people produce more
ideas. One line of evidence in this area examines the determinants of wages within an
urban area. Rauch (1993) showed that holding individual human capital constant, wages
rise in high human capital areas. Figure 6 shows the relationship between the average
income residual, i.e. income holding individual schooling and experience constant, and
the share of the population in a metropolitan area with college degrees. People who live
in more educated areas earn more, which may reflect higher productivity in those areas
due to a faster exchange of ideas.


A second line of evidence on knowledge-based sources of local productivity has looked
at patterns of urban growth. One fact that makes it seem that local knowledge is
increasingly important for local productivity is the robust connection between initial
human capital in an area and later growth. Local skills are among the best predictors of
which metropolitan areas will succeed, especially in the older regions of this country.
Figure 7 shows the correlation between the share of the population with bachelor’s
degrees in 1980 and the growth of the metropolitan area since then. This type of indirect
evidence has pushed economists towards the view that locational productivity differences
may owe something to the benefits that smart people gain from interacting with and
learning from each other.




                                             18
Housing Supply


The last major ingredient in the economic model of cities is housing supply. Economists
are not so oblivious to the real world that they ignore the role of the built environment in
the development of cities. Indeed, the percentage change in the number of people in a
city is almost exactly the same thing as the percentage change in the number of homes in
that city. Figure 8 shows this correlation across metropolitan areas in the U.S. between
1980 and 2000. If the number of homes is so tightly correlated with the overall growth of
the area, then it is surely critical to understand the factors determining the growth in the
number of homes in an area, which itself reflect the supply of housing.


Again, economists understand housing supply with the same no arbitrage tools that are
used to understand the determination of wages and employment in the labor market. The
key no arbitrage condition in the housing market is that housing prices must not be higher
than the total cost of supplying new housing. If a builder can sell a home for more than it
costs to build a home, then the logic of economics strongly suggests that a new home will
be built. This logic implies that developers will keep on building to the point where the
total costs of building a new unit are equal to housing costs.


Again, this condition is only meant to hold approximately. There are some market
imperfections in the construction industry, although monopoly is likely to be rare since
the number of builders in most metropolitan areas is quite large. Construction takes time,
especially in the permitting process, and this means that builders are guessing the
eventual sales price when they are initiating the permitting process. With these caveats,
economists have still relied on the equilibrium condition that housing prices should be
close to the total costs of building.


If every area had the same basic supply of housing, so that costs of production were more
or less identical, then it would be perfectly reasonable to focus on factors other than
housing supply. However, there is abundant evidence suggesting that housing supply
differs from place to place. If there was one single housing supply for every place, then

                                             19
we would expect to see high price in high construction areas and low prices in low
construction areas.


Figure 9 shows the correlation between prices in 2005 and the number of new permits in
a metropolitan area between 2000 and 2005. The figure shows that the expensive places
in the U.S. have low development and the places in the U.S. with abundant development
have low prices. This fact is not compatible with the view that places differ only in their
level of housing demand. In that case, high price places would also have more
development. Only differences in the supply of housing can explain why San Francisco
has high prices and low permitting while Houston has high permitting and low prices.


Some of the differences in supply conditions reflect the actual physical costs of
construction. Gyourko and Saiz (2006) estimate that one-fifth of the variation in housing
prices across space can be attributed to differences in the cost of building homes.
Materials, and especially labor, do cost more in some places than in others. Some part of
the difference in housing supply also reflects physical conditions, like lack of land and
natural barriers to development such as too much or too little water .


In my work in this area with Joseph Gyourko and others, I have argued that land use
regulations, not construction costs or land density, explain the bulk of the differences in
housing supply across space. This claim is based on both direct evidence linking land use
controls with less construction and higher prices (Glaeser and Ward, 2006, Katz and
Rosen, 1987) but also indirect evidence of many forms. For example, new construction
per acre is more common in areas with higher density, not in areas with less land.
Housing prices in Manhattan are far higher than the cost of supplying a new unit by
building an extra floor on a new skyscraper. The discrepancy between price and cost
seems to imply regulatory barriers on new construction. If this hypothesis is correct and
differences in housing supply reflect differences in regulatory regimes, then these
regulatory regimes are having a major impact on both the cost of living and urban
growth.



                                             20
Economics predicts that housing prices should not be higher than the costs of new
building, but it does not predict any floor on housing prices. Housing prices can certainly
fall below construction costs, but if they do, economics predicts that no new housing will
be built. This scenario describes many of the inner cities of the rustbelt that have housing
prices that are far below construction costs and almost no new construction (Glaeser and
Gyourko, 2005). The durability of housing means that these places remain, despite the
fact that their productivity and amenity levels are not high enough to justify housing costs
that would cover the costs of construction. In these places, we expect to see continuing
urban decline, because current low prices suggest that there is not nearly enough demand
to prod the market into building new homes.


One implication of the abundant durable housing in declining cities is that attempts to
revitalize these cities with new construction seem particularly odd. These declining cities
have abundant housing and physical infrastructure relative to demand. That is why prices
are so low. How could it make sense to respond to those conditions by building more
infrastructure?


   IV.     The Empirical Approach of Economics to Cities


Disciplines are divided not only by core theoretical assumptions, but by their empirical
methods. Over the past 50 years, economics has particularly distinguished itself by a
focus on statistical work with large data sets, as opposed to case studies. Over the past 15
years, empirical economists have become particularly focused on causal inference. The
strength of empirical economics is in quantitative empirical methods, especially
sophisticated methods that are focused on exogenous sources of variation. By contrast,
only a few economists have real expertise in non-quantitative forms of research, like
ethnography.


The early classics of urban social science, none of which were written by economists,
generally combine statistical work and descriptive observation. For example, the
greatness of DuBois’ Philadelphia Negro comes from its fusion of statistics and first

                                            21
hand knowledge of the community. Over the next century, urban sociologists such as
those in the “Chicago School” captured the rich details of urban life by developing tools
of ethnographic research. Ethnographic classics, like Gans’ The Urban Villagers or
Liebow’s Talley’s Corner, presents rich depictions of particular neighborhoods.


Even the more statistical exercises in urban sociology and urban political science are
often distinguished by their ability to capture more detailed information on particular
areas. For example, over the course of the 20th century, sociological survey research
became increasingly sophisticated about asking detailed questions about urban life. More
recently, the work of Sampson, Raudenbusch and Earl (1997) use movie cameras and
other technologies to acquire visual images of particular places that were then
transformed into statistical measures of neighborhood activity that went far beyond the
usual administrative data.


Economists have rarely been so willing to invest in getting richer depictions of any
particular neighborhood. Since economists tend to be interested more in common
patterns than in unique features of particular locales, few economists have tried to
comprehensively measure any particular place. Moreover, since economists came late to
the study of cities, there was little incentive to try to compete with sociologists in an area
where that discipline is particularly strong. Finally, economists have a particular interest
in financial variables like income and housing prices that do tend to be administratively
available.


While economists have not contributed much to either ethnography or rich environmental
measurement, economists have focused particularly on causal inference and exogenous
variation. This focus comes from the strong attachment to formal economic theory.
Economic models are generally geared towards predicting the relationship between an
exogenous variable and endogenous variables, such as the link between an exogenous
cost shock to an industry and both prices and quantities. Since our models are geared
towards links between exogenous variables and outcomes, our theoretical work has also
come to focus on exogeneity.

                                              22
This theoretical background does not preclude interest in the correlation between two
endogenous variables. For example, the relationship between income and housing prices
shown in Figure 3 is certainly relevant to urban economics. However, the lack of
exogenous variation in that figure makes it inherently unsatisfying to many economists.
The link shown in the figure might mean that some places are intrinsically more
productive than others and therefore have high wages which then cause high prices.
Alternatively, the picture might mean that some places are intrinsically more expensive
than others and those high prices then ensure the need to pay high wages. As discussed
in the previous section a whole theoretical apparatus that embeds endogenous housing
supply is needed to truly make sense of this correlation.


For an economist, making sense of Figure 3 requires a source of exogenous variation in
the productivity of different regions. That exogenous variation would then enable us to
trace out the impact that higher productivity has on wages and prices and housing supply.
Unfortunately, such exogenous sources of variation are often difficult to come by. One
approach has been to look at the changes over time in the international price of
commodities produced by a particular locale and then to look at how wages, prices and
construction change with respect to that price. A particularly clear example is the price
of oil which strongly influences prices, construction and wages in Texas. Since the price
of oil is determined by factors largely outside of the Texas economy, this provides us
with one source of exogenous variation that can be used to examine the link between
income and prices.


Over the past 15 years, economists have made much progress on using the tools of casual
inference to examine urban issues. For example, Hoxby (2000) used the number of rivers
across metropolitan areas to provide exogenous variation in the number of natural
barriers which then predicts the number of governments in an area. Using this natural
source of variation, Hoxby finds that more inter-governmental competition increases
school performance.



                                            23
No one has been more successful in identifying exogenous sources of variation than
Steve Levitt, whose popular book Freakonomics, made his work world famous. Levitt’s
work often relies on exogenous events, like ACLU lawsuits against prisons, to identify
important economic relationships, such as the impact of incarcerating criminals on crime
and urban growth (Levitt, 1996, Berry-Cullen and Levitt, 1999). Without such sources of
exogenous variation, economists would find it difficult to say anything meaningful about
the relationship between incarceration and crime, since incarceration rates are themselves
a function of the amount of crime in an area.


One approach to causal inference has been to use spatial discontinuities in public policy.
Since policies change discontinuously at a border, it is possible to identify the impact of
policy separately from other forces if those other forces are assumed to change more
continuously. The work of Sandra Black on housing prices and school districts discussed
above is one use of spatial discontinuities in economic policy. Holmes (1998) used these
discontinuities to look at the impact of employment policies, like right-to-work laws on
firm locations. While this approach produces something of a natural experiment
associated with a somewhat random change in public policy at a border, it faces
difficulties in identifying the impact of a particular policy if many policies
simultaneously change at a border.


A final natural extension of the economic focus on causal inference has been an
increasing interest in designing new policy experiments. Perhaps the most famous of
these experiments is the Moving-to-Opportunity program funded by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development. In this experiment, subjects that lived in high poverty
areas were randomly allocated into three groups. One group was the control and received
no assistance. A second group received a standard Section 8 rental voucher. The third
group received a special voucher that committed the program to pay for housing if the
recipient moved to a low poverty neighborhood. The recipients in the two treated groups
both used their vouchers to move to areas with less poverty and less crime (Katz, Kling
and Liebman, 2001).



                                             24
This experiment was particularly exciting to economists because it seemed to offer the
hope of identifying the impact of neighborhood choice on outcomes for children and
adults. The basic correlation between poverty and growing up in poor neighborhoods
seemed to suggest the presence of neighborhood effects, where children in those
neighborhoods have unfortunate outcomes because of a lack of economic opportunity,
role models or good schools. However, it was always possible that these correlations
reflected the fact that parents in these neighborhoods were intrinsically different in some
hard-to-measure way from parents in more affluent neighborhoods. The Moving-To-
Opportunity experiment gave us the opportunity to compare parents who differed only on
the basis of their receiving this voucher.


The basic findings of this experiment have suggested that neighborhood effects were
probably over-rated. Parents who received the vouchers do seem to have become
happier, but their economic success did not increase. Female children of voucher
recipients did become somewhat more successful, but male children fared worse. The
studies that came out of the Moving to Opportunity program have used exogenous
variation to challenge prevailing wisdom that came from ecological correlations. These
findings show that economists’ use of exogenous variation can produce very different
results than results using raw correlations.


The attention to causal inference is one empirical by-product of economists’ focus on
formal theory. Another by-product is the use of data to estimate formal models. For
example, Ellison and Glaeser (1997) provide a formal model of firm location choice that
then creates a natural index of geographic concentration of industry. Rosenthal and
Strange (2001) use this index to understand the roots of agglomeration economies.
Indeed, a common view in economics is that researchers should be able to justify any
regression as an attempt to estimate the parameters of a formal model.




                                               25
   V.      Economics and Urban Policy


The economic approach to urban policy combines the use of cost-benefit analysis and the
assumption that the goal of policy is to increase the choices available to people. The
most important part of this assumption is that people, not places, are the important
outcomes. A policy that yields a beautiful place, but does little to increase the welfare of
individuals has little appeal to most economists. Policies make sense to economists if
their benefits to people outweigh their costs. This may not distinguish economists from
sociologists, but it does distinguish economists from some architecturally oriented urban
planners and from place-based politicians.


The economists’ desire to put people first might seem obvious, but it is often in conflict
with much place-based urban policy. For example, regional policies in Europe, such as
the European Union’s spending on infrastructure for poorer areas like the Mezzogiorno
and in the U.S., such as the Appalachian Regional Commission, are classic place-based
policies that aim to make particular regions wealthier. In the wake of Hurricane Katrina,
many advocates for New Orleans called for hundreds of billions of dollars to be spent so
that the city would come back.


The economics approach to public policy pushes us to ask whether this money would be
better spent on people, rather than place based policies. For example, would 500,000
residents of New Orleans be better off with 200,000 dollars apiece or 100 billion dollars
worth of government infrastructure. While it seems hard to argue that infrastructure
spending was the best thing for the people of New Orleans, economics does not give us a
universal rule against place-based spending. People’s lives are certainly enriched when
they live in a successful place and there surely are times when the best way to help
people is to improve a place.


For example, late nineteenth century investments in water systems were placed-based
policies. Massive public works projects, like the Croton Aquaduct, delivered clean water
to residents of a particular locale. Clean water was critical for avoiding public health

                                             26
disasters like Cholera epidemics and it is hard to argue that these place-based investments
didn’t deliver benefits that exceeded costs. Crime prevention is also generally handled
place-by-place and investments in place-based policing also often seem to deliver
benefits that outweigh costs.


However, there are other cases where place based systems do not seem so sensible. First
of all, the beneficiaries of much place-based spending are often local landowners rather
than current residents. For example, building a fancy contemporary art museum in a poor
neighborhood that is short on contemporary art aficionados may well increase housing
prices because of rich professionals who are willing to pay more for proximity to the
museum. However, if the original residents don’t care about the art then they will be
made worse off because they need to pay more for their housing and haven’t gained
something that they particularly value.


A second issue with place-based policies is that they artificially distort migration
decisions. One can easily argue that the best thing that can happen to the residents of a
declining region is that they leave that region and move to areas with a brighter economic
future. If place-based policies reduce the incentive to migrate, then they may reduce the
beneficial process of moving from less productive areas to more productive areas. This
argument is akin to arguments that economists make against propping up declining
industries. Economic efficiency requires workers to move to more productive industries
or places. Economic policy that tries to stop that process is reducing efficiency.


The third issue with place based policies is that these policies have often provided
excuses for vast expenditures which benefit contractors more than target populations.
Since amorphous appeals to the magic of a particular place are not amenable to
conventional cost-benefit analysis, this means that all sorts of projects can be justified
that do not provide people with benefits that are large enough to justify their costs. For
example, much of the urban renewal spending in the 1960s was seen as being a way of
rebuilding cities, but few people actually bothered to ask whether this spending would
deliver people benefits large enough to offset costs.

                                             27
Economics and Laissez-Faire


Some of the most famous results in formal economic theory suggest that competitive
markets will deliver a socially desirable outcome in the absence of market failures. Of
course, even these results do not claim that free markets equitably redistribute income.
Moreover, market failures often appear endemic in urban settings. One example of
market failures are externalities, which are defined as settings where one person’s action
impacts his neighbors in ways that are not mediated by the price system. A classic
example is the production of pollution. A second example of a market failure is the
existence of public goods, like the legal system, that are non-rival and non-excludable.
The close connection of people in cities generally increases the level of externalities and
the scope for government intervention.


The problems of externalities like pollution, the spread of disease and congestion mean
that pure laissez-faire is rarely an option in urban economics. Few economists question
the wisdom of disease-reducing expenditures on clean water or the need for local police.
Moreover, the existence of agglomeration economies in cities makes it at least possible
that economic externalities exist that could, in principle, justify significant government
interventions in local economies.


Yet despite abundant externalities, economists remain more skeptical of many forms of
government intervention than representatives of many other disciplines. This skepticism
is based not on an uncritical faith in the free market but rather in doubts about the
competence and benevolence of government. Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations,
which is the closest thing economics has to a founding document, was the product of the
Scottish Enlightenment. Like many thinkers of the Scottish Enlightenment, Smith
questioned the tendency of kings to perfectly care for their subject’s interests. While
there is little doubt that democracy has generally made governments more benign,
economists have retained doubts about the perfection of government. As such, those
economists who have a predilection for limited government base that view not on an



                                             28
unquestioning faith in the market, but rather on doubts about the perfect benevolence of
the state.


In the context of cities, doubts about governmental goodness and competence certainly
have some basis in fact. Corruption was endemic in many American cities throughout
much of the 19th century. Urban leadership has often been beholden to special interests
on both the left and the right. Moreover, the limited resources available to local
governments often ensures that even well intentioned city governments have difficulties
figuring out the right course of action.


Skepticism about the limits of government is particularly important in debates about
activist economic policy. On one side of this debate, pro-intervention advisors urge using
government intervention to secure the growth of industries that will generate positive
externalities for other people and firms in the city. Anti-intervention advisors doubt the
ability of the government to get this right. Beason and Weinstein (1996) show that
Japan’s famous Ministry of International Trade and Industry was not good at directing
funds to firms that were either ex post successful or ex ante likely to have a high return.
The track records of city governments, which have often targeted elderly industries with
little chance for growth, are hardly encouraging.


The opponents of firm-level targeting argue that the best economic development plan is
to attract smart people and get out of their way. Within this group, there is some division
on what attracts smart people. Some authors, like Richard Florida, emphasize hip
downtowns. Others emphasize good schools, safe streets and fast commutes. While all
of these debates are currently active, there is no sense that economists have come to any
discipline-wide agreement on these issues.


City Limits and Migration


Urban economists are less divided on the view that good urban policy must reflect the
fact that people and firms are mobile. Location choice lies at the heart of urban

                                             29
economics, so it is unsurprising that urban economists have been particularly attuned to
the connection between government policy and location choice. The seminal paper in
local public finance is Tiebout (1956), which argued that many different localities would
provide consumers with a variety of choices about the kind of public services that they
would like to consume. Just as economists think that competition among firms ensures
that consumers will have a rich set of choices about product choices, competition across
governments seems to allow consumers to vote with their feet and choose the government
that best fits their needs.


Tiebout mentions, but does not emphasize, a second potential benefit from competition
among government: improving the incentives facing governments. Since economists
tend to doubt the innate benevolence of the public sector, there may be benefits from
forcing governments to compete to attract people and firms. Just as private sector
monopolies don’t serve consumers well, public sector monopolies can be just as
problematic. Hoxby (2000) is a classic paper on the connection between inter-
governmental competition and better school provision.


Economists’ emphasis on the mobility of people and firms guides policy
recommendations at both the local and national level. At the local level, the mobility of
factors means that policy makers face strong limits in the extent that they can pursue
redistribution policies. Raising taxes on the rich to fund the poor may be socially
attractive, but at the urban level such redistribution seems to lead to a quick flight of the
rich. The classic statement of this point is Paul Peterson’s City Limits. Peterson is a
political scientist, although one who was strongly influenced by economics and especially
Tiebout. One hypothesis is that an increasing recognition of the mobility of wealth
explains why socially visionary mayors of the 1960s, like John Lindsay, have been
replaced by mayors who look more like city managers, like Richard M..Daley (Glaeser
and Kahn, 1999).


The mobility of the rich suggests both that mayors should avoid repelling the well-to-do,
but also that they might want to pursue policies that will attract high human capital

                                              30
residents. The robust correlation between urban success and a skilled population
suggests that attracting skilled people might be a particularly sensible policy for a mayor
who is trying to generate long run economic success for his area. Of course, there is less
consensus about what things will attract a skilled population to a city.


At the national level, the emphasis on the mobility of people and firms often leads
economists to favor spatial neutrality. Many economists think that the government
should not interfere in the competition between firms, each of which is trying to
maximize their own profits. Analogously, many economists think that it makes sense for
the national government to restrain from interfering in the competition between cities,
each of which is trying to attract people and firms. Policies that favor particular cities
will dilute the incentives to compete and create spatial distortions that artificially push
people to one place or another. There is no conflict between economists advising mayors
on how to build up their cities while simultaneously advising the national government to
stay neutral, any more than there is a conflict between economists advising individual
firms and simultaneously opposing government intervention in the marketplace.


   VI.     Conclusion


Urban economics is only one of the many disciplines that contribute to our understanding
of cities. Among the social sciences, the economic approach to cities is distinguished by
its strong ties to formal economic theory based on the concept of a no-arbitrage
equilibrium. Economists seek to understand cities with a framework that requires people
to be indifferent over space, employers to be indifferent over where to locate and how
many people to hire and builders to be indifferent about whether or not to build more or
taller buildings. This attachment to theory provides urban economics with discipline and
with a clear structure. Almost everything urban economists do can be understood as part
of the large question of understanding why people choose to locate in urban areas.


While the economic approach to cities has many strengths, the economic approach also
has profound limitations. Economists have never acquired the skills to study the built

                                              31
environment or the intricacies of individual neighborhoods. Our overwhelming focus on
quantitative methods has left us poorly suited to treat historical narratives in a scientific
fashion. While I believe that no one can make sense of cities without the tools of
economics, I also believe that no economist can make sense of cities without borrowing
heavily from other disciplines.




                                              32
References

Alonso, William (1964) Location and Land Use. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Beason, Richard and David Weinstein (1996) “Growth, Economies of Scale and
   Targeting in Japan (1955-1990)” Review of Economics and Statistics 78(2): 286-295.

Becker, Gary S. (1965) “A Theory of the Allocation of time,” Economic Journal 75(299):
   493-517.

Black, Sandra E. (1999) “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary
   Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2): 577-599.

Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga (2001) “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process
   Innovation and the Life Cycle of Products,” American Economic Review 91(5):
   1454-1477

Ellison, G. and E. Glaeser (1997) "Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
    Industries: A Dartboard Approach," Journal of Political Economy 105 (1997): 889-
    927.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Matthew Kahn (2001) “Decentralized Employment and the
   Transformation of the American City,” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs
   2 (2001).

Glaeser, Edward L. and Matthew Kahn (1999) “From Lindsay to Giuliani: The Decline
of the Local Safety Net?”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review
5(2): 117-132.

Glaeser, Edward L., Kahn, Matthew and Jordan Rappaport (2007) “Why do the poor live
   in cities?” Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Janet E. Kohlhase (2004) “Cities, Regions and the Decline of
   Transport Costs,” Papers in Regional Science 83(1): 197-228.

Glaeser, Edward L., Kolko, Jed and Albert Saiz (2001) "Consumer City," (joint with J.
   Kolko and A. Saiz), Journal of Economic Geography 1: 27-50.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Bryce Ward (2006) “The Causes and Consequences of Land Use
   Regulation: Evidence from Greater Boston,” NBER Working Paper # 12601.

Gyourko, Joseph and Albert Saiz (2006). “Construction Costs and the Supply of Housing
   Structure”, Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 46, no. 4 (November 2006):
   forthcoming.

Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy (1991) “The Structure of Local Public Finance nad
   the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy 99(4): 774-806.
                                          33
Holmes, Thomas J. (1998) “The effects of state policies on the location of industry:
   Evidence from state borders,” Journal of Political Economy 106 (4): 667 – 705

Hoxby, Caroline M. (2000) "Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students
   and Taxpayers?" American Economic Review, 90 (5).

Katz, Lawrence, Kling, Jeffrey and Jeffrey Liebman (2001) “Moving to Opportunity in
   Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 116(2): 607-654.

Katz, L. and K.T. Rosen (1987) “The Interjursdictional Effects of Growth Controls on
   Housing Prices,” Journal of Law and Economics 30(1): 149-160.

LeRoy, Stephen and Jon Sonstelie (1983) “Paradise Lost and Regained: Transportation
   Innovation, Income and Residential Location,” Journal of Urban Economics 13: 67-
   89.

Mills, Edwin S. (1967) “An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitna
   Area,” American Economic Review 57(2): 197-210.

Muth, Richard (1969) Cities and Housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Rauch, James E. (1993) “Productivity gains from geographic concentration of human
   capital: Evidence from the cities,” Journal of Urban Economics 34 (3): 380 – 400.

Roback, Jennifer (1982). “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life”, Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol. 90, no. 4 (December 1982): 1257-78.

Rosen, Sherwin (1979). “Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life”. In Current
   Issues in Urban Economics, edited by Peter Mieszkowski and Mahlon Straszheim.
   Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univerity Press, 1979.

Rosenthal, Stuart and Will Strange (2001) “The Determinants of Agglomeration,”
   Journal of Urban Economics 50(2): 191-229.

Sampson, R.J.., S.W. Raudenbush, and F. Earl. 1997. “Neighborhoods and Violent
   Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.” Science 277(5328): 918-24.

Tiebout, Charles (1956) “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures” Journal of Political
   Economy 64(5): 416-424.




                                           34
         coeff:-1132.315 se:199.4381 R2:.1491

250000

                                  DOVER
                                   LINCOLN
                                  WESTON


200000           BROOKLIN              SHERBORN
                                             CARLISLE
                               WELLESLE
                       BELMONT                 BOXFORD

                                       TOPSFIEL
                       WINCHEST
                        NEWTON     WAYLAND            HARVARD
150000                     COHASSET
                             LYNNFIEL
                           LEXINGTO
                          NEEDHAM
                                       SUDBURY
                                    CONCORD
                                      MANCHEST
                                   MEDFIELD ACTON
                                                MARBLEHE
                                                       WENHAM
                                                 BOXBOROU
                    MILTON WESTWOOD
                                 BEDFORD ANDOVERDUXBURY
                         HINGHAM
                         SWAMPSCO
                       ARLINGTO               FRAMINGH         WESTBORO
                   WATERTOW     CANTON SCITUATE
                                     SHARON
                                 READING
                                    NORWELL     HOLLISTO
                                                     SOUTHBOR
                                                     NORTH ANBOLTON
                                                     CHELMSFO                HAMILTON       PAXTON
                 CAMBRIDG
                      NAHANT
                     MELROSE  NORWOOD
                            WALTHAM
                         DEDHAM
                            WAKEFIEL
                        STONEHAM
                       BRAINTRE        WALPOLE
                                 BURLINGT
                                        HANOVER
                                      NATICK            STOW       DUNSTABL
                                                             ROCKPORT
                     MEDFORD         DANVERS
                               PEABODY
100000        WINTHROP
                  REVERE
                            WOBURN  NORTH
                              MARLBORO
                                    WILMINGT
                                  SALEM
                                            RE
                                       BEVERLYMILLIS
                                                ASHLAND    HUDSON
                                                       WESTFORD
                                                      FRANKLIN
                                                MARSHFIE
                                                    IPSWICH
                                                  MEDWAY
                                             FOXBOROU            NORTHBOR    WEST
                                                                       SHREWSBU
                                                                                     HOLDEN
                                                                                  SOMERSET
                                                                                    BOY PRINCETO
                                                                              LUNENBUR
                EVERETT
                 QUINCY SAUGUS
                    MALDENRANDOLPH
                        WEYMOUTHSTOUGHTO     TEWKSBUR
                                           BILLERIC
                                              NORFOLK       MILFORD
                                                                 WESTLANCASTE
                                                               NEWBURY NEW
                                               EASTON
                                                MAYNARD
                                           PEMBROKE
                                             HANSON    GEORGETO
                                                          METHUEN
                                                        HOPKINTO
                                                           GROVELAN
                                                        RAYNHAM      GROTON
                                                               HOPEDALE
                                                            BELLINGH  GRAFTONSTERLING
                                                                               SEEKONK
                             HOLBROOK
                           LYNN  AVON BROCKTON
                                 ABINGTON        WRENTHAMROWLEY
                                                          KINGSTON
                                                     LAWRENCE      BERLIN
                                                            LITTLETO
                                                                 PLYMOUTH        LEOMINST
                                                                             MILLBURY
                                                                         DIGHTON     AUBURN
                                                                                   SWANSEA
                                ROCKLAND     EAST
                                              WEST ESSEX
                                                 BRIDGEWA
                                                    HALIFAX
                                                  BRIBRI      NORTH
                                                         PLYMPTON
                                                         DRACUT      ATREHOBOTH
                                                                      NORTHBRI
                                                               ATTLEBORCLINTON
                                                                      BOYLSTON
                                                                     AYER
                                                                   UPTON        WORCESTE
                                                                                SUTTON
                 SOMERVIL
              CHELSEAHULL              WHITMAN         GLOUCEST
                                                 MANSFIEL  PLAINVIL
                                                              TAUNTON     PEPPEREL FREETOWN
                                                                       SHIRLEY
                                                                  MENDONUXBRIDGE          LEICESTE
                                                       LOWELL   HAVERHIL
                                                                      BLACKSTO
                                                                     LAKEVILL
                                                                    NEWBURYP       DOUGLAS
                                                         NORTONTYNGSBOR
                                                                     CARVER
                                                                      SALISBUR TOWNSEND
                                                                    MERRIMAC
                                                               MIDDLEBO
                                                                     BERKLEY
                                                                        AMESBURY
                                                                         MILLVILL
 50000
          0                                  20                                 40                   60
                                                    Distance to Boston
           Fig. 1: 2000 Housing Value on Distance to Boston

         coeff:-.0812 se:.0064 R2:.4593
                 SOMERVIL
    10
                 CAMBRIDG
              CHELSEA
                EVERETT
                    MALDEN
              WINTHROP ARLINGTO
                   WATERTOW
                 BROOKLIN                             LAWRENCE
                           LYNN
                     MEDFORD
                  REVERE
                     MELROSE                            LOWELL
                       BELMONT
                 QUINCY NEWTON
                            WALTHAMSALEM
                         SWAMPSCO BROCKTON              MARBLEHE                 WORCESTE
                        WINCHEST
                            WAKEFIEL
                        STONEHAM
                      NAHANT
                     HULL
                        WEYMOUTH
                            WOBURN
                              NORWOOD
                               PEABODY
     8                        WELLESLE
                          RANDOLPH
                         DEDHAM
                       BRAINTRE
                            NEEDHAM
                        SAUGUS   READINGBEVERLYFRAMINGH                 CLINTON SOMERSET
                    MILTON   LEXINGTO  NATICK
                                      DANVERS
                                       WHITMANMAYNARD
                                 BURLINGT                            NEWBURYP
                             HOLBROOK
                                ROCKLAND
                                STOUGHTO                   METHUEN
                              MARLBORO                      HUDSON
                                                      CHELMSFO   HAVERHIL
                                                             MILFORD
                                 ABINGTON
                                 AVON
                              WESTWOOD      BILLERIC            ATTLEBOR          LEOMINST
                               LYNNFIEL       TEWKSBUR  GLOUCEST
                                     WILMINGT
                                     BEDFORD
                                CANTON SCITUATE
                                       WALPOLE
                                       WAYLAND
                         HINGHAM NORTH RE ANDOVER ROCKPORT
                                                               NORTH
                                                               TAUNTON
                                                          DRACUTHOPEDALEAMESBURY AUBURN
                                                                      ATSHREWSBU
                                                                      AYER
                                                             BELLINGH NORTHBRIMILLBURY
                             COHASSET  MEDFIELD     ACTON
                                                 ASHLAND
                                              FOXBOROU
                                                   MEDWAY
                                                       FRANKLIN
                                  WESTON CONCORD
                                          HANOVERHOLLISTO
                                                      NORTH     WESTBORO
                                                               AN
                                                            GROVELAN   BLACKSTO SEEKONK
                                             SUDBURY
                                            MANCHEST
                                      SHARON
                                    LINCOLN      MARSHFIE
                                            PEMBROKE
                                              EAST BRI
                                                  MANSFIEL
                                              HANSON
                                               MILLIS
                                               WEST   BRI PLAINVIL
                                                                       GRAFTON
                                                                 HARVARD
                                                                   WENHAM
                                                                     MERRIMAC
                                                                  NORTHBOR    WESTSWANSEA
                                                                                    BOY
                                                  BRIDGEWA
                                                EASTON
                                             TOPSFIEL SOUTHBOR
                                                        GEORGETO              HAMILTON
     6                               NORWELL                 LITTLETO     MILLVILL        LEICESTE
                                                                                      HOLDEN
                                               NORFOLK  WESTFORD
                                                  WRENTHAM
                                                     IPSWICH
                                                          NORTON
                                                         RAYNHAM
                                                           KINGSTON
                                                         DUXBURY        SHIRLEYLUNENBUR
                                  DOVERMIDDLETO                          UXBRIDGE
                                                                       SALISBUR
                                                                TYNGSBOR   PEPPEREL         PAXTON
                                         SHERBORN        STOW
                                                         HOPKINTO
                                                     HALIFAX           LANCASTE
                                                                         DIGHTON
                                                    ESSEX
                                               CARLISLE         MIDDLEBO
                                                                  PLYMOUTH
                                                 BOXFORD  ROWLEY  WEST BOYLSTON
                                                                        NEW
                                                                    UPTON
                                                                    BERLIN
                                                                NEWBURY
                                                                      GROTON SUTTON
                                                                      LAKEVILL
                                                          BOXBOROU      REHOBOTH
                                                                   MENDON     STERLING
                                                                                   TOWNSEND
                                                                      BERKLEY         FREETOWN
                                                                  BOLTON
                                                          PLYMPTON  DUNSTABL        DOUGLAS
                                                                      CARVER
     4                                                                                  PRINCETO


          0                                  20                                 40                   60
                                                    Distance to Boston
         Fig. 2: Log Population Density on Distance to Boston




                                                        35
         coeff:3.777 se:.2785 R2:.4033

600000



                                                                                                                         San Fran


400000

                                                                                              Honolulu
                                                                                Santa Ba
                                                                           Salinas,
                                                                               SanSanLuis
                                                                                       Dieg       New York
                                                                                                    Seattle-
                                                                           Los Ange                                   New Have
200000                                                                                 Santa Fe            Boston-W
                                                                                     BarnstabFort Col
                                                                                     Portland         Denver-B      Washingt
                                                                                     Naples,
                                                                                    Reno,   NV    Chicago-Anchorag
                                                                        Bellingh  Sacramen
                                                                          Provo-OrSalt Lak                   Hartford
                                                                  Stockton
                                                            Eugene-S               Colorado        Raleigh-
                                                                                                 New     Madison,
                                                                                                       Lond
                                                         Medford-
                                                  Chico-Pa
                                                              Flagstaf
                                                            Missoula
                                                            Modesto, Las Vega
                                                                    Wilmingt
                                                               Albuquer
                                                           Miami-Fo
                                                                                  West
                                                                              Providen
                                                                            Phoenix-      Charlott
                                                                                          Pal
                                                                                          Milwauke
                                                                                     Portland
                                                                                         Burlingt
                                                                                    Nashvill
                                                                             SpringfiCharlott      Iowa  Cit Minneapo
                                                                                                  Atlanta,
                                                                                                  Detroit-
                                                                                                Austin-S
                                                 Redding,
                                                Yakima,Myrtle
                                                       Grand   BJu
                                                           Ashevill
                                                           Tucson,
                                                                Dover,
                                                               Athens,Sarasota
                                                                Spokane,
                                                                Fort  Mye Boise
                                                                          D    Lancaste
                                                                               Clevelan
                                                                           State  Ci
                                                                           Pittsfie   Columbus
                                                                                   Lawrence
                                                                             Richland Cincinna
                                                                                   Grand
                                                                                  Co
                                                                               Allentow
                                                                            Blooming     Green Philadel
                                                                                        Richmond
                                                                                            Ra  Ba    Rocheste
                                                                                                     Blooming
                                           Merced,
                                                Yuba   Cit
                                             Fresno, New          Charlest
                                                               CheyenneGreensboYork,
                                                                         Norfolk-
                                                                     Orlando,
                                                                            Columbia  PA
                                                                               Harrisbu Indianap
                                                                                        Dallas-F
                                                                                    Albany-S
                                                                                   Sheboyga
                                                                                   Lincoln,
                                  Las   Visalia-
                                      Cruc            Punta
                                                 Pueblo,
                                               Bakersfi
                                                Great
                                                             Tuscaloo
                                                              GoFort
                                                             Orle
                                                          Greenvil
                                                      Panama
                                                        Pensacol
                                                      Daytona
                                                        Fa
                                                                    Roanoke,
                                                              Billings
                                                                   Fort
                                                                  Canton-M
                                                                      Pie
                                                                Knoxvill
                                                          LynchburBaton
                                                                 Gainesvi
                                                                  Savannah
                                                                 Greenvil
                                                                Bryan-Co
                                                                 C
                                                          Fayettev
                                                             Montgome
                                                              Chattano
                                                           Pocatell
                                                       Springfi        Eau
                                                                             Lafayett
                                                                          Louisvil
                                                                           Columbia
                                                                          Wal  Sioux
                                                                              St.
                                                                            Dayton-S
                                                                     Birmingh
                                                                          Jacksonv
                                                                          Ro
                                                                          Kalamazo
                                                                   Melbourn
                                                                Benton
                                                                  Memphis,
                                                              Tampa-St
                                                            Hickory-      La
                                                                          H Jackson,
                                                                          Toledo,    St.Lansing-
                                                                                 Reading,
                                                                          Lexingto
                                                                          TallahasClou Fa
                                                                                Huntsvil
                                                                           Elkhart-      Kansas
                                                                                  Janesvil
                                                                                  Rockford
                                                                               Wausau,
                                                                              Cross
                                                                               Champaig
                                                                           Fargo-Mo
                                                                      Dubuque,
                                                                             Clai
                                                                         Bismarck
                                                                                          DesNMoin
                                                                                         Appleton
                                                                                    Omaha,Cedar
                                                                                          Loui
                                                                                   Rocheste
                                                                              Houston-
                                                                                    Springfi
                                                                                  Kokomo,
                                                                               Peoria-P          RaC
                                        Jacksonv
                                    Yuma,  AZJohnson
                                          Ocala,      Mobile,
                                                    Fayettev
                                                 Goldsbor
                                                  Columbus
                                            LafayettLakeland
                                                 Florence
                                                   F
                                                 Albany,
                                                     Lake
                                                 Monroe,
                                                 Jonesbor
                                                  Dothan,
                                                Houma,
                                                  Parkersb
                                              Sumter,
                                               Hattiesb   LChaAugusta-
                                                          Lewiston
                                                             Glens
                                                         Scranton
                                                          Decatur,
                                                   Florence
                                                       Biloxi-G
                                                   Rocky  Charlest
                                                   Williams Erie,
                                                           Mo     Little
                                                              Grand
                                                              Casper,
                                                            Mansfiel
                                                               Lima,
                                                          Jackson,
                                                      Bangor,
                                                 Clarksvi    Owensbor
                                                            Tyler,
                                                          Youngsto
                                                           Oklahoma
                                                           San SiouxTFa
                                                              Binghamt
                                                                 Anto Saginaw-
                                                                 Jackson,
                                                                       CiR
                                                                    Pittsbur
                                                               Macon,
                                                                   PA
                                                                 Tulsa,FoGO   Fort
                                                                        Buffalo-
                                                                       Evansvil
                                                                        South   Be
                                                                         Davenpor
                                                                        OH          Way
                                                                              Wichita,
                                                                       Syracuse
                                                                             Topeka,
                          Laredo, El Paso,
                                        Huntingt
                                            Fort   Killeen-
                                              Danville
                                        AlexandrShrevepo
                                                  Smi     Amarillo
                                                     Sharon,
                                                        St.
                                                 Altoona,
                                               Lawton,
                                                Anniston
                                              Cumberla Terre
                                                    Longview
                                              Joplin,
                                            Gadsden,
                                                  Corpus
                                             Wheeling
                                               Steubenv
                                                  Jamestow
                                                   Waco,      Muncie,
                                                           Utica-Ro
                                                            Jose
                                                              Ha
                                                          Elmira,
                                                   Lubbock, C      Waterloo
                                                                Duluth-S
                                                            Victoria
                                                                   Decatur,
                                                            Sherman-
                                                            TX
                                               Texarkan
                                         Johnstow
                                              San
                                            Pine    Ange
                                                      Beaumont
                                                    Wichita
                                                   Abilene,
                                                    Odessa-M
                                                Enid,
                                                  Blu  OK
                      Brownsvi
                    McAllen-


     0
         20000                                    40000                                       60000                                 80000
                                                             Median Income 2000
  Fig. 3: Housing Value on Median Income Across MSAs - 2000



         coeff:-72.5555 se:9.3079 R2:.2321

 20000
                         Rocheste
                                                               Washingt
                         Minneapo
                             Green  Ba
                                  Cedar
                                     Des  Ra Blooming
                                          Moin          Denver-B     NashvillAtlanta,
                                                                        Raleigh-
                                       Omaha,
                                Madison,
                                      Sheboyga
                                        Lansing-  N Fort
                                              Springfi
                                                Kansas     C
                                                           Col
                                                       St.Cincinna
                                                 Indianap
                                                      New  Loui
                                                             Have                 Dallas-FAustin-S
                               Appleton
                         Wausau,      Milwauke
                                            South   Be
                                               Detroit-
                                                      Salt
                                                   Topeka, Lak Richmond Huntsvil               Houston-
                                         Lincoln,
                                           Lafayett    Colorado
                                                     Lancaste             Charlott
                                                                                Columbia
                    St. Clou Sioux Fa
                                   Rockford Elkhart-
                                                       Lawrence
                                                  Columbus
                                                  Dayton-S
                                                    Columbia    Roanoke, Memphis,
                                                                                               Jacksonv
                     Bismarck Anchorag   Peoria-P
                                          Chicago-        Evansvil
                                                       Harrisbu
                                                           Lexingto Greensbo
                                                                          Portland       Bryan-Co
                Fargo-MoEau Clai
                              WaterlooDavenpor           Wichita,
                                                    Blooming
                                                     Provo-Or
                                                Decatur,
                                                       York, Louisvil
                                                               Richland      Birmingh                             West Pal
              Grand Fo           Burlingt               BoisePACi Tulsa,Norfolk-
                                                                          O      Jackson,        Victoria
                                                                                                  Phoenix-
                                            Champaig
                                           Toledo,                  Knoxvill
                                                                Fayettev
                                         Grand
                                            Lima,
                                          Syracuse            Reno,
                                                  RaOH Philadel      NV Little RAugusta-
                                                                                      Tyler,
                                                                                          SanT Anto        Orlando,
 15000                                      Youngsto      Santa   Oklahoma
                                                                  Amarillo
                                                             Owensbor
                                                                 Fe
                                                             Charlest
                                                      Boston-W             Greenvil
                                                                        Decatur,   Macon,   G Santa Ba           Fort Mye
                                             Buffalo-           Lynchbur   Sherman-
                                               St.Cheyenne
                                              Mansfiel
                                             Muncie,
                                       Binghamt
                                            PocatellSpringfiSpringfi
                                                   Pittsbur
                                                    Jose
                                                   Spokane,
                                            Billings
                                              Scranton
                                                                    Jonesbor
                                                                       Hickory-
                                                                     Jackson,
                                                                      Chattano
                                                                                    Montgome
                                                                              Odessa-M
                                                                                 Longview
                                                                               Tuscaloo  Savannah
                                                                                             Tallahas
                                                                                        Charlest            Sarasota
                                                Terre   Ha             Bellingh
                                                                AlbuquerFlorence
                                                                        Lubbock,
                                                                          Wichita Sacramen
                                                                                   Wilmingt
                                                                                  Texarkan
                                                                                   Las    Beaumont
                                                                                        Vega
                                                                Dover,  D Smi
                                                                     Fort
                                                                   Ashevill         Killeen-
                                                                                   Waco,
                                                                                   Shrevepo
                                                                            Greenvil          Tucson,
                                                                                           Baton
                                                                                         Dothan,  Ro C
                                                                                            Pensacol
                                                                                           TX              Tampa-St
                                                Williams Pueblo,
                                                              Joplin,          Abilene,     Panama
                                                                                            Mobile,
                                           Missoula
                                               Grand    Ju      Johnson
                                                                  Enid, OK
                                                                            Goldsbor
                                                                              Anniston
                                                                                San  Ange   Lake
                                                                                      Albany,      Orle Daytona
                                                                                              NewCha                  Miami-Fo
                                                       FlagstafClarksvi  Rocky   Mo Modesto,
                                                                                  Monroe,
                                                                           Fayettev                     San Dieg
                                                                     Lawton,         Hattiesb
                                                                                 Sumter,
                                                                           Eugene-S   Alexandr
                                                                                  Jacksonv
                                        Great Fa         Yakima,                             Lafayett
                                                             Huntingt
                                                                                    Fresno, San Fran  Yuma, AZ
                                                                               El Cruc
                                                                              Las Paso,                  Los Ange
                                                                                    Visalia-

 10000
                                                                                                        Brownsvi
                                                                                                       McAllen-
                                                          New York




  5000
          0                               20                         40                                     60                        80
                                                            January Temperature
Fig. 4: Real Income on January Temperature Across MSAs - 2000




                                                                  36
          coeff:.1571 se:.0253 R2:.1432

    50


                                                     Palmdale

                                      New York
    40

                                          Chicago FontanaMoreno Vallejo
                                                                   V           Corona
                                        Jersey C                   West Cov
                                                                                          Santa Cl                    Napervil
                    Newark Philadel          Pomona  Yonkers
                                               Lancaste                  Concord
                                                                  Pembroke      Rancho C
                          Baltimor           Oakland             Hayward                                  Fremont
                                                  Ontario              San Fran
                                 Inglewoo    Washingt                              Daly  Cit
    30                               Los Ange
                                      LongBoston
                                              Bea
                                                Riversid       Mesquite
                                                            Joliet
                                                       Oceansid
                                                                         Alexandr
                                                                    Peoria                      Simi  Val
                Miami Detroit
                           San BernAtlanta
                                   Elizabet           Glendale
                                                         Anaheim
                                                       Downey
                                                     BerkeleyGarland         Coral Sp Huntingt
                                                                        Aurora               Gilbert
                                                                                              San Jose
                         Hialeah
                              El MonteHouston
                                    Stockton    GlendaleNorwalk
                                                        North
                                                 Escondid
                                                   Santa  Garden
                                                          Aurora
                                                          An
                                                         Grand  Fullerto
                                                               La  G Westmins                                 Plano
                      Gary
                                         Dallas
                                      Hollywoo        Chula
                                                Phoenix
                                                    Mesa     Vi Pr
                                                           Arlingto
                                                       Pasadena          Arvada Carrollt                  Thousand
                  Clevelan
                   New    Orle                Modesto
                                         TacomaCape
                                     Orlando              Lakewood
                                                    Las Seattle
                                                         Vega
                                                         Cor                    Sterling
                     St. Loui Bridgepo   Pasadena
                                      Fort   Wor
                                             Denver       Burbank
                                                          Charlott
                                                               Chesapea     Chandler
                                                                          Torrance
                                                                              Orange
                 Hartford     Paterson       Lowell    IrvingVirginia
                                               Lau Salinas
                                        Independ
                                         Fort
                                        Clarksvi      Warren               Scottsda
                                                                                Stamford
                   Birmingh
                        Flint
                       Pittsbur
                        Cincinna
                                Portsmou
                             Memphis
                                     San
                                  Saint
                                           Anto
                                      Sacramen
                                         PePortland
                                     Newport
                                     Clearwat
                                   Tampa               SanCambridg
                                                             Oxnard
                                                            Dieg
                                                      Honolulu
                                               Vancouve         Santa Me
                                                               Costa
                                                                        Henderso
                                                                       Ro           Livonia         Irvine
                       New   Milwauke
                              El Waterbur
                                 Paso
                              Have
                          Richmond
                             MobileWorceste Salem
                                     Lafayett
                                       Columbus
                                      Kansas     C AustinRaleigh
                                             Bakersfi             San Buen                            Sunnyval
                 Buffalo
                     Dayton
                               Fresno
                              Norfolk
                            Tucson
                           Springfi
                       Savannah
                              Kansas
                             Allentow
                              Akron      C Hampton
                                       Minneapo
                                          St.Manchest
                                     Fayettev  Paul   Colorado                     Bellevue Santa Cl
                Brownsvi  Baton Ro
                         Laredo
                     Knoxvill     Oklahoma      Durham
                                         Albuquer Tempe
                                           Greensbo
                   Providen
                        Louisvil
                             Beaumont
                          Jackson
                               Toledo
                             ChattanoFort
                                       Rockford
                                           Way
    20                    Shrevepo
                   Rocheste
                          Tallahas
                                   Lansing
                             Spokane
                             South   Corpus
                                      Winston-
                                   Montgome
                                     Be  Little
                                      Grand
                                McAllenSalt  LakC
                                                R
                                                Ra
                                     Tulsa Wichita      Ann
                                                     Fort    Arbo
                                                                        Anchorag Overland
                    Waco
                Syracuse
                          Pueblo
                             Evansvil
                           Columbia      Des
                                   Amarillo
                                                Huntsvil
                                                 Madison
                                              Omaha
                                                  Boise
                                                Reno
                                               Moin      CiCol
                         Springfi    Eugene Springfi
                                          Green
                                       Peoria
                                     Topeka    Lincoln
                                                   Ba
                                                   Cedar Ra
                              Wichita
                         ErieLubbock
                                   Provo
                                Abilene        Sioux  Fa



    10
           20                                40                     60                                         80                 100
                                                        Income (Thousands of Dollars)
 Fig. 5: Transportation Time on Median Income Across Cities - 2000

                          2000 Log Wage Residual                                                Fitted values

   2.35


                                                                        New York
                                                                                 Minneapo
                                                             Charlott                            Raleigh-
                                                                West   Pal    Atlanta,
                                                          Indianap Kansas  C              Austin-S
                                                                                           San Fran
                                              Louisvil Phoenix-Omaha,Richmond
                            Las VegaFort Way GrandSarasota             SanNDieg
                                                                    Columbus
                                                                  Albany-S
                                                              Nashvill       Colorado
                                                        St. Loui
                                                       Ra
                                                      Wichita,
    2.3                                 Lancaste
                                               Greensbo
                                             Dayton-S        SaltHonolulu
                                                      Orlando,
                                                   Norfolk-
                                               Harrisbu
                                          Allentow
                                                                  LakColumbia
                                           Toledo,
                                                Tulsa,  O BoiseAlbuquer
                                                 Melbourn
                                           Tampa-St                 Ci
                              Canton-M             Syracuse
                                                       Charlest
                                                     Birmingh
                                                       Little       Chicago-
                                                              Rocheste
                                                              R
                      Stockton
                       Lakeland           Pensacol    Spokane,
                                                   Pittsbur
                                              SanBuffalo-
                                                      Baton
                                                   Anto       Ro Jackson,
                     Modesto,
                       Youngsto                   Knoxvill
                                                    Oklahoma  Tucson,
                               Scranton       New  Orle
                                              Memphis,
                    Bakersfi
                             Fresno,




   2.25
                  McAllen-




    2.2
          10.00                           20.00                    30.00                                     40.00               50.00
                                                       % Pop. w/ Bach. Degree - 2000
Fig. 6: Average Income Residual and % Pop. w/ Bach. Degree - 2000




                                                                     37
                    dpop8000                                                       Fitted values
                  Las Vega

1



                                                                                                           Austin-S
                                        Orlando,  Phoenix-
                                               West Pal
                                                                Atlanta,
                                                                                          Raleigh-
                                       Sarasota                     Dallas-F
.5               Bakersfi
               Stockton                                         Sacramen
                                  Fresno,                               Tucson,
                                  Charlott
                              Jacksonv
                         Tampa-St                                       SanHouston-
                                                                             Dieg
                                       SanMiami-Fo
                                             Anto                     Salt   Seattle-
                                                                           Lak                       Denver-B
                                                Nashvill Los Ange
                                                               Portland
                              El Paso,
                                                                         Albuquer
                                                                             Minneapo
                       Lancaste
                        Greenvil  Greensbo
                             Augusta-
                               Grand  RaNorfolk-         Richmond Lexingto
                                                                         Columbia               Washingt
                                                                                                San Fran
                                     Charlest
                                           Knoxvill       Columbus
                                                           Oklahoma
                    Mobile,           IndianapLittle    Des  Moin
                                                       Wichita,
                                                     RKansas
                                                      Spokane,
                                                 Tulsa, O     C Baton RoJackson,
                                Memphis,
                             Corpus CCincinna
                           Lafayett                     Omaha, N
                      Allentow
                     Rockford
                      Fort Way  Harrisbu
                                    Birmingh          Chicago-New   Boston-WHonolulu
                                                                   York
             Johnson Chattano Providen Philadel
                                                 Kalamazo Rocheste HartfordLansing-
                            Louisvil St. LouiMilwauke                          New Have
                                 Shrevepo     Springfi Albany-S
                                    Detroit-New
                  Beaumont                      Orle
                                      Dayton-SSyracuse
            Canton-M             Toledo,
                                    Clevelan
0                    Saginaw- Peoria-P
     Scranton
     Huntingt                   Buffalo-
                               Davenpor
      Youngsto               Pittsbur


      10.00                         15.00                 20.00                                  25.00                30.00
                                              % Pop. w/ Bach. Degree - 1980
Fig. 7: 1980-2000 Population Growth and % Bach. Degree




                    Change in Housing Units 1980-20                                Fitted values

3




2




1




0




-1
       -2                                     0                          2                                              4
                                             Change in Population 1980-2000
Fig. 8: Change in Housing Units and Population 1980-2000



                                                          38
                                  San Fran
                     600000              San Jose
                                   New York



                                         Honolulu
                                           Santa An
                                            Oakland-
                                               Oxnard-T
                                    Bridgepo         San Dieg
2005 Housing Price




                     400000        Los Ange

                                  Nassau-S          Bethesda
                                  Cambridg
                                      Newark-U
                                     Essex Co               Washingt
                                    Boston-Q                                   Sacramen
                                              Edison Seattle-
                                                                                    Riversid
                                                  Poughkee              West Pal
                                    Providen        Fort Lau                                                          Las Vega
                                  New  Have Worceste           Lake Cou
                                                              Portland
                                        Hartford  Chicago- Fresno
                                             Baltimor                                  Sarasota
                                                                 Tacoma                                             Cape Cor
                     200000       Springfi
                                                  Wilmingt
                                              CamdenPortland        Minneapo
                                                              Salt Bakersfi
                                                                   Lak Madison PalmColorado
                                                                                                    Phoenix-
                                      Philadel       Warren-F
                                                       Virginia                       Bay              Orlando-
                                        Albany-S
                                           Milwauke Allentow           Tucson                            Atlanta-
                                                                                                        Raleigh-
                                                            RichmondTampa-St   Charlest
                                                                          Deltona-
                                                                     Albuquer        Jacksonv
                                       Clevelan                          Nashvill
                                                                      Columbus                  Austin-R
                                                                                                  Charlott
                                             Harrisbu
                                           New   Grand
                                                Orle
                                              Akron   Cincinna
                                                         Ra
                                    Detroit-
                                                St. Loui
                                                     Gary     Kansas
                                                        Knoxvill
                                                       Louisvil
                                             ToledoBirmingh    Greensbo
                                                             Greenvil  C Indianap
                                                                Columbia
                                                                 Omaha-Co
                                                                               Lakeland
                                                                             Dallas-P
                                         Dayton      Baton
                                  Scranton
                                      Rocheste
                                   Buffalo-
                                   Syracuse
                                    Pittsbur           Little Ro
                                                     Chattano
                                                       Augusta-
                                                    Oklahoma
                                                 Tulsa        RMemphis   FortHouston-
                                                                    San Anto  Wor
                                   Youngsto       Wichita   El Paso



                         0
                              0                                  .1                        .2                                    .3
                                                                 Permits 2000-5/Stock in 2000


                          Fig. 9: Correlation Between 2005 Housing Prices and New Permits 2000-2005




                                                                    39
