                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        WHAT DETERMINES THE STRUCTURE OF CORPORATE DEBT ISSUES?

                                         Brandon Julio
                                          Woojin Kim
                                        Michael Weisbach

                                       Working Paper 13706
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13706


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Determines the Structure of Corporate Debt Issues?
Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 13706
December 2007
JEL No. G30,G32

                                             ABSTRACT

Publicly-traded debt securities differ on a number of dimensions, including quality, maturity, seniority,
security, and convertibility. Finance research has provided a number of theories as to why firms should
issue debt with different features; yet, there is very little empirical work testing these theories. We
consider a sample of 14,867 debt issues in the U.S. between 1971 and 2004. Our goal is to test the
implications of these theories, and, more generally, to establish a set of stylized facts regarding the
circumstances under which firms issue different types of debt.

Our results suggest that there are three main types of factors that affect the structure of debt issues:
First, firm-specific factors such as leverage, growth opportunities and cash holdings are related with
the convertibility, maturity and security structure of issued bonds. Second, economy-wide factors,
in particular the state of the macroeconomy, affect the quality distribution of securities offered; in
particular, during recessions, firms issue fewer poor quality bonds than in good times but similar numbers
of high-quality bonds. Finally, controlling for firm characteristics and economy-wide factors, project
specific factors appear to influence the types of securities that are issued. Consistent with commonly
stated 'maturity-matching' arguments, long-term, nonconvertible bonds are more likely to be issued
by firms investing in fixed assets, while convertible and short-term bonds are more likely to finance
investment in R&D.


Brandon Julio                                       Michael Weisbach
London Business School                              University Of Illinois
Regent's Park                                       340 Wohlers Hall
London NW1 4SA                                      1206 S. Sixth Street
United Kingdom                                      Champaign, IL 61820
bjulio@london.edu                                   and NBER
                                                    weisbach@uiuc.edu
Woojin Kim
Korea University Business School
Anam-Dong, Seongbuk-Gu,
Seoul 136-701
South Korea
woojinkim@korea.ac.kr
        Firms face a complex menu of choices when making financing decisions. Managers must decide

whether to finance investment projects with retained earnings, outside equity, or one of many possible types of

debt. Prior research related to the choice of financing has focused mostly on the broad choice between debt

and equity in general such as theories based on optimal leverage ratios, asymmetric information, and market

timing. However, firms most often use debt rather than equity to finance projects; Bolton and Scharfstein

(1996) observe that from 1946 to 1987, 85 percent of total U.S. external financing was raised through debt

offerings, compared to only 7 percent through equity offerings. Therefore, to understand how firms finance

investments, the choice between alternative types of debt financing is likely to be equally, or even more

important than the choice between equity and debt.

        Debt contracts differ on a number of dimensions, including maturity, security, seniority, covenants, and

different types of embedded options such as convertible features and call options. These features vary both

across different firms’ debt issues and over time within the same firm’s issues, even when institutions,

regulations, taxation, and market conditions remain relatively constant. While there are many theories

discussing the possible reasons why firms structure debt in particular ways, there has been surprisingly little

empirical work testing the implications of these theories.

        This paper attempts to fill this void, by empirically investigating the structure of public debt financing.

We rely on the Mergent database, which provides detailed information on the bond contracts of 14,867

publicly-traded U.S. debt issues between 1971 and 2004. We focus on five specific characteristics of bond

contracts: convertibility, maturity, security, callability, and credit quality. In doing so, we have two main goals.

First, we hope to establish a set of stylized facts on the use of various types of bonds by U.S. corporations over

time. Second, we wish to test the predictions of theories that provide explanations for why firms will use

alternative types of public debt.

        The explanations we focus on for observed differences in debt contracts fall into three categories.

First, corporate finance theory has argued that certain firm characteristics are likely to affect the structure of

debt contracts. In particular, a firm’s size, the nature of its growth options, as well as its cash flows and cash

holdings are all potential determinants of the type of features included in a bond contract. In addition, the state


                                                          2
of the macroeconomy can also influence the characteristics of observed debt offerings. Financial constraints

are likely to be exacerbated during a recession, limiting firms’ ability to issue anything but the highest quality

debt. Finally, holding firm characteristics and economic conditions constant, firms also potentially issue

different types of debt over time as a function of the type of project the debt is used to finance. Thus, theory

suggests that the properties of debt issues should be a function of firm-level, economy-level, and project-level

factors.

           We first summarize the various characteristics of public debt issues, and document how they have

changed over time. The overall quantity of public debt issues has increased dramatically in recent years. The

$2 trillion issued in the 2000-2004 period represents almost a six-fold increase in total issuance relative to the

sub-period beginning only ten years earlier, 1990 to 1994. In addition, recent debt issues have become shorter-

term, more likely to be convertible, and less likely to be callable than they were in the 1971-1984 period.

           The main focus of the paper is on the factors that lead firms to use alternative kinds of debt. We first

perform univariate comparisons of the characteristics of firms issuing different kinds of debt. These

comparisons are suggestive, but do not control for other factors that are correlated with both the issuance’s type

and firm-level factors. We therefore use a multivariate approach to estimate the marginal effect of firm

characteristics on security choice. This problem is complicated by the fact that firms can choose when and

whether to issue a security at all, and by the fact that they can substitute for some security features with other

characteristics. Because of these statistical issues, we use a probit model with an explicit correction for

selection bias. The results are largely consistent with the univariate specification. Thus, we are relatively

confident that our conclusions come from the actual economics of security choice rather than from econometric

mismeasurement.

           Finally, we consider the possibility that funds raised from different kinds of debt are used for different

purposes. To do so, we estimate equations similar to those in Kim and Weisbach (2007), which predict the

uses of an incremental dollar raised from different sources. We estimate these equations for different kinds of

debt, and find that capital from different kinds of debt does in fact get used for different purposes, even when

we control for other firm characteristics by including firm fixed effects in the equation.


                                                           3
        Overall, our results suggest a number of factors that affect the structure of debt securities. Firms

issuing convertible debt tend to be smaller, and have higher growth opportunities than firms issuing

nonconvertible debt. In addition, firms issuing convertible debt are more likely to use the proceeds for R&D

and less likely to use them for capital expenditures than firms issuing nonconvertible debt. This pattern is

consistent with the arguments of Stein (1992) and Mayers (1998), suggesting that convertible debt is somewhat

‘equity-like’, in that it is preferable for financing projects with embedded real options, particularly in situations

in which asymmetric information is likely to be severe. Finally, when we control for firm characteristics, we

find that convertible bonds are more likely to be issued in a recession than in an economic boom.

        The maturity of the debt issue is also an important consideration in the choice of security. A

commonly stated argument by practitioners is that firms should ‘match maturities’ of the security it issues with

the investment it finances. Our results do support this finding, in that short-maturity debt is more likely to be

used to finance R&D, while long-maturity debt is more likely to finance capital expenditures. In addition,

consistent with the Diamond (1991) liquidity risk arguments, short-term issuers are more likely to be larger,

have lower fixed asset ratios, stronger growth opportunities, and hold more cash than otherwise similar issuers

of long-term debt.

        Another choice firms face when they issue debt is whether the debt should be secured or unsecured.

Theoretically, it is not clear what kinds of firms we should observe using secured debt. It is possible that they

could be high quality firms seeking to avoid investment inefficiencies associated with unsecured debt, as

argued by Smith and Warner (1979), Stulz and Johnson (1985), and Berkovich and Kim (1990). Alternatively,

as emphasized in the banking literature (Berger and Udell (1990)), secured debt could be primarily used by

low-quality firms who cannot otherwise raise capital without providing security. Our results are consistent

with the arguments from the banking literature. Firms that issue secured debt tend to be much more highly

levered than firms issuing unsecured debt. In addition, firms tend to issue secured debt after periods of low

cash flows and poor stock performance.

        Debt contracts often contain imbedded options, the most common of which are call provisions. One

advantage of callability is to provide a natural hedge against interest rate risk, since firms can redeem them at


                                                          4
prespecified prices if interest rates fall. In addition, the corporate finance literature has argued that one

potential motive for issuing callable debt is to minimize potential underinvestment or overinvestment

distortions arising from the agency costs of debt. Our evidence is consistent with the interest rate hedging view,

as callable bonds are more likely to be issued during periods of high interest rate volatility by firms most likely

to find hedging motives useful. In contrast, we do not find support for the agency cost of debt explanations for

call provisions; firms issuing callable bonds do not appear to have higher growth opportunities than firms

issuing non-callable bonds.

        We finally consider the bond’s quality, measured by its rating. Not surprisingly, firms issuing higher-

rated debt tend to be larger, with higher cash flow and market to book, and with lower stock price volatility

than firms issuing lower quality debt. Perhaps more surprisingly, firms issuing higher-quality debt hold less

cash and are more likely to issue in bad economic times compared to firms issuing lower quality debt. This

pattern is consistent with the ‘financial constraints’ view, in which potential financial constraints induce firms

to hold a more liquid balance sheet and lower quality firms are shut out from the capital markets during

recessions.

         The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section I summarizes some related literature and

develops the main hypotheses to be tested. Section II describes the data employed in this paper and reports

summary statistics. Section III presents univariate results linking debt characteristics to firm characteristics,

macroeconomic conditions and different uses of funds. Section IV presents our multivariate analysis of debt

structure choice. Section V examines the determinants of credit quality and section VI reports the effect of

debt type on post issuance investment expenditures. Section VII concludes.



I. Hypothesis Development and Related Literature

        The literature related to financing choices is vast. We focus here on prior research dealing with the

specifics of debt contract design. This literature can be classified into two broad groups. The first strand of

literature focuses on the demand side as a determinant of debt contract design. This research has focused

mainly on firm characteristics, such as size, growth opportunities, degree of asymmetric information, and firm


                                                          5
risk as the primary determinants in the choice of financing. The second and more recent strand of literature

focuses on the supply of debt financing as a factor in financing choice. We briefly review here some of the

relevant literature on debt financing from both the demand and supply sides. The first three subsections briefly

summarize literature on how firm characteristics determine the maturity, seniority and exchangeability features

of debt contracts. The last subsection discusses some papers on the impact of credit supply and

macroeconomic conditions on debt financing.

A. Maturity Structure

          Myers (1977) originally proposed that risky debt can induce suboptimal investment incentives when a

firm has valuable growth options. Managers acting in behalf of shareholders will not exercise valuable growth

options if the returns to investment accrue primarily to risky debt holders. Myers argues that one way to avoid

this underinvestment incentive is to issue short-term debt that matures prior to the exercise of growth options.

The empirical prediction coming from this argument is that firms with high growth opportunities will tend to

use shorter-term debt than firm whose value is made up primarily of fixed assets.

          Flannery (1986) argues that the debt maturity choice can signal inside information about firm quality to

outside investors when insiders are better informed. In the presence of transaction costs, lower-quality firms

will tend to avoid short-term debt because they cannot afford the costs of frequently rolling over their debt.

Diamond (1991) also presents a model of debt maturity based on private information. In his model, short-term

debt exposes a firm to liquidity risk and loss of control rents. The main empirical prediction of Diamond (1991)

is that borrowers with a low credit rating have no choice but to borrow short-term via private placements and

banks. Firms with intermediate credit quality will borrow long-term publicly traded debt because they face

relatively high liquidity risks. Firms with high credit quality will be issuers of short-term debt, such as

commercial paper. Thus, the theory predicts that firms with very high or very low credit will borrow short term

(with different contracts), with long-term debt being issued by firms with credit quality somewhere in the

middle.

          Myers (1977), Diamond (1991) and Hart and Moore (1994) suggest that the maturity of debt will

match the timing of cash flow from assets. In the case of Myers (1977), this helps alleviate the


                                                         6
underinvestment incentive, while in Diamond (1991) it helps mitigate risk of inefficient liquidation. The

matching of debt maturity to that of assets in the Hart and Moore model comes from the threat of the

entrepreneur to withdraw his human capital from the financed project. This ‘matching maturity principle’

predicts that debt maturity will be directly correlated with asset maturity. Thus, we expect that investment in

long-term tangible assets will be financed primarily with long-term debt, while R&D and other short-term

investments will be financed with short-term debt securities.

        Several papers have studied the relation between debt maturity and firm characteristics empirically.

Barclay and Smith (1995b) and Stohs and Mauer (1996) find that larger, less risky firms tend to have debt with

longer maturity. Using a proxy for asset maturity, they also find that firms with longer asset maturity tend to

have longer debt maturity, consistent with the notion that firms match the maturities of their assets and

liabilities. These papers find mixed support for the hypothesis that debt maturity is inversely related to growth

opportunities. Guedes and Opler (1996) find that larger firms with investment grade credit tend to borrow at

both the long and short term of the maturity spectrum, while risky firms tend to issue debt with more

intermediate maturities. This finding is consistent with Diamond’s (1991) prediction that risky firms do not

issue short term debt because of the risk of inefficient liquidation.

B. Seniority/Security Structure

        Debt contracts also differ by levels of seniority or priority. At the bottom of the priority ladder is

common stock, which as a residual claim is paid only when all other claimants have been paid in full. Above

common stock is preferred stock, then subordinated debt, then ordinary debt, and finally secured debt.

Theoretically, Stulz and Johnson (1985) argued that issuing secured debt allows a firm to undertake some

projects that would be rejected if financed by equity or other form of debt. Berkovitch and Kim (1990) show

that the issuance of secured debt can decrease underinvestment, but increase overinvestment. Smith and

Warner (1979) argue that including higher seniority provisions in the debt contract limits the firm’s ability to

engage in asset substitution. The empirical prediction of these models is that highly indebted firms with

relatively good growth options are more likely to have a large proportion of senior claims in their capital

structures.


                                                          7
         In contrast, Berger and Udell (1990) argue that firms issue more senior/secured debt in situations in

which the firm is not doing well and providing seniority is the only way in which they are able to issue the

securities. Their argument implies that firms issuing secured debt should be relatively poor performers and

have low growth options. Barclay and Smith (1995a) examine this issue empirically and find results largely

consistent with the agency cost view.

C. Exchangeability

         Another dimension upon which debt contracts differ is the degree to which the issue can be exchanged

or converted for a different security. These bonds are typically associated with an option given either to the

issuer or bondholder to exchange the debt for another security. For example, callable debt gives the issuer the

option to exchange cash for the outstanding debt at a pre-specified price. Convertible debt gives the

bondholder the option to convert a bond into a certain number of common shares at a pre-specified conversion

ratio. Putable debt gives the bondholder the option to sell the bond back to the issuer. The literature has

argued that these exchangeability features of debt mitigate information asymmetries with convertible debt

(Stein 1992) and agency costs with callable debt (Barnea, Haugen and Senbet (1980)). Guntay, Prabhala and

Unal (2002) suggest that callable debt can be used to hedge against interest rate risk. In addition, convertibility

can lead to more efficient investment in situations in which a substantial fraction of a firm’s investment is in

the form of future investment options (Mayers 1998).

D. Macroeconomic Conditions and Financial Constraints

         Some of the more recent work in capital structure choice has focused on the supply of credit as a

determinant of firms’ observed capital structures, arguing that frictions in the credit markets limit the ability of

firms to achieve their desired level of debt, particularly during periods of recession in the economy.

Faulkender and Petersen (2006) show that firms which have access to debt markets, proxied by whether a firm

has a credit rating, have significantly more leverage than firms without credit ratings. 1 Korajczyk and Levy



1
  In a related paper, Sufi (2007) finds that the introduction of syndicated bank loan ratings in 1995 leads firms to increase
their use of syndicated debt, and ultimately increase investment and acquisitions financed with this debt. Leary (2007)
studies the emergence of the CD market in 1961 (credit expansion) and the 1966 credit crunch (credit contraction) and


                                                              8
(2003) argue that the issuing decision of firms is affected by their access to capital and the state of the economy,

and find evidence supporting this view. Lamont (1995) suggests another channel through which financial

constraints can become exacerbated during times of recession. As the economy moves into a recession, debt

overhang becomes more binding as growth options tend to diminish and agency costs may hinder access to

financing for firms with higher probabilities of default.



II. Data Sources and Sample Description

A. Data Sources

         We obtain data on public debt issues in the United States from the 2005 version of the Mergent Fixed

Income Securities Database (FISD). This database provides comprehensive information for US corporate debt,

including characteristics such as seniority, maturity and convertibility as well as total proceeds raised.

Macroeconomic data are obtained from two sources. Recession/expansion dates are from the National Bureau

of Economic Research (NBER) and GDP growth rates are obtained from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis

(BEA).

         We obtain financial information on the issuing firms by matching each issue with its corresponding

firm in Compustat based on fiscal year ends and keep only those with accounting information available before

and after the issue date. Accounting variables, with the exception of total assets, are winsorized at the 1% and

99% of the sample distribution for each variable. Since cash flow statement items are available in Compustat

only after 1971, we set our sample period to start from then. In addition, we eliminate all debt issues from

financial firms (SIC 6000-6999). After applying these filters, we end up with 14,867 debt issues, each

occurring between 1971 and 2004.

B. Characteristics of Total Debt Issues over Time

         Table I presents descriptive statistics of our public debt issuance sample. To provide a rough idea of

the time-series variation in the design of debt contracts, we divide the sample into five sub-periods. For each


finds that the leverage ratios of bank-dependent firms increase following the expansion and decrease following the
contraction.


                                                            9
sub-period, we report the number of issues (Panel A) and value of the proceeds raised (Panel B) for all issued

bonds, as well as by each type of issue, sorted by convertibility, initial maturity, security, callability, and credit

rating. The overall pattern shows an increasing trend in the use of publicly traded bonds over time. Our

sample contains 947 total debt issues over the 1971 to 1984 sub-period, compared to 4,498 total issues in the

much shorter 2000 to 2004 sub-period. The total proceeds raised over the sample period was $3.66 trillion,

with just over 80% of that total amount raised since 1995. Overall, our sample firms raised on average $246

million per each debt issue throughout the sample period, with a corresponding median value of $125 million.

As a comparison, the magnitudes of debt issues are somewhat larger than average amount raised through

seasoned equity offerings. 2

        To verify that the trends reported above are material and not simply reflect the growth in the overall

economy, we report in panels C and D the number of issues and the total proceeds raised scaled by number of

firms in Compustat and total liabilities of firms in Compustat, respectively. The results indicate that the growth

in public debt market is still pronounced even after controlling for the growth in the overall economy.

C. Debt Issues by Type and Quality

        Public debt issues vary along a number of dimensions, including convertibility, maturity, security level,

callability, and other features. Table I also summarizes the use of these various features over time. There has

been an upward trend in the use of convertible bonds over time, both in terms of the proportion of total bonds

issued and the proportion of proceeds raised. Panel A demonstrates that while about 9% of total bonds (5% of

the proceeds) issued during 1971 to 1984 were convertible, 24% of total bonds (19% of the proceeds) issued

between 2000 and 2004 were convertible. A similar trend emerges in the use of short-term debt over time. If

we define an issue as short-term when it has an initial maturity of five years or fewer, none of the issues in our

sample were classified as short-term in the 1971 to 1984 sub-period. Using this definition, the proportion of

total issued debt classified as short term increased rapidly, reaching 30% of all issues and 39% of total proceeds




2
 The mean and median proceeds raised between 1990 and 2003 through seasoned equity offerings in the US are $100.3
million and $45.5 million, respectively, according to Thomson Financial’s SDC New Issues database.


                                                          10
raised by the 2000 to 2004 sub-period. 3 To ensure that the lack of short-term bonds during the 1971 to 1984

period is not a data issue, we consult the SDC database and find similar patterns in the issuance of short-term

debt over the sample period.

         Table I also demonstrates that the vast majority of public debt issues are unsecured. Secured debt

makes up only 3% of total issued bonds and 2% of the proceeds in our sample. These proportions have

remained relatively stable over time. In contrast, callable debt is much more common. However, the incidence

of callability varies substantially over the sample period. During the 1971 to 1984 period, 83% of all issued

bonds were callable. This figure dropped to 28% of issued bonds during 1990 to 1994. The most recent sub-

period, 2000 to 2004, has seen a resurgence in the popularity of callable bonds, with these bonds making up

73% of total issues and 56% of total proceeds raised.

         The last five columns of Table I summarize the number of issues and proceeds raised by bonds of

various credit quality. 4 We group bonds into five different quality categories: non-rated bonds, C-rated bonds,

speculative B-rated bonds (Moody’s B3 to Ba1 ratings), investment grade B-rated bonds (Moody’s Baa3 to

Baa1 ratings), and A-rated bonds. Compared to the variation of bond types issued over time, the distribution of

credit quality seems relatively stable over each of the five sub-periods. There has been a slight upward trend in

the use of speculative and non-rated bonds over the sample period. Approximately 40% or all issued bonds and

29% of total proceeds raised were from speculative and non-rated bonds in the 1971 to 1984 sub-period.

During 2000 to 2004, these bonds made up 55% of total issued bonds and 40% of total proceeds raised through

public debt financing.

         Table II provides cross-tabulations of debt issue type for all issues during the sample period to examine

patterns in the bivariate distribution of debt issues. The table provides observed two-way frequencies,

percentages, and the expected frequency of bonds in each category we should observe if the two classifications

were independent of each other. Looking first at convertibility and maturity, we see that of the 12,817 straight


3
  The typical classification of short-term vs. long-term debt is different for publicly traded bonds. For bank debt, contracts
with less than one year to maturity are usually classified as short-term. For publicly traded debt, the short-term cutoff is
typically considered to be five years or fewer.
4
  Credit ratings are based on Moody’s.


                                                             11
debt issues, 20.7% are short-term and 79.3% are long-term. Among the convertibles, 18.4% of the bonds are

classified as short term. A chi-square test of independence between maturity and convertibility rejects the

assumption that maturity and convertibility are unrelated. Specifically, convertible bonds are more likely than

nonconvertible bonds to have initial maturities of more than five years.

        Convertibility and security level also appear to be correlated, as only four secured bonds in our sample

are also convertible. Thus, almost all secured debt issues are straight debt, which seems plausible, since

holders of secured, convertible debt would lose their security upon conversion. However, there does not appear

to be a significant relationship between security level and initial maturity, as the initial maturity of secured

bonds appears to have a similar distribution to that of unsecured bonds. In terms of callability, secured bonds

appear to be more likely to have a callable feature than unsecured bonds. Slightly more than 80% of the

secured bonds in our sample are also callable, compared to 57.3% of the unsecured issues.

        One possibly surprising finding is that only 80.8% of convertible bonds in the sample have a callable

feature. Convertible bonds are, nonetheless, much more likely to be callable than straight debt issues. In

addition, there is a negative relation between initial maturity and callability. The observed frequency of short-

term, callable bonds is much lower than that expected if the two categories were independent; 820 of the short-

term debt issues are callable, while the expected frequency in this category under independence is 1,750.



III. Univariate Analysis

A Firm Characteristics and Debt Structure

        For many reasons, different types of firms tend to issue different types of debt. Table III provides

summary statistics for different firm characteristics by type of bond issued to examine how firms differ by size,

growth opportunities and financial condition at the time of issuance for various types of bonds.

        Since 40% of the firm-fiscal year pairs in the sample have more than one issue during a fiscal year, we

assign a given firm-year to a certain type of bond as follows: We define a given firm-fiscal year as convertible

if there is at least one convertible bond issued during that year. Out of all firm-years classified as convertibles,

65% had only one issue during that year and 22% had more than one issue where all of them were


                                                         12
convertibles. 5 For maturities, we take the weighted average of the initial maturities of all debt issues during

that year where the weights are the proceeds raised through each issue. Firm-years with aggregated maturity of

less than or equal to 5 years are classified as short term. For the purposes of defining secured debt, we first

recode the FISD’s codes into numeric codes as follows: subordinate or no classification as 1, junior subordinate

as 2, senior subordinate as 3, senior as 4, and senior secured as 5. We take the proceeds-weighted average of

the security level and define firm-years with aggregate security level of greater than 4 as secured.

         Panel A reports firm characteristics across the various types of debt issues offered in our sample. The

first column compares firm-years in which any type of debt was offered to firm-years in which debt was not

issued for all firms that had at least one public debt issue during the sample period. Firms tend to be larger,

have more growth opportunities and better financial performance leading up to the debt issue. For this sample

of issuing firms, the average annual stock return for the year just prior to the debt issuance is 26.4%, compared

to 19.7% for non-issuing firm-years. 6 Stock return volatility is slightly less prior to issuing years and equity

issuance tends to be lower in years when firms issue debt.

         The remaining columns in Panel A summarize differences in firm characteristics across different debt

structures. Convertible issuers tend to be smaller, high growth firms with lower leverage ratios and lower fixed

asset ratios compared with straight-debt issuers. Convertible issuers also tend to issue after periods of high

stock returns and high return volatility. They are also likely to issue equity during the same year. Firms

issuing short-term debt appear to be systematically different from firms that issue long-term debt. Short-term

issuers tend to be larger, have greater growth opportunities, and hold more cash on their balance sheets. This

pattern is consistent with Myers (1977) in that firms with more growth opportunities are more likely to choose

short-term debt to avoid potential underinvestment problems.




5
  Since the percentage of convertible firm-years that is mixed with straight debt issues is only 13% of the sample, we
expect the noise from these observations to be minimal.
6
  Prior stock returns in this sample of firms are higher than the long-term average of typical stocks for two reasons. First,
Table III summarizes characteristics only for firms that have issued public debt and firms tend to issue after periods of
good returns. Second, a large proportion of the debt issues in the sample were issued between the 1996 to 2001 time
period when the stock market in general had unusually high returns.


                                                             13
        Firms issuing secured debt appear to be relatively financially distressed. These firms are smaller and

have an average leverage to total capital ratio of 0.81. They also have relatively weak cash flows leading up to

issuance compared with non-secured issuers. These comparisons are consistent with the idea that debt

investors require more security when lending to financially distressed borrowers. Callable debt issuers appear

to be similar to issuers of non-callable debt in general. Callable issuers are slightly smaller, have higher cash

balances, and have experienced higher stock returns in the year prior to debt issuance than non-callable issuers.

        Panel B of Table III reports mean firm characteristics by credit quality of the issued bonds. We divide

the bonds into five categories according to their ratings: non-rated, C-rated bonds, speculative B-rated bonds,

investment grade B-rated bonds, and A-rated bonds. Some clear patterns emerge from Panel B. First, there is a

monotonic relationship between firm size and credit rating. Highly rated firms tend to be significantly larger

than firms with high-yield ratings. They also tend to have more collateral, measured by the ratio of fixed assets

to total assets. High-rated issuers have strong cash flows and lower stock return volatility compared to lower

rated issuers. A consistent pattern is that firms issuing investment grade bonds have significantly lower cash

holdings as a proportion of total assets than do the issuers of junk bonds. While the direct effect of cash

holdings should be to increase credit quality by enhancing the amount and liquidity of collateral to the

bondholders, an indirect effect appears to be more important: More financially constrained firms hold more

cash to mitigate these constraints, as suggested by Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004, 2007). These

constraints also cause firms to have lower bond ratings, leading to a correlation between cash holdings and

bond ratings.

B. Macroeconomic Conditions and Debt Structure

        One of the goals of this paper is to determine whether macroeconomic conditions have any effect on

the design of public debt issues. As a first pass at this issue, we consider how the relative share of total debt

issuance by various bond types changes over the business cycle. We classify economic conditions in two

separate ways. The first is based on annual growth rates in US GDP. ‘Low Growth’ years are defined as years

in which the GDP growth rate was less than 2%. ‘Medium Growth’ years are those with GDP growth between

2% and 3.5%, while ‘High Growth’ years are those with growth larger than 3.5%. As a second classification,


                                                         14
we rely on the NBER business cycle dating, using the NBER measure of when the economy is in a recession or

expansion.

        Table IV reports the proportion of total bond issuance made up of various types of bonds over different

economic conditions. Convertible bonds are relatively more likely to be issued during times of slow economic

growth or recessions. During high growth periods, 7.7% of total issuances came from convertibles, increasing

to 11.7% during low growth periods. A stronger pattern emerges for the issuance of short-term debt: 9% of all

bonds issued during high growth periods were short term, compared to 22.2% during low growth periods.

There is a similar pattern if we do the comparison using the NBER-defined recessions as our measure of

economic activity.

        The strongest correlations between economic conditions and bond types are found in the variation in

credit quality across economic conditions. Investment grade bonds make up 44.1% of all issuance during high-

growth years, increasing to 68.9% of the total during low growth periods. The results are similar if we look at

the NBER expansion/recession classifications. Junk and non-rated bonds account for 51.6% of total debt

issuance during economic expansions but only 33.7% of total issuance during recessions. This pattern is

consistent with the idea that perhaps financial constraints are exacerbated during economic recessions, leaving

only the highest quality firms with access to public debt markets as suggested by Korajczyk and Levy (2003)

and Lamont (1995).

        Figure 1 illustrates this pattern in debt issuance. The vertical axis measures the natural logarithm of

proceeds raised (in $US millions) for each year from 1971 to 2004. Time periods classified as a recession are

noted on the chart. This figure illustrates the overall upward trend in the use of public debt financing in all

levels of credit quality. It also points out the differential impact of a recession on different types of issues. The

quantity of capital raised by low-rated and non-rated debt issues drops significantly during recession periods,

while highly-rated bonds remain relatively constant through a recession or even rise in the case of the 1989-

1991 recession. It also appears that the volatility of proceeds raised over time is higher for lower-rated bonds

than for highly-rated bonds.




                                                         15
C. Univariate Analysis of Post-Issuance Changes in Accounting Variables

        Presumably, there are a number of reasons why firms differ in the type of debt securities they offer.

We have seen that bond structures are correlated with certain firm characteristics and overall economic

conditions. In addition, we consider the hypothesis that the type of debt issued depends on how the funds are

expected to be used.    Specifically, we conjecture that more equity-like debt such as convertibles and short

term debt are more likely to be used for intangible investment such as R&D whereas less equity like debt such

as secured debt are more likely to be used to finance tangible investment such as CAPEX.

        A difficulty in testing whether the expected uses of funds matter for debt design is that we cannot

directly observe management’s investment plans at the time of issuance. While firms typically are required to

disclose the purpose for the debt issue in the prospectus, the description of ‘general purpose’ is most common

and does not help us identify whether the firm is going to invest in physical assets or R&D. We proxy for the

intended uses of funds from a debt issue by estimating the actual uses of the funds raised in the issue during the

two years following the debt issue. This approach presumes that the realized post-issuance expenditures reflect

management’s investment plans prior to issuance.

        To minimize the impact of outliers, we focus on a logarithmic transformation of CAPEX and R&D.

Since these are flow variables, we consider the log of one plus the accumulation in each variable since the

issue, normalized by total assets prior to the issue: ln[(∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] , where V is the variable

being measured, and years are normalized so that year 0 is the fiscal year end just prior to the issue and year t

denotes number of years after year 0. 7 As a consequence of this transformation, the resulting distribution of

each variable is more symmetric than it is without the transformation.

        Table V reports the means and medians of this normalized increase for capital expenditures and R&D,

broken down by debt issue type. Also included are t-statistics for comparisons of means between the various

types of debt issues in the sample, as well as Mann-Whitney z-statistics for comparing medians. The first row


7
  R&D values are often missing in Compustat. As is typical in the previous literature, we assume that firms that do not
report values for R&D actually do small quantities of R&D in their firms, so we replaced missing R&D values with zeros.
We have repeated the subsequent analysis treating these values as missing, and found very similar results.


                                                          16
compares changes in capital expenditures and R&D over the two years after issuance for issuing firm-years

compared to non-issuing firm years. Capital expenditures are higher following a debt issue, but expenditures

on R&D tend to be higher when debt is not issued, suggesting that a substantial quantity of R&D may be

financed by equity or retained earnings.

        The remainder of Table V compares post-issuance capital expenditures and R&D expenses for

different types of debt issues. Consistent with the uses of funds hypothesis, R&D expenditures are significantly

higher for firms issuing convertibles relative to firms issuing straight debt. Capital expenditures are higher

after long-term debt issuance, while R&D expenditures are higher following short-term issues. Post-issuance

R&D expenditures for secured debt issuers are significantly lower than those following unsecured issues.

Capital expenditures are slightly higher following callable issues, but R&D expenses are statistically

indistinguishable between callable and non-callable debt. Lower-rated firms tend to have higher levels of

capital expenditures than highly rated firms. Finally, post-issuance R&D expenses appear to be similar across

the credit ratings spectrum with the notable exception of non-rated issues, which have significantly higher post-

issuance R&D than the others.



IV. Multivariate Analysis of Changes in Accounting Variables across Debt Issue Types

        The univariate results are suggestive of the hypothesis that firm and project characteristics as well as

macroeconomic conditions help explain the design of debt contracts. We now utilize a multivariate approach

that permits us to examine the effect of these potential factors.

A. Specification

        We employ multivariate discrete-choice models to estimate the impact of various firm and economic

characteristics on the choice of securities offered. The econometric modeling is complicated by the fact that

when they issue debt, firms are making a number of decisions simultaneously. First, the firm decides whether

or not to issue a debt security in a given year. Then, given the decision to issue a corporate bond, the firm

decides how to structure the issue in terms of maturity, convertibility, security, and callability. Because of this

issue, when we estimate the probability of using a particular type of debt, we explicitly model the probability of


                                                         17
issuing that type given that the firm has chosen to issue debt that year. The general specification for our

analysis has the form:

         Pr(Y = j | Debt Issue) = F (Firm Characteristicsit , Economyt )                                  (1)

        where j = 0, 1, 2,… indicates the type of debt being issued, F is a cumulative distribution function,

whose arguments consist of current firm characteristics and economic conditions at the time of issuance. Firm

characteristics include firm size, leverage, market-to-book ratio, fixed asset ratio, cash flow, and cash holdings

scaled by total assets. We also control for the net issuance of equity, since other sources of funds may enter the

firm during the same year as the debt issuance. Economic conditions are captured by a recession dummy

variable that takes the value of one during any time period designated by the NBER as being in a recession.

Year effects are added to control for year-specific characteristics such as the general level of interest rates in

the economy. We also include a measure of the slope of the yield curve, measured as the difference between

the yield on 10-year maturity treasury bonds and the yield on 1-year maturity treasury bonds. The variability

in interest rates is measured as the monthly standard deviation of yields on 1-year maturity treasury bonds over

a given year. Industry effects are included in most specifications. All firm variables, except the dummy

variables, are standardized to have zero mean and unit variance. As such, the estimated marginal effects will

reflect expected changes in the probability of choosing one type of debt over the other given a one standard

deviation change in the particular explanatory variable. The estimates for the recession dummy variable

represent the change in predicted probabilities if the economy goes from an expansion to a recession. Only

firm age, slope of the yield curve, and interest rate volatility remain in their original units.

        We estimate equation (1) using a probit model with an explicit correction for selection. This method

assumes that the underlying relation between debt structure and various explanatory variables is:

                                                     y j = x j β + ε1 j ,

where yj indexes various debt features. However, yj is only observed if the firm chooses to issue a corporate

bond. A selection equation is specified in which the firm first chooses whether or not to issue a corporate bond.

The selection equation is generally specified such that a firm chooses to issue a bond if



                                                          18
                                                        z j γ + ε 2 j > 0,

where ε 1 ~ N (0, σ ) and ε 2 ~ N (0,1) , with corr (ε 1 , ε 2 ) = ρ .       The two equations are estimated jointly by

maximum likelihood. 8

B. Convertibility

         The first two columns of Table VI present the estimation results for the choice between convertible and

straight debt. These results confirm that convertible issuers tend to be smaller firms with relatively low

leverage ratios. Convertibles tend to be issued by firms with high market-to-book ratios, consistent with the

idea that growth firms tend to choose convertible bonds to help avoid potential agency conflicts between

bondholders and shareholders. These results are also consistent with the predictions of Stein’s (1992) model of

‘back-door’ equity financing, in which relatively smaller firms issue convertibles to minimize the information-

induced pricing impact from issuing equity.

         Controlling for firm characteristics, high prior stock returns do not significantly increase the probability

of issuing a convertible bond. This finding is counter to the common argument that convertible bond issuance

follows a market-timing pattern similar to that in equity issues. Unconditionally, firms tend to issue convertible

debt after periods of high returns. However, once we condition on the issuance of some kind of public debt

issue, prior returns do not have significant predictive power in explaining the choice between convertible and

straight debt in the our sample.

         Conditional on the decision to issue debt, firms are more likely to issue convertible debt during times

of recession. The occurrence of a recession increases the predicted probability that a firm will choose a

convertible issue by almost 17%, controlling for firm characteristics.

         The second column in Table VI presents the marginal effects when we include a measure of the slope

of the yield curve, as defined by the difference between the yield on 10-year and 1-year treasury securities

during the year of the issue. Including this year-specific variable requires us to omit the year fixed-effects that

8
 For more details on this estimation procedure, see Greene (2002) pages 930-933. In an earlier draft, we have also
estimated equation (1) using a multinomial logit approach, as well as a conditional logit that include firm fixed effects.
The results using these alternative approaches are similar to those discussed below, and they are available from the authors
on request.


                                                            19
were included in the first specification. We find some evidence that firms are more likely to issue convertibles

when the yield curve is upward sloping. Specifically, an increase of 1% (100 basis points) in the slope of the

yield curve increases the expected probability of issuing a convertible by 10.4%.

C. Maturity

        The third and fourth columns of Table VI report the estimates for the choice between short- and long-

term debt issues. Consistent with the Diamond (1991) liquidity risk arguments, we find that short-term debt

issuers tend to be larger, have lower debt levels, stronger growth opportunities, and more cash on the balance

sheet than firms that choose to issue long-term debt. The large effect of growth opportunities, as measured by

the market-to-book ratio, is also consistent with Myers (1977) and Barnea, Haugen and Senbet (1980), in which

firms with better growth opportunities issue on shorter term maturities to help minimize potential agency

conflicts. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in the market-to-book ratio increases the predicted

probability of a short-term issue by 3.1%. The results are also largely consistent with Flannery (1986) in that

short-term debt issuers seem to be of better quality than long-term debt issuers. In terms of economic

conditions, we find that firms are more likely to issue short-term debt during a recession. The model predicts

that a recession increases the probability that a firm issues a short-term bond by 4.9%.

        The fourth column of Table VI reports results that include a measure of the slope of the yield curve

(and hence necessarily omit the year effects). These estimates suggest that firms are less likely to issue on the

short end of the maturity spectrum when the yield curve is upward sloping. The marginal effect suggests that

an increase in the slope of 100 basis points decreases the probability that a firm issues a short-term security by

3.1%. This finding is counter to the common wisdom that firms adjust the maturity of their bond offering to

minimize interest payments because of variations in the yield curve.

D. Security Level

        The fifth and sixth columns of Table VI report the results of the binary choice models when the firm is

choosing between secured and unsecured debt. We find evidence consistent with the ‘banking’ view of secured

debt (Berger and Udell (1990)), in which poor quality firms have little choice but to issue secured debt as

investors are more likely to require direct collateral when the firm is nearing bankruptcy. These results are in


                                                        20
contrast with the ‘corporate finance’ view, in which high quality firms issue secured debt to avoid

underinvestment problems associated with the priority of existing debt claims (Stulz and Johnson (1985), Smith

and Warner (1979), and Berkovich and Kim (1990)). In particular, we find that firms issuing secured debt tend

to be smaller and much more highly levered than unsecured issuers. Firms also tend to issue secured debt after

periods of low cash flows and stock returns. Finally, our results suggest that firms tend to issue secured debt

when growth options are low. The estimated parameters imply that a one-standard deviation increase in the

market-to-book ratio decreases the predicted probability of issuing secured debt over unsecured debt by 2.1%.

Finally, it does not appear that a recession affects the probability of a firm’s issuing secured debt.

E. Callability

        The final two columns of Table VI summarize the estimation results for the choice between callable

and non-callable debt. 9 The leading explanations for why firms issue callable debt are to mitigate agency costs

(Barnea, Haugen and Senbet (1980)) and to hedge against interest rate risk (Guntay, Prabhala and Unal (2002).

We find no evidence consistent with the view that firms issue callable debt to hedge against underinvestment

risk, as suggested by Barnea, Haugen and Senbet (1980). Specifically, firms that issue callable debt do not

have significantly different market-to-book ratios relative to firms issuing straight debt.

        In contrast, our results are consistent with the view that firms use call provisions to hedge against

potential interest rate movements. We find that callable issuers tend to be smaller, lower-levered firms,

consistent with the arguments of Guntay, Prabhala and Unal (2002), who suggest that it is precisely the smaller

firms which are most likely to hedge against interest rate risk using call provisions. In addition, the last column

of Table VII confirms that firms tend to issue callable debt during periods of high interest rate volatility, again

consistent with the hedging motive.



V. Multivariate Analysis of the Determinants of Credit Quality




9
 Because most convertible bonds are also callable, we eliminate these bonds from the sample when we estimate this
equation.


                                                          21
        In addition to the features of the bonds, we are also interested in the factors that affect the quality of the

bond. Consequently, we estimate equations predicting the bond’s quality, measured by its rating. We estimate

these equations using a multinomial logit setup, in which the dependent variable has five levels of credit

quality: non-rated, C-rated, speculative B-rated, investment grade B-rated, and A-rated bonds. The baseline

corresponds to the firm choosing not to issue any kind of debt. 10

        Table VII reports coefficient estimates from equations predicting the credit quality of a firm’s bond

issue. Some of the results are not particularly surprising. For example, larger firms are much more likely to

issue high-rated debt. The relation between the effects of size on the probability of issuing high quality debt is

monotonic across credit rating groups. In addition, firms with higher growth opportunities and stronger cash

flows are also more likely to issue investment grade debt. Finally, lower return volatility increases the

probability of issuing a highly-rated bond.

        A somewhat counterintuitive finding is that the strong negative relationship between cash holdings and

the probability of issuing investment grade debt. This finding is consistent with the logic of Almeida,

Campello and Weisbach (2004, 2007), who argue that more financially constrained firms are likely to save a

higher percentage of cash from their cash flows. Since firms with low bond ratings are more likely to face

financial constraints, they will tend to save more cash, leading to a negative relation between firms’ cash

holdings and the ratings of the bonds they issue.

        The other striking finding from Table VII concerns the impact of recessions on bond ratings.            The

estimates in this table clearly indicate that a recession increases the quality of bonds that are issued. Consistent

with the commonly discussed arguments of practitioners, during bad financial times, poor quality borrowers

appear to be shut out of the bond market, so that the only bonds that are issued are highly rated. In other words,

the fact that the quality of bonds issued is strongly countercyclical is evidence consistent with the view that

financial constraints are exacerbated during recessions.



10
  An alternative specification would be an ordered probit, which would take advantage of the natural ordering of the bond
ratings. We do not use this approach because it would not be clear to us where non-rated debt would fall into this
ordering.


                                                           22
           There are measurement issues that potentially affect this result. One is simply the definition of a

recession. Therefore, in separate regressions (not reported), we replace the ‘recession dummy’ with GDP

growth and the number of months in a given year designated as being in a recession. 11 The results are similar

to the ones reported in Table VII. Another possibility is that the result is being driven by the decline of the

bond market in the early 1990s, which coincided with a recession. To examine this possibility, we reestimate

this equation excluding the 1989 to 1992 time period; these estimates imply an effect of recessions on security

issuances essentially the same as those reported in Table VII. Overall, the result that firms are more likely to

issue high quality debt during recessions appears to be robust to measurement issues.



VI. The Effect of Debt Issuance on Post Issuance Investment Expenditures

           Finally, we examine the extent to which different kinds of bonds are used for different purposes,

explicitly taking into account the amount of funds raised in the offering. In particular, a number of theories of

security issuance relate the type of security issued to the assets that are purchased with its proceeds. To

evaluate these theories, we estimate the effect of bond issuances on subsequent potential uses of the capital.

A. Estimates of Uses of Funds of Different types of Debt

           We use an approach similar to that used by Kim and Weisbach (2007), who estimate the uses of the

proceeds from a large sample of equity offerings. This approach allows us to estimate the dollar change in

various uses of funds given a $1 increase in debt financing. In particular, we estimate the effect of new funds

raised by the issuance of a particular type of debt on the measures of increases in CAPEX and R&D discussed

in Section III. We also examine the effect on changes in cash holdings. Since cash is a balance sheet item and

hence a stock variable, we calculate the log of one plus the change in the variable normalized by total assets

prior to the debt issue: ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] . Specifically, we use the following specification:




11
     These estimates are available upon request.


                                                          23
                    ⎡⎛ debt issue ⎞ ⎤                   ⎡⎛ debt issue ⎞ ⎤
          Y = β1 ln ⎢⎜⎜                ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ + β 2 ln ⎢⎜⎜                ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ × debt_type_dummy
                    ⎣ ⎝ total assets 0  ⎠    ⎦          ⎣ ⎝ total assets 0  ⎠ ⎦
                       ⎡⎛ other sources ⎞ ⎤                ⎡⎛ other sources ⎞ ⎤
              + β 3 ln ⎢⎜⎜                ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ + β 4 ln ⎢⎜⎜                ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ × debt_type_dummy
                       ⎣⎝  total assets 0 ⎠     ⎦          ⎣⎝  total assets 0 ⎠     ⎦
              + β 5 × debt _ type _ dummy + β 6 ln[total assets 0 ]
                  2004                      21                                     38
              +    ∑ θ year _ dummy + ∑ λ credit _ ratings _ dummy +∑ γ
                  i =1971
                            i
                                            j =0
                                                   j
                                                                                  k =1
                                                                                         k   industry _ dummy + ε (2)


where Y = ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] for V = cash holdings

         = ln[(∑it =1Vi total assets 0 ) + 1] for V = capital expenditure or R&D ,

       other sources = ln[(∑ti =1 (total sources of funds i − primary capital) total assets 0 ) + 1]

and t = 1 or 4 years after the debt issue. Total sources of funds include internally generated cash flows from

the firm’s continuing operations as well as other sources of funds from investment and financing activities. 12

debt_type_dummy represents dummy for convertibles, dummy for short term bonds, dummy for secured debt,

or dummy for callable debt depending on the categorization being used. We then estimate the dollar changes in

the various uses of funds implied by the regression coefficients for one and four years following the debt issue,

following Kim and Weisbach (2007). 13

         Table VIII reports estimates of equation (2), omitting β3 through β6 and the year, credit rating, and

industry fixed effects from the table for the sake of brevity. Panel A summarizes the results, breaking down

firms between issuers of convertible bonds to those of straight bonds. The estimates imply that convertible

issuers spend much less on capital expenditures than do issuers of straight bonds. Convertible issuers appear to

12
   Specifically, total sources of funds is the sum of funds from operations, sale of property, plant and equipment, long term
debt issuances, and sale of common and preferred stock.
13
   The calculations are based on a median-sized firm in the sample. Year, industry, and credit ratings fixed effects are for
1998, two digit SIC code 48 (communications), and Aaa rated debt.. For example, the dollar changes in CAPEX for t = 1
following convertible issue is calculated as follows: Median debt amount is 200, median total sources are 363.028 and
median total assets prior to the debt issue are 1,412.532 (All units are in $US million). The estimated coefficients not
reported in table IX are as follows; β3 = .0804828, β4 = -.0442473, β5 = .0471107 , β6 = .0013864, and the constant term
reflecting 1998 and SIC 48 fixed effects is .0635309. Using these numbers together with coefficients from Table IX yields
.12880058 as the predicted value of the log transformation, implying a predicted change of 194.17126 in CAPEX. Then
we add one to median debt amount (as well as total sources) and repeat the above procedure, which results in a predicted
change of 194.27808 in CAPEX. The difference in the two predicted changes represents the dollar changes in CAPEX for
one unit increase in debt amount, which equals 0.107.


                                                             24
spend $0.11 in capital expenditures for each dollar in debt financing in the first year following issuance, and

$0.20 per dollar after four years, compared to $0.21 after one year and $0.50 after four years for straight debt

issuers. In contrast, firms issuing convertible debt tend to allocate more towards R&D financing and cash

holdings than do straight debt issuers; per dollar raised, convertible issuers spend $.13 per dollar raised in the

first year and $.50 over the four year period on R&D, compared to less than $.01 for straight debt issuers. In

addition, convertible bond issuers save much more of the capital they raise as cash than do straight bond

issuers; per dollar raised, convertible bond issuers save $.42 in the first year and $.25 over a four year period

compared to $.20 and $.11 for straight bond issuers.

        A number of theories of convertible bonds (Stein (1992) and Mayers (1998)) suggest that they will be

used to finance the same type of investments as equity. Hence, for comparison purposes, we present in Panel E

estimates of similar equations for seasoned equity offerings taken from Kim and Weisbach (2007). The

estimates for SEOs are very close to those for convertible bonds: For CAPEX, firms spend $.08 in the first

year and $.19 over four years out of a dollar raised in an SEO compared to $.11 in the first year and $.20 over

four years for a dollar raised in a convertible. For R&D, firms spend $.18 in the first year and $.64 over four

years out of a dollar raised in an SEO compared to $.13 in the first year and $.50 over four years for a dollar

raised in a convertible. Finally, cash holdings increase by $.53 in the first year and $.32 over four years out of

a dollar raised in an SEO compared to $.42 in the first year and $.25 over four years for a dollar raised in a

convertible. It appears from these estimates that firms’ uses of cash raised in convertible bond offerings is

remarkably similar to the uses of the cash raised in an SEO.

        Panel B summarizes the estimated uses of fund for issuers of different maturity debt. We see evidence

of “maturity matching” (Myers (1977), Diamond (1991) and Hart and Moore (1994)) with long-term issuers

increasing capital expenditures by $0.19 and $0.47 per dollar of debt raised in one and four years after issuance,

compared to $0.11 and -$0.13 for short-term issues. Like convertibles, larger shares of short-term debt

issuance tend to go to R&D expenditures and increases in cash holdings.

        Panel C reports the results for the secured debt sample. These results imply that secured debt issuers

utilize less of the funds they raise in R&D compared to unsecured issuers. Finally, Panel D summarizes the


                                                        25
implied dollar changes in uses of funds following the issuance of callable debt. Callable debt issues are more

likely to finance CAPEX over a longer period, but more likely to be held as cash over a shorter period.

        Overall, the results suggest that firms do use different kinds of securities for different purposes.

Convertible bonds are more ‘equity-like’, and consistent with the arguments of Mayers (1998) and Stein (1992),

issuers of convertible bonds are more likely make similar types of investments as issuers of equity. In contrast,

issuers of straight debt are more likely to make capital expenditures. In addition, there appears to be evidence

of ‘maturity matching’; issuers of long-term debt are more likely to make capital expenditures while shorter-

term debt issuers are more likely to increase R&D.

B. Within Firm vs. Across Firm Interpretations

        An interesting issue is the extent to which these findings reflect differences in the firms issuing the

securities, or whether they reflect the particular projects undertaken by these firms. This issue is important,

because different kinds of firms tend to issue different kinds of debt, and also are likely to make different kinds

of investments. To evaluate this possibility, we reestimate Equation (2) with the addition of firm fixed effects.

The fixed firm effects dramatically reduce the power of our tests, since they require us to utilize only firms that

make more than one debt issue in our sample period, but, at least to the extent that firm characteristics are

constant over time, do control for these characteristics. Results that hold both with and without firm effects are

likely attributable to particular projects financed by the debt issue in question, while results that hold without

firm effects but go away when fixed effects are added likely occur because of firm-specific factors that do not

vary with particular investments.

        We estimate the following model:

                  ⎡⎛ debt issue       ⎞ ⎤              ⎡⎛ debt issue  ⎞ ⎤
        Y = β1 ln ⎢⎜⎜                 ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ + β 2 ln ⎢⎜⎜            ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ × debt_type_dummy
                  ⎣⎝ total assets 0    ⎠ ⎦             ⎣⎝ total assets 0
                                                                       ⎠ ⎦
                      ⎡⎛ other sources ⎞ ⎤               ⎡⎛ other sources ⎞ ⎤
             + β 3 ln ⎢⎜⎜               ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ + β 4 ln ⎢⎜⎜                ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ × debt_type_dummy
                      ⎣⎝ total assets 0 ⎠ ⎦              ⎣⎝ total assets 0 ⎠ ⎦
             + β 5 × debt _ type _ dummy + β 6 ln[total assets 0 ] + β 7 credit _ ratings
                 2004
             +    ∑θ year _ dummy + firm fixed effects + ε
                 i =1971
                           i                                                                              (3)



                                                             26
         Table IX contains estimates of this equation. 14 The results comparing convertible vs. straight

(nonconvertible) bonds again suggest that convertible bonds are more likely to be used to finance R&D and be

held in cash, while straight bonds are more likely to be used to finance capital expenditures (at least when

measured over the four-year window). These results suggest that firms finance particular projects according to

their characteristics, with R&D more likely to be financed with convertibles and capital expenditures with

straight debt.

         The results on maturity are slightly ambiguous. Although they are not statistically significant, the point

estimates indicate that long-term debt is more likely to be used to finance capital expenditures. Short-term

debts are more likely to finance R&D over one-year period, but are not statistically different over four-year

period. It seems likely that the effect of maturity structure on investments is partly driven by differences across

firms, and partly by differences in particular projects within firms.



VII. Conclusion

         Debt securities vary in many ways, including maturity, seniority, convertibility, callability, as well as

the overall quality of the issue. There has been much theoretical work proposing reasons for the choice among

characteristics of debt securities. Yet, there has been little empirical work studying the extent to which these

theories reflect real-world issuance decisions.

         This paper uses a large sample of U.S. public debt issues and examines the factors that lead firms to

issue different kinds of debt. It has two main goals. First, it establishes a set of stylized facts about the use of

various types of debt securities, how debt provisions are used with one another, and how these practices have

changed over time. Second, it considers the question of why firms use different kinds of debt. We propose that

there are three types of factors that potentially affect the choice of debt securities; firm characteristics,

economic conditions, and the characteristics of planned investment projects.



14
  In this specification, we have replaced industry and credit ratings fixed effects with the firm fixed effect and non-binary
credit ratings. We assign a value of zero for non-rated debt, one for C rated debt, two for Ca rated debt, and so on. The
highest rated debt, Aaa, corresponds to 21.


                                                             27
         We find that all three types of factors affect the structure of debt securities. We have a number of

empirical results, which are summarized in Table X. This Table indicates that small, growth-oriented firms

with large R&D expenditures are more likely to issue convertible or short-term debt, while large, established

firms with large investment in fixed assets are more likely to issue long-term, straight debt. In addition,

recessions appear to exacerbate financial constraints in that controlling for other determinants of credit quality,

firms are more likely to issue highly-rated debt during a recession.

         A novel contribution of this paper is to relate post-issuance expenditures on various uses of funds to

test theories suggesting that the characteristics of the firm’s marginal investment opportunities have

implications for the type of debt the firm will choose to issue. When a firm acquires fixed assets with steady

expected cash flow streams, firms will have a tendency to issue relatively long-term, senior debt. When

intangible assets are acquired, especially those with option-like payoffs, the firm is more likely to issue

relatively short-term convertible debt securities.

         Most theories of security design relate the security’s characteristics to the nature of the projects that

they finance. Yet, to our knowledge, this is the first paper to link empirically variation in debt financing with

various types of investment spending. Clearly, there is much more work to be done. For example, a large

fraction of investments are financed through bank or other private debt, but our sample only considers public

debt issues. Future research empirically linking other types of financing choices to the uses of the funds raised

is likely to be fruitful.




                                                         28
REFERENCES

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S.Weisbach, 2004, The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash,
Journal of Finance, 59, 1777-1804.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S.Weisbach, 2007, Corporate Financial and Investment
Policies when Future Financing is not Frictionless, Working Paper, University of Illinois.

Barclay, Michael J. and Clifford W. Smith, 1995a, The Priority Structure of Corporate Liabilities, Journal of
Finance, 50, 899-917.

Barclay, Michael, J and Clifford W. Smith, 1995b, The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt, Journal of
Finance.

Barnea, Amir, Robert A. Haugen and Lemma W. Senbet, 1980, A Rationale for Debt Maturity Structure and
Call Provisions in the Agency Theoretic Framework, Journal of Finance, 35, 1223-1234.

Berger, A. N., and G. F. Udell, 1990, Collateral, Loan Quality and Bank Risk, Journal of Monetary Economics
25, 21-42.

Berkovitch, Elazar and E. Han Kim, 1990, Financial Contracting and Leverage Induced Over- and Under-
Investment Incentives, Journal of Finance, 45, 765-794.

Bolton, Patrick and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors, The
Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1-25.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
106, 709-737.

Faulkender, Michael and Mitchell A. Petersen, 2006, Does the Source of Capital Affect Capital Structure?,
Review of Financial Studies, 19, 45-79.

Flannery, Mark J., 1986, Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice, Journal of Finance, 41,
19-37.

Greene, W. H., 2002, Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall .

Guedes, Jose and Tim Opler, 1996, The Determinants of the Maturity of Corporate Debt Issues, Journal of
Finance, 51, 1809-1833.

Guntay, L, Prabhala, N. R., and Haluk Unal, 2002, Callable Bonds and Hedging, Working Papers – Financial
Institutions Center at The Wharton School.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore, 1994, A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 109, 841-879.

Kim, Woojin and Michael S. Weisbach, 2007, Motivations for Public Equity Offers: An International
Perspective, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Korajczyk, Robert A. and Amnon Levy, 2003, Capital structure choice: Macroeconomic conditions and
financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 75-109.


                                                      29
Lamont, Owen, 1995, Corporate-debt overhang and macroeconomic expectations, American Economic Review,
85, 1106-1117.

Leary, Mark T., 2007, Bank Loan Supply, Lender Choice, and Corporate Capital Structure, working paper,
Cornell University.

Mayers, David, 1998, Why Firms Issue Convertible Bonds: The Matching of Financial and Real Investment
Options, Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 83-102.

Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 147-176.

Stein, Jeremy, 1992, Convertible Bonds as Backdoor Equity Financing, Journal of Financial Economics, 32, 3-
21.

Stohs, Mark H. and David C. Mauer, 1996, The Determinants of Corporate Debt Maturity Structure, Journal of
Business, 69, 279-312.

Smith, Clifford and Jerold Warner, 1979, On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond Covenants, Journal
of Financial Economics, 7, 117-161.

Stulz, Rene and Herb Johnson, 1985, An Analysis of Secured Debt, Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 501-
521.

Sufi, Amir, 2007, The Real Effects of Debt Certification: Evidence from the Introduction of Bank Loan Ratings,
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.




                                                     30
                                                                              Table I
                                                                  Sample Descriptive Statistics

The sample includes all public debt issued in US by non-financial firms between 1971 and 2004. We divide the sample into 5 sub-periods. The first row in each
sub-period presents the means and the second row provides the relative proportions in each category for each sub period. Debt with an initial maturity of five
years or fewer are defined as short term. Panel A reports the number of debt issues by type, Panel B reports total dollar amounts raised in $US billions, Panel C
reports number of issues scaled by average number of firms in Compustat, and Panel D reports total proceeds scaled by total liabilities in Compustat.

                                                                       Panel A: Number of Debt Issues by Type
sub period     Total        Convertible          Maturity             Secured             Callable                                    Quality
              Number       No        Yes      Long      Short      No        Yes       Yes         No      Non Rated    C to Caa1    B3 to Ba1     Baa1       A3 to Aaa

1971-84           947        864        83       947          0      909        38        789       158          171           48          157         120          451
                             (91)       (9)     (100)        0       (96)       (4)      (83)      (17)          (18)          (5)         (17)        (13)         (48)
1985-89          1,570     1,317       253     1,438       132     1,530        40      1,121       499          286          144          385         311          444
                             (84)      (16)      (92)       (8)      (97)       (3)      (71)      (29)          (18)          (9)         (25)        (20)         (28)
1990-94          3,041     2,820       221     2,563       478     2,972        69        846     2,195          400          123          679         698        1,141
                             (93)       (7)      (84)      (16)      (98)       (2)      (28)      (72)          (13)          (4)         (22)        (23)         (38)
1995-99          4,811     4,417       394     3,736     1,075     4,699       112      2,578     2,233          945          274        1,205         985        1,402
                             (92)       (8)      (78)      (22)      (98)       (2)      (54)      (46)          (20)          (6)         (25)        (20)         (29)
2000-04          4,498     3,403     1,095     3,156     1,342     4,353       145      3,268     1,233          968          163        1,302         867        1,198
                             (76)      (24)      (70)      (30)      (97)       (3)      (73)      (27)          (22)          (4)         (29)        (19)         (27)

Total           14,867    12,821     2,046    11,840     3,027    14,463       404     8,602      6,318        2,770          752        3,728       2,981        4,636
                             (86)      (14)      (80)      (20)      (97)       (3)      (60)       (40)         (19)          (5)         (25)        (20)         (31)

                                                                      Panel B: Total Proceeds by Type($US bil.)
sub period     Total        Convertible          Maturity             Secured              Callable                                   Quality
              Amount       No        Yes      Long      Short      No        Yes        Yes         No     Non Rated    C to Caa1    B3 to Ba1 Baa3 to Baa1   A3 to Aaa

1971-84           97.9        92.8      5.0      97.9       0.0       95.1      2.8      91.0       6.9          10.5          3.6         13.3        15.2         55.3
                              (95)      (5)     (100)        0        (97)      (3)      (93)       (7)          (11)          (4)         (14)        (16)         (56)
1985-89          230.1       200.7     29.5     210.3      19.8      226.3      3.8     165.9      64.2          30.8         15.6         65.1        51.2         67.4
                              (87)     (13)      (91)       (9)       (98)      (2)      (72)      (28)          (13)          (7)         (28)        (22)         (29)
1990-94          344.9       296.5     48.4     295.6      49.3      334.3     10.6     135.8     209.0          50.0         11.7         84.3        82.9        116.0
                              (86)     (14)      (86)      (14)       (97)      (3)      (39)      (61)          (14)          (3)         (24)        (24)         (34)
1995-99          985.9       891.5     94.4     784.9     201.0      961.0     24.9     594.4     391.5         246.9         63.8        257.4       208.7        209.2
                              (90)     (10)      (80)      (20)       (97)      (3)      (60)      (40)          (25)          (6)         (26)        (21)         (21)
2000-04         2,002.7    1,627.5    375.2   1,223.4     779.3    1,971.6     31.1   1,127.5     871.4         362.5         41.0        399.6       397.4        802.1
                              (81)     (19)      (61)      (39)       (98)      (2)      (56)      (44)          (18)          (2)         (20)        (20)         (40)

Total           3,661.4    3,109.0    552.4   2,612.0   1,049.4    3,588.3     73.1   2,114.6    1,543.0        700.6        135.6        819.7       755.5      1,250.1
                              (85)     (15)      (71)      (29)       (98)      (2)      (58)       (42)         (19)          (4)         (22)        (21)         (34)

                                                                                 31
                                                                                         Table I, continued

                                             Panel C: Number of Debt Issues by Type (Scaled by Number of Firms in Compustat, averages of annual numbers within each subperiod)
sub period   Scaled             Convertibility                   Maturity                   Security                Callable                                            Quality
             Figures    Non convertibles Convertibles Long Term Short Term Unsecured Secured                    Yes          No      Non Rated      C to Caa1         B3 to Ba1          Baa3 to Baa1    A3 to Aaa
1971-74         0.021              0.020          0.002        0.021         0.000        0.021        0.000       0.020        0.002        0.002             0.001            0.003            0.003         0.012
                                    (93)             (7)       (100)             0         (99)           (1)       (93)           (7)        (11)                (4)            (15)             (15)          (54)
1975-79         0.041              0.040          0.001        0.041         0.000        0.037        0.004       0.038        0.003        0.007             0.002            0.005            0.005         0.021
                                    (98)             (2)       (100)             0         (91)           (9)       (92)           (8)        (17)                (5)            (13)             (13)          (52)
1980-84         0.091              0.081          0.011        0.091         0.000        0.089        0.002       0.071        0.020        0.018             0.005            0.017            0.011         0.041
                                    (88)           (12)        (100)             0         (97)           (3)       (78)         (22)         (20)                (5)            (18)             (12)          (45)
1985-89         0.207              0.174          0.033        0.190         0.017        0.202        0.005       0.148        0.059        0.038             0.019            0.051            0.041         0.059
                                    (84)           (16)         (92)            (8)        (97)           (3)       (71)         (29)         (18)                (9)            (25)             (20)          (28)
1990-94         0.362              0.335          0.026        0.305         0.057        0.353        0.008       0.101        0.261        0.048             0.015            0.081            0.083         0.136
                                    (93)             (7)        (84)          (16)         (98)           (2)       (28)         (72)         (13)                (4)            (22)             (23)          (38)
1995-99         0.455              0.418          0.037        0.353         0.102        0.445        0.011       0.244        0.211        0.089             0.026            0.114            0.093         0.133
                                    (92)             (8)        (78)          (22)         (98)           (2)       (54)         (46)         (20)                (6)            (25)             (20)          (29)
2000-04         0.489              0.370          0.119        0.343         0.146        0.474        0.016       0.356        0.133        0.105             0.018            0.142            0.094         0.130
                                    (76)           (24)         (70)          (30)         (97)           (3)       (73)         (27)         (22)                (4)            (29)             (19)          (27)
Total           1.939              1.672          0.267        1.544         0.395        1.886        0.053       1.123        0.817        0.361             0.098            0.486            0.389         0.605
                                    (86)           (14)         (80)          (20)         (97)           (3)       (58)         (42)         (19)                (5)            (25)             (20)          (31)

                                            Panel D: Total Proceeds by Type (Scaled by Total Liabilities of Firms in Compustat, averages of annual numbers within each subperiod)
1971-74         0.007              0.006          0.000        0.007         0.000        0.007        0.000       0.007        0.000        0.000             0.000            0.001            0.001         0.005
                                    (96)             (4)       (100)             0         (99)           (1)       (97)           (3)          (5)               (3)            (11)             (10)          (71)
1975-79         0.010              0.010          0.000        0.010         0.000        0.010        0.000       0.010        0.000        0.001             0.000            0.001            0.001         0.007
                                    (99)             (1)       (100)             0         (96)           (4)       (97)           (3)          (8)               (3)              (8)            (13)          (67)
1980-84         0.014              0.013          0.001        0.014         0.000        0.013        0.000       0.012        0.001        0.002             0.001            0.002            0.002         0.007
                                    (93)             (7)       (100)             0         (97)           (3)       (91)           (9)        (13)                (4)            (16)             (17)          (50)
1985-89         0.028              0.024          0.004        0.026         0.002        0.027        0.000       0.020        0.008        0.004             0.002            0.008            0.006         0.008
                                    (87)           (13)         (91)            (9)        (98)           (2)       (72)         (28)         (13)                (7)            (28)             (22)          (29)
1990-94         0.026              0.022          0.004        0.022         0.004        0.025        0.001       0.010        0.016        0.004             0.001            0.006            0.006         0.009
                                    (86)           (14)         (86)          (14)         (97)           (3)       (39)         (61)         (14)                (3)            (24)             (24)          (34)
1995-99         0.038              0.035          0.004        0.030         0.008        0.037        0.001       0.023        0.015        0.010             0.002            0.010            0.008         0.008
                                    (90)           (10)         (80)          (20)         (97)           (3)       (60)         (40)         (25)                (6)            (26)             (21)          (21)
2000-04         0.045              0.037          0.008        0.028         0.018        0.045        0.001       0.026        0.020        0.008             0.001            0.009            0.009         0.018
                                    (81)           (19)         (61)          (39)         (98)           (2)       (56)         (44)         (18)                (2)            (20)             (20)          (40)
Total           0.249              0.211          0.038        0.178         0.071        0.244        0.005       0.144        0.105        0.048             0.009            0.056            0.051         0.085
                                    (85)           (15)         (71)          (29)         (98)           (2)       (58)         (42)         (19)                (4)            (22)             (21)          (34)




                                                                                                      32
                                                                       Table II
                                                     Cross-Tabulation of Debt Issues – 1971 to 2004

This table reports two-way classification tables of US public debt issues by type over the 1971 to 2004 period. Each cross-tabulation contains three statistics;
first, the number of bonds falling within each two-way category. Second, we report the percentage of bonds having a particular column characteristic relative to
the row total. For example, 20.7% in the ‘short-term’ column and ‘straight’ row means that 20.7% of straight bonds are short-term. Third, we report the number
of bonds in each category we would expect to observe if the two characteristics were independent. Finally, we include p-values from chi-square tests of
independence.

                                                Short-Term     Long-Term             Secured      Unsecured           Callable Noncallable Row Total
   Straight         Frequency                         2,649        10,168                399         12,418              6,951       5,866    12,817
                    Percent                          20.7%         79.3%               3.1%          96.9%              54.2%       45.8%
                    Expected Frequency            2,608.25      10,208.75             347.59      12,469.41           7,419.37   5,397.63
   Convertible      Frequency                           375         1,668                  4          2,039              1,651         392     2,043
                    Percent                          18.4%         81.6%               0.2%          99.8%              80.8%       19.2%
                    Expected Frequency              415.75       1,627.25              55.41       1,987.59           1,182.63      860.37
   p-value                                                          0.016                             0.000                          0.000
   Short-Term       Frequency                                                              83         2,941                820       2,204     3,024
                    Percent                                                             2.7%         97.3%              27.1%       72.9%
                    Expected Frequency                                                  82.01      2,941.99           1,750.50   1,273.50
   Long-Term        Frequency                                                            320         11,516              7,782       4,054    11,836
                    Percent                                                             2.7%         97.3%              65.7%       34.3%
                    Expected Frequency                                                 320.99     11,515.00           6,851.50    4,984.50
   p-value                                                                                            0.901                          0.000
   Secured          Frequency                                                                                              324          79       403
                    Percent                                                                                             80.4%       19.6%
                    Expected Frequency                                                                                  233.28      169.72
   Unsecured        Frequency                                                                                            8,278       6,179    14,457
                    Percent                                                                                             57.3%       42.7%
                    Expected Frequency                                                                                8,368.72    6,088.28
   p-value                                                                                                                           0.000
   Column Total                                        3,024         11,836               403         14,457             8,602   6258.000




                                                                              33
                                                                                                  Table III
                                                                                             Firm Characteristics
This table presents summary statistics of firm characteristics for firm-years in which various types of bonds were issued in US over the period 1971 to 2004. The
sample represents all non-financial firms that issued at least one public debt during the sample period.

                                                                                   Panel A: Firm Characteristics by Issue Type
                                                All Debt Issues                      Convertible                     Maturity                       Secured                    Callable
                                                       Non-
                                          Issuing Issuing
                                            Years     Years          Diff.        Yes          No          Diff.   Short   Long     Diff.     Yes        No    Diff.     Yes         No    Diff.
N                                           6,828 34,755                        1,577       5,251                    753   6,075              264     6,564            5,070      1,758
ln[Total Assets]: $US mil                   7.074     5.888         1.186       6.048       7.382         -1.334   7.368   7.038    0.331   6.271     7.106   -0.835   6.842      7.744   -0.903
Leverage                                    0.634     0.608         0.026       0.546       0.661         -0.115   0.630   0.635   -0.005   0.810     0.627    0.183   0.630      0.645   -0.015
Fixed Asset Ratio                           0.401     0.362         0.038       0.296       0.433         -0.137   0.333   0.409   -0.076   0.512     0.396    0.116   0.394      0.420   -0.025
Market-to-Book                              2.800     2.268         0.532       3.370       2.615          0.755   3.718   2.684    1.033   2.249     2.816   -0.567   2.809      2.773    0.036
Cash                                        0.092     0.109        -0.018       0.192       0.061          0.131   0.136   0.086    0.050   0.083     0.092   -0.009   0.097      0.075    0.022
Cash Flow                                   0.070     0.064         0.006       0.031       0.082         -0.051   0.041   0.074   -0.032   0.006     0.073   -0.067   0.067      0.081   -0.014
Prior 12-Month Stock Return                 0.264     0.197         0.067       0.443       0.205          0.238   0.206   0.271   -0.065   0.071     0.269   -0.198   0.287      0.199    0.087
Return Volatility                           0.421     0.441        -0.021       0.569       0.372          0.197   0.506   0.410    0.096   0.612     0.416    0.196   0.443      0.359    0.083
Net Equity Issuance                         0.022     0.028        -0.006       0.067       0.009          0.058   0.024   0.021    0.002   0.037     0.021    0.016   0.026      0.010    0.016

                                                                             Panel B: Firm Characteristics by Issue Credit Quality
                                             Non-         C to      B3 to    Baa3 to                        Invest.     Junk
                                            Rated        Caa1         Ba1       Baa1         A               Grade    Bonds       Diff.
Net Equity Issuance                         1,437         671       2,042      1,224     1,454               2,678     2,707
ln[Total Assets]: $US mil                   5.636       6.216       6.789      8.069     8.455               8.278     6.647     1.631
Leverage                                    0.584       0.709       0.679      0.633     0.586               0.607     0.687    -0.079
Fixed Asset Ratio                           0.311       0.397       0.399      0.435     0.465               0.451     0.399     0.052
Market-to-Book                              3.102       2.510       2.298      2.794     3.342               3.078     2.348     0.730
Cash                                        0.196       0.098       0.069      0.052     0.052               0.052     0.076    -0.024
Cash Flow                                   0.013       0.031       0.072      0.100     0.118               0.109     0.062     0.048
Prior 12-Month Stock Return                 0.361       0.390       0.287      0.184     0.160               0.172     0.311    -0.139
Return Volatility                           0.584       0.533       0.444      0.325     0.274               0.299     0.465    -0.166
Net Equity Issuance                         0.066       0.046       0.019     -0.005    -0.008              -0.006     0.026    -0.032

*Differences shown in bold face type are significantly different from zero at the 95% confidence level.




                                                                                                             34
                                                   Table IV
                              Macroeconomic Conditions and Debt Design
This table summarizes the proportion of total debt proceeds by bond characteristics over various states of the
economy. High GDP growth is defined as years in which GDP growth exceeded 3.5%. Medium growth is defined
as years in which the GDP growth rate was between 2% and 3.5%. Low growth is defined as years in which the
annual rate of GDP growth was less than 2%. Time periods are classified as being in either an expansion or a
recession based on NBER business cycle dating procedures. The sample period is from 1971 to 2004.




                                            Proportion of                               Proportion of
                                        Total Proceeds Raised                      Total Proceeds Raised
GDP Growth                High Growth     Medium Growth         Low Growth      Expansion           Recession
Issue Characteristics


Convertibility
Straight                     0.923             0.888              0.883           0.887              0.871
Convertible                  0.077             0.112              0.117           0.116              0.129

Security Level
Secured                      0.030             0.046              0.037           0.038              0.012
Unsecured                    0.970             0.954              0.963           0.962              0.988

Maturity
Less than 5 Years            0.090             0.119              0.222           0.191              0.311
More than 5 Years            0.910             0.881              0.778           0.809              0.689

Callability
Callable                     0.628             0.534              0.609           0.574              0.623
Noncallable                  0.372             0.466              0.391           0.426              0.377

Credit Quality
Investment Grade             0.441             0.511              0.689           0.481              0.662
Junk                         0.352             0.330              0.189           0.327              0.236
Not Rated                    0.194             0.147              0.116           0.189              0.101




                                                       35
                                                                                   Table V
                                                               Project Characteristics and Types of Debt Issues
This table presents summary statistics for post-issuance capital expenditures and R&D expenditures by issue type. The expenditure variables are calculated as the
natural logarithm of the sum of the respective expenditure over the two years following the debt issuance, scaled by total assets. Test statistics for testing
differences in the mean and median expenditure amounts across bond types are included. Differences shown in bold face type are significantly different from zero
at the 95% confidence level. The sample period is from 1971 to 2004.

                                                                                                   ln[(CAP EX over next 2 years /          ln[(R & D over next 2 years /
                                                                                                         Total Assets)+1]                        Total Assets)+1]
                                                                                                  N           mean           median      N             mean         median
Non Issuing Firm-Years                                                                             32,316           0.19          0.13    17,074           0.12          0.05
Debt Issuing Firm-Years                                                                             6,150           0.20          0.14     3,186           0.09          0.04
testting the difference   t-stat/z-stat                                                                             4.09          5.55                    -7.86         -7.04
                                                                 Straight                           4,839           0.20          0.14     2,382          0.05          0.03
                                                                 Convertibles                       1,311           0.22          0.14       804          0.18          0.11
                          testing the difference                 t-stat/z-stat                                      2.78          0.31                   25.01         15.81
                                                                 Long Term                          5,501           0.21          0.14     2,788          0.08           0.04
                                                                 Short Term                           649           0.15          0.11       398          0.13           0.06
                          testing the difference                 t-stat/z-stat                                     -5.27         -7.69                    7.03           6.78
                                                                 Unsecured                          5,911           0.20          0.14     3,083           0.09          0.04
                                                                 Secured                              239           0.23          0.14       103           0.04          0.01
                          testing the difference                 t-stat/z-stat                                      1.76         -1.02                    -3.61         -5.44
                                                                 Noncallable                        1,623           0.17          0.14       881          0.08           0.04
                                                                 Callable                           4,528           0.21          0.14     2,305          0.09           0.04
                          testing the difference                 t-stat/z-stat                                      5.72          2.31                    1.49          -1.88
                                                                 Non Rated                          1,240           0.22          0.13       692           0.17          0.08
                                                                 C's(C to Caa1)                       608           0.27          0.15       232           0.06          0.01
                                                                 Speculative B's (B3 to Ba1)        1,807           0.20          0.13       853           0.05          0.02
                                                                 Investable B's (Baa3 to Baa1)      1,125           0.17          0.13       547           0.06          0.04
                                                                 A's (A3 to Aaa)                    1,370           0.18          0.16       862           0.07          0.05
                          C's vs. Speculative B's                t-stat/z-stat                                     -4.75         -4.93                    -0.82          2.44
                          Speculative B's vs. Investable B's     t-stat/z-stat                                     -3.61          0.62                     0.02          4.74
                          Investable B's vs. A's                 t-stat/z-stat                                      2.31          6.04                     4.01          4.89




                                                                                             36
                                                                         Table VI
                                                     Multivariate Analysis: Probit Model with Selection
This table reports coefficient estimates and marginal effects for two-stage probit models with selection. In the first stage, the probability of issuing any type of
corporate bond is modeled as a function of firm size, leverage, fixed asset ratio, market-to-book, operating income, a dummy indicating whether the firm has a debt
rating, a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the firm’s Altman Z-score is below the sample median and year dummies. This table reports estimates from the
second-stage debt design probit regressions where the dependent variable equals one if the debt is convertible, short term, secured, or callable, respectively. t-
statistics based on robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The sample period is from 1971 to 2004.
                                 Convertible vs. Straight       Short-Term vs. Long-Term           Secured vs. Unsecured           Callable vs. Noncallable
                                 dF/dX            dF/dX           dF/dX          dF/dX             dF/dX          dF/dX              dF/dX          dF/dX
Firm Age                          0.000            0.001           0.001          0.001            -0.001         -0.001             -0.001         -0.001
                                  (0.10)          (1.26)           (0.66)         (1.04)           (-0.56)        (-0.77)           (-4.35)        (-4.71)
ln[Total Assets]                 -0.032           -0.150           0.090          0.092            -0.040         -0.014             -0.063         -0.015
                                 (-4.31)         (-8.28)            (4.89         (5.53)           (-3.60)        (-2.86)           (-9.73)        (-3.29)
Leverage                         -0.020           -0.057          -0.022         -0.027             0.033          0.034             -0.002          0.001
                                 (-5.32)         (-5.53)          (-2.44)        (-3.12)            (5.51)         (5.64)           (-0.66)         (0.23)
Fixed Asset Ratio                -0.013           -0.051          -0.029         -0.032             0.020          0.010             0.005           0.023
                                 (-4.13)         (-6.25)          (-3.76)        (-4.94)            (3.62)         (4.32)            (1.45)         (5.59)
Market-to-Book                    0.027           0.029            0.031          0.025            -0.021         -0.019            -0.001          0.002
                                  (2.24)          (2.79)           (3.77)         (4.48)           (-2.26)        (-2.21)           (-0.55)         (0.75)
Cash Flow                         0.478            1.337          -0.121         -0.124            -0.018         -0.017            -0.815         -0.720
                                  (2.45)          (2.40)          (-0.12)        (-0.41)           (-4.41)        (-4.52)           (-2.83)        (-3.16)
Cash                              0.029            0.085           0.033          0.028            -0.001         -0.001             -0.010         -0.020
                                  (7.58)          (8.61)           (2.61)         (3.96)           (-0.19)        (-0.33)           (-1.99)        (-2.10)
Stock Return                      0.004           0.004           -0.004         -0.010            -0.021         -0.009             0.000          0.001
                                  (1.54)          (0.61)          (-1.59)        (-1.80)           (-4.25)        (-4.30)            (0.02)         (0.14)
Return Volatility                 0.022           0.094            0.072          0.059             0.025          0.011              0.011          0.020
                                  (6.12)         (10.06)           (6.91)         (8.44)            (4.93)         (4.99)            (1.73)         (3.11)
Net Equity Issuance               0.151           0.199            0.009          0.016            -0.023         -0.004             0.337          0.321
                                  (1.40)          (0.63)           (0.05)         (0.13)           (-0.19)        (-0.09)            (0.95)         (0.80)
ln[Offer Size]                    0.008            0.050          -0.045         -0.065             0.010          0.005              0.040          0.058
                                   (2.5)          (5.75)          (-6.46)       (-10.13)           (1.71)         (1.84)            (12.37)        (12.71)
Recession Dummy                   0.169            0.187           0.049          0.044            -0.006          0.004             -0.058         -0.030
                                  (6.04)          (7.12)           (2.13)         (2.47)           (-0.45)        (0.56)            (-5.77)        (-4.89)
Yield Curve Slope                                  0.104                         -0.031                            0.002                            -0.007
                                                 (11.56)                         (-4.71)                           (0.96)                          (-1.73)
Interest Rate Volatility                          0.009                          -0.072                            0.000                            0.056
                                                  (0.47)                          (2.80)                           (0.00)                           (2.61)
Year Fixed Effects                Yes              No              Yes             No               Yes             No               Yes             No
Observations                     36,238          36,238           36,238         36,238            36,238         36,238            35,069         35,069



                                                                                37
                                                                        Table VII
                                                                Determinants of Debt Quality

This table reports estimated coefficients from a multinomial logit regression. The dependent variable has five categories, non rated, C-rated bonds, speculative B-
rated bonds, investment grade B-rated bonds, and A-rated bonds where the baseline case is no debt issues. t-statistics based on robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. The sample period is from 1971 to 2004.


Explanatory Variables                 Not Rated             C to Caa1             B3 to Ba1            Baa3 to Baa1           A3 to Aaa          Investment Grade
                                                                                                                                                  vs. Junk Bonds
Firm Age                                -0.027                -0.019                 -0.016                 0.006                 0.022                 0.090
                                        (-6.43)               (-6.98)                (-7.14)               (1.80)                (5.01)               (11.72)
ln[Total Assets]                         0.192                -0.129                  0.409                 1.147                 1.639                 2.314
                                         (2.87)               (-2.80)                (11.53)              (26.26)               (33.65)               (20.90)
Leverage                                 0.300                -0.106                  0.122                 0.012                -0.596                -0.899
                                         (6.10)               (-2.40)                 (3.69)               (0.21)               (-7.35)                (-6.97)
Market-to-Book                           0.002                 0.022                 -0.048                 0.028                 0.344                 0.394
                                         (0.05)               (0.78)                 (-1.57)               (0.65)                (8.24)                (4.50)
Fixed Asset Ratio                        0.233                -0.010                  0.135                 0.156                 0.008                -0.194
                                         (4.54)               (-0.28)                 (4.53)               (3.84)                (0.18)                (-2.10)
Cash Flow                               -0.503                -1.983                  0.673               31.416                40.706                  73.93
                                        (-0.24)               (-1.50)                 (0.13)               (5.99)                (5.13)                (5.86)
Cash                                    -0.116                 0.142                 -0.343                -0.619                -0.885                -1.189
                                        (-1.91)               (4.60)                 (-7.38)              (-6.59)               (-8.13)                (-6.96)
Net Equity Issuance                      3.083                 2.304                  2.891                -8.666                -8.942               -25.887
                                         (3.08)               (2.68)                  (3.20)              (-1.06)               (-0.92)                (-1.91)
Stock Return                             0.115                 0.064                  0.146                 0.051                -0.018                -0.292
                                         (3.96)               (2.55)                  (6.03)               (1.00)               (-0.28)                (-2.93)
Return Volatility                        0.109                 0.095                 -0.041                -0.277                -0.524                -0.965
                                         (3.05)               (3.72)                 (-1.27)              (-4.55)               (-6.49)                (-8.12)
Recession Dummy                         -0.554                -0.537                 -0.122                 0.353                 0.443                 2.011
                                        (-2.88)               (-5.19)                (-1.50)               (3.84)                (5.37)                (7.59)

Year Fixed Effects                       Yes
Observations                            29,572
Pseudo R-Squared                        0.149




                                                                                38
                                               Table VIII
         The Effects of Debt Issuance on Subsequent Increases in Assets and Expenditures
The dependent variable for CAPEX and R&D is Y = ln[(∑it =1Vi A 0 ) + 1] and for cash holdings is Y =
ln[((Vt − V0 ) A0 ) + 1] . Independent variables are new debt raised, other sources of funds - both of which are
normalized by total assets and interacted with debt type dummy – and ln[total assets]. All regressions include year,
credit ratings, and industry fixed effects. Dollar changes are the implied change in the dependent variable when
each debt type is increased by one dollar. Debt type dummy reflects convertibles, short-term, secure, and callable
debt in panels A through D, respectively. Panel E is taken from Kim and Weisbach (2007). Bold letters indicate
statistical significance at the 5% level, using robust standard errors. The sample period is from 1971 to 2004.
Dependent Variable:                                  Explanatory Variables
ln[((Vt-V0)/Asset)+1]   t=1,4     N      ln[(Debt/Asset)+1]         ln[(Debt/Asset)+1]            Dollar Changes        R-Squared
ln[(∑Vt/Asset)+1]                                                  *Debt Type Dummy
                                          Panel A: Straight vs. Convertible Debt Issues
                                          Coef         t stat       Coef           t stat      Straight   Convertible
∑CAPEX                  1year    3,602       0.217         4.11        -0.110         -2.21     0.21          0.11        0.38
                        4years   1,614       0.444         5.44        -0.290         -2.78     0.50          0.20        0.59
∑R & D                  1year    3,645       0.002         0.49         0.141          7.57     0.00          0.13        0.47
                        4years   1,648       0.003         0.23         0.564          6.98     0.00          0.50        0.55
∆Cash                   1year    3,144       0.241         4.45         0.283          3.76     0.20          0.42        0.38
                        4years   1,361       0.121         1.69         0.174          1.77     0.11          0.25        0.37
                                           Panel B: Long vs. Short Term Debt Issues
                                          Coef        t stat        Coef        t stat        Long-Term   Short-Term
∑CAPEX                  1year    3,596      0.193          4.34      -0.086         -2.09        0.19        0.11         0.37
                        4years   1,613      0.404          5.35      -0.512         -3.69        0.47       -0.13         0.59
∑R & D                  1year    3,639       0.030         4.42         0.141          4.75     0.03          0.15        0.43
                        4years   1,647       0.143         2.80         0.354          3.34     0.13          0.46        0.43
∆Cash                   1year    3,138       0.289         6.21         0.286          3.06     0.24          0.45        0.37
                        4years   1,360       0.138         2.10         0.239          2.46     0.12          0.32        0.32

                                          Panel C: Unsecured vs. Secured Debt Issues
                                          Coef        t stat       Coef         t stat        Unsecured     Secured
∑CAPEX                  1year    3,602      0.182          4.42      -0.009         -0.12       0.18         0.17         0.37
                        4years   1,614      0.362          4.55       0.048          0.55       0.42         0.50         0.58
∑R & D                  1year    3,645       0.048         4.52        -0.011         -0.62     0.04          0.03        0.37
                        4years   1,648       0.173         3.30        -0.121         -2.26     0.16          0.05        0.42
∆Cash                   1year    3,144       0.343         7.09        -0.128         -2.99     0.28          0.17        0.33
                        4years   1,361       0.146         2.31         0.229          2.24     0.13          0.33        0.32

                                         Panel D: Non-Callable vs. Callable Debt Issues
                                          Coef        t stat        Coef         t stat    Non-Callable     Callable
∑CAPEX                  1year    2,256      0.183          2.38        0.047          0.56     0.18          0.23         0.40
                        4years   1,104     -0.167         -0.87        0.690          3.40    -0.18          0.58         0.61
∑R & D                  1year    2,285       0.008         1.37        -0.001         -0.22     0.01          0.01        0.31
                        4years   1,131       0.039         1.01        -0.043         -1.13     0.03          0.00        0.51
∆Cash                   1year    1,918       0.101         2.26         0.139          2.17      0.09         0.21        0.29
                        4years     909      -0.016        -0.25         0.144          1.41     -0.01         0.11        0.25

                                               Panel E: Seasoned Equity Offerings
ln[((Vt-V0)/Asset)+1]   t=1,4     N      ln[(Equity/Asset)+1]    ln[(Other Sources/A)+1]       Fresh         Other      R-Squared
ln[(∑Vt/Asset)+1]                         Coef         t stat        Coef         t stat       Equity       Sources
∑CAPEX                  1year    6,890       0.081          3.88       0.108           3.88     0.08          0.09        0.20
                        4years   3,539       0.136          4.18       0.370           6.99     0.19          0.18        0.54
∑R & D                  1year    3,669       0.192         4.98        -0.019         -1.28     0.18         -0.01        0.35
                        4years   1,739       0.523         5.63         0.094          2.98     0.64          0.04        0.49
∆Cash                   1year    6,889       0.594        23.34         0.077          3.68     0.53          0.06        0.42
                        4years   3,540       0.327         6.12         0.176          8.20     0.32          0.06        0.25



                                                             39
                                                Table IX
  The Effects of Debt Issuance on Subsequent Increases in Assets and Expenditures: Within Firm
The dependent variable for CAPEX and R&D is Y = ln[(∑it =1Vi A 0 ) + 1] and for cash holdings is Y =
 ln[((Vt − V0 ) A0 ) + 1] . Independent variables are new debt raised, other sources of funds - both of which are
normalized by total assets and interacted with debt type dummy – ln[total assets], and numerical scores for credit
ratings (0 to 21). All regressions include year and firm fixed effects. Dollar changes are the implied change in the
dependent variable when each debt type is increased by one dollar. Debt type dummy reflects convertibles, short-
term, secure, and callable debt in panels A through D, respectively. Bold letters indicate statistical significance at
the 5% level, using robust standard errors. The sample period is from 1971 to 2004.


Dependent Variable:                                   Explanatory Variables
ln[((Vt-V0)/Asset)+1]   t=1,4     N       ln[(Debt/Asset)+1]         ln[(Debt/Asset)+1]            Dollar Changes        R-Squared
ln[(∑Vt/Asset)+1]                                                   *Debt Type Dummy
                                           Panel A: Straight vs. Convertible Debt Issues
                                           Coef         t stat        Coef          t stat      Straight   Convertible
∑CAPEX                  1year    2,680       0.113          3.04         0.008          0.21     0.11          0.12        0.24
                        4years   1,120       0.237          2.97        -0.338         -2.81     0.30         -0.13        0.64
∑R & D                  1year    2,712       0.003          1.21         0.056          4.90     0.00          0.05        0.10
                        4years   1,143       0.012          0.76         0.261          2.13     0.01          0.26        0.23
∆Cash                   1year    2,348       0.206          3.21         0.383          3.72     0.18          0.51        0.32
                        4years     952       0.164          1.50         0.308          1.17     0.16          0.43        0.35
                                           Panel B: Long vs. Short Term Debt Issues
                                          Coef        t stat        Coef        t stat         Long-Term   Short-Term
∑CAPEX                  1year    2,678      0.121          3.72      -0.039         -1.16         0.12        0.08         0.24
                        4years   1,120      0.177          2.37      -0.587         -1.35         0.22       -0.51         0.63
∑R & D                  1year    2,710       0.016          3.42         0.040          2.99     0.01          0.05        0.07
                        4years   1,143       0.050          1.38        -0.385         -1.58     0.05         -0.33        0.16
∆Cash                   1year    2,346       0.275          4.64         0.116          1.18     0.24          0.34        0.26
                        4years     952       0.182          1.59        -1.039         -2.40     0.18         -0.83        0.32

                                          Panel C: Unsecured vs. Secured Debt Issues
                                          Coef        t stat       Coef         t stat         Unsecured     Secured
∑CAPEX                  1year    2,680      0.117          3.69       0.000          0.01        0.12         0.11         0.24
                        4years   1,120      0.167          2.25       0.437          0.97        0.21         0.74         0.63
∑R & D                  1year    2,712       0.018          3.71        -0.014         -2.43     0.02          0.00        0.06
                        4years   1,143       0.058          1.39         0.000          0.00     0.06          0.06        0.11
∆Cash                   1year    2,348       0.287          4.78        -0.089         -1.63     0.25          0.17        0.25
                        4years     952       0.199          1.67        -0.312         -1.65     0.19         -0.11        0.28

                                         Panel D: Non-Callable vs. Callable Debt Issues
                                          Coef        t stat        Coef         t stat    Non-Callable      Callable
∑CAPEX                  1year    1,666      0.005          0.10        0.125          2.47    0.00            0.13         0.25
                        4years     764      0.167          1.67        0.094          0.78    0.20            0.31         0.64
∑R & D                  1year    1,688      -0.006         -2.80         0.007          2.63     -0.01         0.00        0.05
                        4years     781      -0.012         -1.05         0.003          0.25     -0.01        -0.01        0.13
∆Cash                   1year    1,421       0.186          2.95         0.010          0.12      0.17         0.18        0.24
                        4years     631      -0.025         -0.40         0.198          1.22     -0.02         0.16        0.30




                                                              40
                                                                                    Table X
                               Summary of the Empirical Results and Implications for Theories on Debt Contract Design
This table summarizes the major empirical results and relates them to various theories on debt contract design.


                         Firm/Maco/Project
Bond Characteristics     Characteristics       Empirical Results                                        Implications

                                            Issuers are smaller, have lower leverage and fixed asset,   Consistent with 'back door' equity financing (Stein 92)
Convertibles             Firm/Issuer level  higher market-to-book, higher return volatility             and 'matching' financing and investment options (Mayers 98)
(vs. Non-Convertibles)   Macroeconomy level issued more during recessions                               Consistent with Korajczyk & Levy (03) and Lamont (95)
                         Project level      used more for R&D and held as cash, less for CAPEX          Consistent with Stein (92), Mayers (98)

                                            Issuer are larger, have lower fixed asset, higher           Consistent with liquidity risk (Diamond 91), avoiding underinvestment
Short -term              Firm/Issuer level  market-to-book, and higher cash holdings                    (Myers 77, Barnea, Haugen, and Senbet 80), and signaling (Flannery 86)
(vs. Long-term)          Macroeconomy level issued more during recessions                               Consistent with Korajczyk & Levy (03) and Lamont(95)
                         Project level      used more for R&D and held as cash, less for CAPEX          Consistent with 'maturity matching' (Myers 77, Diamond 91, Hart and Moore 94)

                                                                                                        Consistent with 'banking' view (Berger and Udell 90)
                                            Issuers are smaller, have higher leverage, lower market-to- Inconsistent with 'corporate finance' view (Stulz and Johnson 85, Smith and
Secured                  Firm/Issuer level  book, weaker cash flows, and poor past stock performance Warner 79, Berkovich and Kim 90)
(vs. Unsecured)          Macroeconomy level                              -                                                                        -
                         Project level      less likely to be used for R&D                              Consistent with Mayers (1998)

                                                                                                        Consistent with interest rate risk hedging (Guntay, Prabhala, and Unal 02)
                         Firm/Issuer level  Issuers are younger, smaller, have less cash holdings       Inconsistent with mitigating agency costs (Barnea, Haugen, and Senbet 80)
Callable                                    issued less during recessions
(vs. Non-callable)       Macroeconomy level issued more when interest rate volatility is high                                                    -
                         Project level                                    -                                                                      -

                                            Issuers are largers, have lower leverage, higher
                                            market-to-book, lower stock return volatility,
Investment grade         Firm/Issuer level  stronger cash flows, and lower cash holdings                Consistent with financial constraints (Almeida, Campello, Weisbach 04, 07)
                                            issued more during recession or periods of low
(vs. Speculative)        Macroeconomy level economic growth                                             Consistent with Korajczyk & Levy (03) and Lamont(95)
                         Project level      Non-rated bonds finance more R&D than rated bonds




                                                                                        41
                                                                                                                         Figure 1
                                                                         Time-Series Distribution of Debt Issues by Credit Rating
This figure presents the log of proceeds raised in real terms (constant 2000 $US millions) by debt issues with various credit ratings for each year from 1971 to 2004.

         ln[Total Real Proceeds (constant 2000 $millions)]
 14.00                                                                                                                                                                                                               recession
                                                                         recession                                                            recession
                        recession


 12.00




 10.00




  8.00




  6.00
                                                                                                                                                                       A's (A3 to Aaa)
                                                                                                                                                                       Investable B's (Baa3 to Baa1)
                                                                                                                                                                       Speculative B's (B3 to Ba1)
  4.00
                                                                                                                                                                       C's(C to Caa1)
                                                                                                                                                                       Non Rated

  2.00




  0.00
         1971
                1972
                       1973
                              1974
                                     1975
                                            1976
                                                   1977
                                                          1978
                                                                 1979
                                                                        1980
                                                                               1981
                                                                                      1982
                                                                                             1983
                                                                                                    1984
                                                                                                           1985
                                                                                                                  1986
                                                                                                                         1987
                                                                                                                                1988
                                                                                                                                       1989
                                                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                                                                    1993
                                                                                                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                42
