NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORPORATE MISREPORTING AND BANK LOAN CONTRACTING
John R. Graham
Si Li
Jiaping Qiu
Working Paper 13708
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13708

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

We thank Avri Ravid, Michael Roberts, and participants in seminars at McMaster University, Wilfrid
Laurier University, and the 2006 Northern Finance Association conference for helpful comments.
Qiu acknowledges financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada and Li acknowledges financial support from the Clarica Financial Services Research Center
at Wilfrid Laurier University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by John R. Graham, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Misreporting and Bank Loan Contracting
John R. Graham, Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu
NBER Working Paper No. 13708
December 2007
JEL No. G21,G32,K22,K42
ABSTRACT
This paper is the first to study the effect of financial restatement on bank loan contracting. Compared
with loans initiated before restatement, loans initiated after restatement have significantly higher spreads,
shorter maturities, higher likelihood of being secured, and more covenant restrictions. The increase
in loan spread is significantly larger for fraudulent restating firms than other restating firms. We also
find that after restatement, the number of lenders per loan declines and firms pay higher upfront and
annual fees. These results are consistent with the view that banks use tighter loan contract terms to
overcome risk and information problems arising from financial restatements.

John R. Graham
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu
Si Li
School of Business and Economics
Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, ON
N2L 3C5, Canada
sli@wlu.ca

Jiaping Qiu
DeGroote School of Business
McMaster University
Hamilton, ON
L8S 4M4, Canada
qiu@mcmaster.ca

1.

Introduction

In recent years, a number of high-profile financial restatements by companies such as
Worldcom and Xerox have reduced previously reported earnings by billions of dollars. 1
According to the United States General Accounting Office, the number of restatements
grew by 145% from 1997 through 2002. From January 1997 through June 2002, about 10%
of all listed companies restated one or more times. The size and visibility of restating
companies also increased: The average market value of a restating company increased from
$500 million in 1997 to $2 billion in 2002. Financial restatements are potentially very
costly to the firms involved. They may shake investor confidence in the credibility of
corporate disclosure, depress demand for a firm’s securities, and constrain corporate
opportunities thereby leading to a substantial loss in market value.
With the increasing importance of restatements, their effect on the welfare of
shareholders has attracted a great deal of attention. Palmrose, Richardson and Scholz (2004)
document a -9.2% abnormal stock return over a 2-day event window around restatement
announcements. Anderson and Yohn (2002) find a -3.5% cumulative abnormal return
during a 7-day window. Hribar and Jenkins (2004) estimate that, depending on the model
used, the relative percentage increase in the cost of equity capital averages between 10.8%
and 19.5% in the month immediately following a restatement. These studies indicate that
restatements lead to significant loss in shareholder value and an increase in the cost of
equity.
The extant literature has focused on the consequences of restatements from the
perspective of equity holders. To date there is no evidence on the reactions of debt holders.
1

As stated by the U.S. General Accounting Office, a financial restatement occurs when a company, either
voluntarily or prompted by auditors or regulators, revises public financial information that has been
previously reported.

1

This paper attempts to fill this gap by analyzing the impact of financial restatements on
debt contracting. We focus on a firm’s bank loan contracting for two primary reasons. First,
bank loans are an important source of corporate financing. The flow of funds data from the
Federal Reserve System indicate that over the past decade, there have been $780 billion in
net debt security issuances and only $2 billion for equities. Among the debt issues, bank
loans play a significant role (about 54% of total debt since 1980). Given the significance of
private bank debt as well as the growing number of financial restatements, it is important to
understand how the structure and pricing of private debt change after a firm discloses
financial misreporting.
The second reason that we study bank loan contracts is that they provide multidimensional information about debt, and the reactions of banks to restatements can be
observed explicitly through various features of loan contracts. These contract terms allow
us to investigate the effects of restatements on the direct (interest rate) and indirect (loan
maturity, collateral requirements, and covenant restrictions) costs of debt. Moreover, loan
contracts allow us to uniquely analyze the impact of restatements on the structure of bank
loans, such as the number of lenders in a syndicate loan and loan transaction fees.
To analyze the impact of financial restatements on bank debt contracting, we begin
by examining the effect on the loan spread. We measure loan spread as the amount the
borrower pays in basis points over LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) or LIBOR
equivalent. After refiling financial statements, the loan spread increases by approximately
one half. Depending on the model specification, the magnitude of the increase is 65 to 72

2

basis points relative to a pre-restatement average spread of 141 basis points over LIBOR,
indicating that the increase in the loan spread is economically significant. 2
Corporate misreporting varies in severity. Because fraud-related misreporting is
more egregious than error-related misreporting, we expect that the market will punish fraud
firms more severely in terms of a larger increase in loan spread. We find that fraud-related
restatements increase spreads nearly half-again more, relative to restatements not related to
fraud. To determine whether the source of the restatement is important, we examine
whether lenders respond differently to restatements motivated by various initiators such as
auditors, the SEC, the company itself, or others. We do not find evidence that the loan
spread increase varies significantly across these groups. The results indicate that in loan
contracting, the content of restatements is more important than the identity of the prompter.
By examining non-price terms of the contracts, we also study whether financial
restatements have effects beyond increasing the price of bank debt. We find that loans
contracted after restatement announcements have significantly shorter maturity, higher
likelihood of being secured, and more covenant restrictions. The tighter non-price contract
terms potentially lead to additional costs borne by restating firms, such as incurring higher
transaction costs that result from more frequent refinancing, giving up profitable investment
opportunities to comply with more restrictive debt covenants, etc. Therefore, the economic
effect of restatements on the effective cost of debt is likely even higher than that implied by
the loan spread increase alone.

2

The magnitude of the loan spread increase is similar to that identified in other settings. For example,
Benmelech, Garmaise, and Moskowitz (2005) find that decreasing asset liquidation value translates into a 58
basis point increase in loan spread. Berger and Udell (1995) find that a firm with a 1-year banking
relationship pays a spread 48 basis points higher than does a firm that has an 11-year relationship. Our finding
that the spread increases by about one-half translates into an increase in about a one-tenth increase in the
overall cost of debt, which is in line with Hribar and Jenkins’ (2004) estimate of the effect of restatements on
the cost of equity.

3

In addition to altering contract terms, restatements can also affect how lenders
structure loans. We find evidence that on average, each loan has fewer lenders after
restatement. 3 This is consistent with more concentrated lending arrangements (i.e., fewer
lenders) being formed to enhance monitoring in the environment of increased risk and
information problems after a financial restatement. We also find that the upfront and annual
fees charged by lenders are higher for restating firms, presumably to compensate for
additional monitoring activities.
This paper is related to both the financial misreporting and loan contracting
literatures. First, the growing literature on the consequences of financial misreporting has
focused on how restatement reduces market value and increases the cost of equity
(Anderson and Yohn (2002), Hribar and Jenkins (2004), and Palmrose, Richardson and
Scholz (2004)), and how misreporting distorts employment and investment in the economy
(Kedia and Philippon (2006)). Our paper provides unique evidence on how restatement
affects bank debt contract terms. Combining our result of a 50 percent increase in the loan
spread after restatement with the previously documented increased cost of equity implies
that the effect of restatement on total cost of capital could be dramatic. Further accounting
for the indirect costs of restatement, such as stricter non-price contract terms, suggests that
restatement is quite costly to borrowing firms.
Second, our analysis is also related to the literature on bank loan contracting, which
has examined how loan contracts reflect risk and information asymmetry in various ways. 4
Previous contracting research has not investigated how loan contracts are affected by the

3

Firms may switch to new lenders after restatements. If this is the case, it is likely that the borrowing cost
from new lenders is lower than from existing lenders. Thus, our results of higher direct and indirect costs after
restatements would be likely stronger had firms kept the same lenders before and after restatements.
4
See Section 2 for a detailed discussion on the related banking literature.

4

changes in credit risk and information asymmetry that follow a restatement, so we add to
the literature in this dimension. A restatement implies that the information previously
known to the lending bank is inaccurate; therefore, prior beliefs about loan risk need to be
reevaluated. A restatement also creates uncertainty about the credibility of financial
statements and increases the firm’s perceived informational asymmetry from the bank’s
perspective. To deal with these issues, banks can attempt to enhance the efficiency of
monitoring by using tighter contract terms and a more efficient lending structure. In this
paper, we explore empirically how banks use price and non-price terms as well as the
lender structure of loan contracts to address these risk and information problems.
Third, we examine multiple dimensions (instead of a single dimension) of the loan
contract, and this allows us to investigate the creditors’ reactions to corporate restatements
more comprehensively. According to Melnik and Plaut (1986), bank loan contracts are a
package of n-contract terms and these contract terms cannot be split and traded separately.
The contract terms include not only the price term (the interest rate) but also non-price
terms such as maturity, collateral requirements, covenants, etc. By examining the multifaceted features of loan contracts, we show that restatement affects not only the price but
also the non-price terms and lender structure of loan contracts. Only a few papers examine
the impact of various factors on the multidimensional features of loan contracts and none
have examined the impact of corporate restatements. These papers investigate how the
country level creditor protection environment (Bae and Goyal (2006) and Qian and Strahan
(2006)), asset liquidation value (Benmelech, Garmaise, and Moskowitz (2005)), abnormal
accounting accruals (Bharath, Sunder, and Sunder (2006)), shareholder rights (Chava,
Dierker, and Livdan (2005)), and firm risk characteristics (Strahan (1999)) impact loan
contract terms.
5

To summarize, our paper makes three contributions. First, our paper is the first to
provide evidence on how restatement affects the cost of raising bank debt, one of the
primary financing sources to corporations. Second, our paper contributes to the loan
contracting literature by highlighting how financial restatements act as a mechanism by
which risk and information asymmetry can affect spreads, maturity, collateral, covenants,
and other aspects of financial contracting. Third, we focus on various aspects of loan
contracts that capture their multidimensional character, while most previous studies focus
on a single dimension (e.g., interest rate).
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses the relation
between restatements and loan contracting, as well as the related literature. Section 3
describes the data and summary statistics. Results, implications, and robustness tests are
given in Section 4. The last section concludes.

2.

Financial Restatements, Bank Loan Contracting, and Related

Literature
Financial restatement can affect a lender’s evaluation of a company through
revisions in beliefs about the firm’s expected future cash flows (mean or wealth effect) or
the uncertainty about the firm’s financial information (variance or information effect).
Regarding the mean effect, a restatement changes historic financial numbers, and thus
changes forecasts that are based on these numbers. 5 A majority of restatement cases reduce

5

This is what Karpoff et al. (2007) label the readjustment effect, which reflects the market adjusting to a
more accurate representation of the firm’s financial situation. This is the adjustment to the value the firm
would have obtained had it not misreported its financial numbers.

6

earnings, thereby revealing that companies are worse than they previously appeared. 6 In
addition, some restatements are associated with significant legal liabilities, further
worsening future prospects. Finally, a restatement may harm a company’s reputation, which
has a real effect on firms’ cash flows. This reputation effect refers to the decrease in present
value of the firm’s cash flows as investors, customers, and suppliers change the terms of
trade on which they do business with the firm. 7 The decline in future expected earnings for
restating companies has been documented in the literature, which finds a significant
downward revision in mean values of analyst earnings forecasts following restatements
(Palmrose et al. (2004)). The poorer prospects imply an increase in firm default risk and
such an increase in risk is reflected in stricter loan contract terms.
Regarding the variance effect, misreporting creates uncertainty about the credibility
of financial statements and signals low quality of disclosed company information. Although
restatement might in some circumstance reduce uncertainty about one particular accounting
item, the overall uncertainty of company financial information increases because
restatement causes investors to question other aspects of the firm's operations and reported
performance. As a result, the perceived information asymmetry between borrowers and
lenders increases after restatement. The literature has provided evidence of this effect. For
example, Palmrose et al. (2004) document a significant increase in analyst earnings forecast
dispersion after restatement announcements. Anderson and Yohn (2002) find an increase in
bid ask spreads surrounding restatement announcements related to revenue recognition

6

In their sample, Kinney and McDaniel (1989) find that there are twice as many announcements about
earnings overstatements as there are about earnings understatements. In our sample, overstatements
outnumber understatements nine to one.
7
According to Karpoff et al. (2007), the revelation of misconduct can have real effects on the firm’s
operations and result in reputation loss. For example, customers may change the terms on which they do
business with the firm due to an increased likelihood of misreporting or the perception that the firm cannot
support warranties or supply compatible parts in the future.

7

problems. The increased information asymmetry requires lenders to monitor the restating
firms more intensely. The increase in monitoring costs is passed along to borrowers in the
form of possibly higher interest rates and more stringent contract terms.
In short, the potential channels through which restatement affects loan contracting
include both wealth and information effects. We attempt to disentangle the wealth effect
from the information effect (in Table 5) but acknowledge that this part of the analysis is
suggestive rather than conclusive. Therefore, for the most part, we focus on the overall
effect of restatement on loan contracting.
The traditional banking literature (e.g., Freixas and Rochet (1997)) suggests that
credit risk is the major lending risk faced by banks and is one of the primary determinants
of loan pricing. Greater lending risk leads to higher loan interest rates. In addition, the
theoretical findings in Barry and Brown (1984), Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002), and
Easley and O’Hara (2004) suggest that the systematic risk of securities is affected by the
amount of available information, and limited information is a source of non-diversifiable
risk that should be priced in securities. As a result, this literature argues that information
disclosure lowers information risk and reduces the cost of capital. From a different angle,
Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) show that information transparency can reduce a firm’s
cost of capital because a firm with less information asymmetry attracts increased demand
from investors and thus increases the liquidity of its securities. The empirical literature
documents that information opacity of borrowing firms increases loan spreads. This
literature investigates the impact of such factors as duration of bank relationships (Petersen
and Rajan (1994) and Berger and Udell (1995)), auditor assurance (Blackwell, Noland, and
Winters (1998) and Pittman and Fortin (2004)), and analysts’ evaluations of voluntary
disclosure quality (Maxumdar and Sengupta (2005)) on loan spread. In short, the findings
8

in this literature are consistent with our conclusion that restating firms, having larger credit
risk and more severe information disclosure problems, face higher loan spreads.
Diamond’s (1991) theory indicates that debt maturity is a nonmonotonic function of
risk ratings. Low and high risk firms use short-term debt (low risk firms are able to roll
over their debt and high risk firms may be refused long-term debt because of a high default
probability) and intermediate risk firms use long-term debt (these firms avoid short term
debt to minimize refinancing risk). Stohs and Mauer (1996) and Scherr and Hulburt (2001)
find results consistent with this theory. 8 Restating firms are on average riskier than nonrestating firms, 9 thus we expect our results to follow Diamond’s (1991) implications for
intermediate to high risk firms: after restatement, the firms are perceived to be very risky
and are limited primarily to shorter term debt. In addition, Barclay and Smith (1995), OrtizMolina and Penas (2006), and Rajan and Winton (1995) suggest that by forcing more
frequent information disclosure and renegotiation of contract terms, shorter maturities may
be useful in addressing information problems. This is because banks can periodically
evaluate a firm’s ability to pay off debt and maintain a stronger bargaining position through
the short-term debt renewal processes. Our results that restating firms use shorter maturity
loans are consistent with Barclay and Smith (1995), Ortiz-Molina and Penas (2006), Rajan
and Winton (1995), and the intermediate to high risk range of Stohs and Mauer (1996) and
Scherr and Hulburt (2001).
Previous research finds that riskier borrowers use more collateral (Berger and Udell
(1990) and Jimenez, Salas, and Saurina (2006)). Rajan and Winton (1995) show that the

8

Guedes and Opler (1996) find that low risk firms borrow at short-term and long-term while high risk firms
borrow at intermediate-term, a result which appears to conflict with Diamond (1991).
9
Burns and Kedia (2006) show that restating firms have significantly higher leverage and price-earnings
ratios than nonrestating firms.

9

presence of collateral enhances efficient monitoring. These implications are consistent with
our finding that firms that have misstated financials are more likely to pledge collateral.
Smith and Warner’s (1979) Costly Contracting Hypothesis (CCH) states that, when
including covenants in debt contracts, firms trade off benefits of reducing agency costs of
debt (which are higher when firms are closer to financial distress) with costs of reduced
flexibility. Bradley and Roberts (2005) argue that an important implication of CCH is a
negative relation between the financial health of a firm and the presence and intensity of
covenants in debt contracts and they document this empirically. Additionally, Rajan and
Winton (1995) suggest that covenants enhance banks' incentives to monitor the borrower.
Hence, this literature suggests that covenants will be used more intensively in the loan
contracts involving firms that are relatively distressed and in need of monitoring, such as
restating firms. Our findings support this argument.
The loan syndicate literature indicates that firms with a high probability of financial
distress will borrow from fewer lenders (Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) and Lee and
Mullineaux (2004)). This is because a syndicate structure with fewer lenders facilitates
renegotiation and collective decision-making, and thus enhances the prospects of successful
loan restructuring in the event of financial distress. 10 In addition, the literature suggests that
loans to borrowers with information problems involve fewer lenders. Dennis and
Mullineaux (2000) show that banks could decline to provide loans to borrowers whose
information is opaque. Also, when there is limited information about a borrower, fewer
lenders help reduce free riding in information gathering and monitoring. Consistent with
10

The literature also suggests that the syndication structure can diversify banks’ loan portfolios by spreading
the credit risk among the participating banks. Therefore, more lenders help diversify the credit risk of a loan.
However, in the case of restating firms, banks may refuse to provide loans because such borrowers are
perhaps very distressed and have severe information problems. As a result, for restating firms, the risk
diversification effect may be dominated by other effects.

10

this literature, we find that firms that have restated will borrow from syndicates comprised
of fewer lenders. In addition, our results are consistent with the increased cost of
monitoring activities being passed along to borrowers through increased fees.

3.

Data

3.1

Sample Selection
We use corporate misreporting data from the financial restatement database

collected by the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO). This database includes 919
restatements announced by around 800 public companies from January 1, 1997, to June 30,
2002. These restatements involve accounting irregularities that result in material
misstatements of previously filed financial results.11 These events include material errors
and fraud.
The bank loan data come from Dealscan, a Loan Pricing Corporation (LPC)
database. This database contains detailed loan information for U.S. and foreign commercial
loans made to corporations, starting in 1986. The data are primarily gathered from SEC
filings. The rest of the data are from direct research by LPC through contacts with
borrowers, lenders, and the credit industry at large. The basic unit of our empirical analysis
is a loan, also referred to as a facility or tranche in Dealscan. Loans are grouped into deals,
so a deal may have one or more loans. While each loan has only one borrower, loans can
have multiple lenders due to syndication. In the case of syndication, a group of banks

11

Specifically, the database includes the instances in which a company restates its financial statements
because they were not fairly presented in the initial filings in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP).

11

and/or other financial institutions (e.g., insurance companies) make a loan jointly to a
borrower. 12
We use the following procedures to form the sample. First, for companies that
restate their financial information more than once, we keep only the first restatement
announcement. This is because the main purpose of this study is to compare the cost of debt
before restatement with that after restatement. If we were to keep the second restatement
announcement for a firm, the pre-announcement window of the second restatement could
overlap with the post-announcement window of the first restatement and this overlap might
confound the comparison. 13 Sixty-five companies restated twice and eleven companies
restated three times in the original restatement database. We are left with 832 restatements
by 832 firms after removing the second and third restatements. We then merge the
restatement sample with the Dealscan and Compustat databases. Firms are removed if they
have no loan information in Dealscan or have missing Compustat information, resulting in
a sample of 437 firms. Finally, to permit fair comparison of the debt contract before and
after restatement, we remove firms that only have pre-restatement loans or post-restatement
loans. 14 Our final sample includes 237 restatement firms with 2451 loans, of which 1568
loans are initiated before the announcements of restatements and 883 are initiated after the
announcements. These loans span the period 1989 through 2004.
12

Dealscan provides information about loans at origination but no information about what happens
subsequently (Strahan (1999)). Therefore, our data do not contain loan amendments and it is therefore
advantageous to compare contract terms of new loans (both before and after restatements). In addition,
Dealscan includes loans issued to refinance or consolidate existing debt prior to maturity. Because the
purpose of this study is to compare contract terms of loans issued before restatements with those issued after,
no matter what the loan is used for, loan refinancing will not affect our primary purpose.
13
For companies that have multiple restatements, in unreported analysis, we compare loans initiated between
the first and the second restatement with those initiated after the second restatement and do not find a
significant difference in contract terms. This implies that there is no significant incremental effect due to a
second restatement.
14
Including firms that only have pre-restatement or post-restatement loans in the analysis yields essentially
the same results.

12

We examine whether the final sample is representative of the original restatement
sample. First, we compare the original sample (919 restatements) and the final sample (237)
in terms of restatement announcement year, reason for restatement, restatement initiator,
and whether fraud occurred. The distributions from these two samples are similar. We also
compare the 832 restatements (that are left after removing the second and third restatements)
with the final sample and again get similar distributions. Second, we compare 237 firms in
the final sample with 437 firms, 200 of which have only pre-restatement loans or only postrestatement loans. Both samples have similar distributions by restatement announcement
year, reason for restatement, prompter, fraud occurrence, and industry. These two samples
also have similar firm characteristics such as market-to-book, asset tangibility, cash flow
volatility, etc., and similar loan characteristics such as loan maturity, covenants, etc. Further,
regression analyses using the 437 firms do not change our results. Therefore, we conclude
that our final sample is not systematically different from the original restatement sample.
The analysis of sample representativeness is available upon request.

3.2

Sample Description and Univariate Comparisons
[Table 1 about here]
Table 1 contains the information on the restating firms in our final sample. 237

firms restated their financials for a variety of reasons (Panel A). Issues involving improper
revenue recognition (misreported or nonreported revenue) account for about 40% of the
restatement cases. Restatements related to improper accounting treatment of restructuring
activity, investments, timing of asset write-downs, inventory valuation, etc. account for
16% of the cases. About 13% of firms restate due to improperly recognizing costs or
expenses. A restatement can be prompted by different parties (Panel B). About 44%

13

restatements are prompted by the restating companies themselves, 24% by the SEC, and
5% by external auditors. Panel C of Table 1 shows that about 8% of restatements occur in
firms that allegedly committed fraud. We define corporate fraud as cases subject to fraud
enforcement actions by the SEC. In these fraud cases, the SEC took action against
companies for violating the SEC's antifraud rule 10b-5 because the firm made
misstatements of material fact related to its financial condition. 15 Restatements may occur
before or after SEC fraud enforcement because a restatement could trigger the SEC fraud
investigation, or the SEC enforcement action may result in a restatement.
[Table 2 about here]
Table 2 presents summary statistics of debt contract terms for restating firms, and
the univariate comparisons of these contract terms between pre-restatement and postrestatement loans. The price of the bank borrowing, loan spread, is measured as the
Dealscan data item all-in spread drawn (AIS drawn), which is the amount the borrower pays
in basis points over LIBOR or LIBOR equivalent for each dollar drawn. 16 This measure
adds to the borrowing spread any annual fees paid to the bank group. The mean loan spread
increases from 141 basis points over LIBOR before restatement to 223 basis points after
restatement. The average loan maturity drops from 45 months before restatement to 35
months after restatement. We also compare the number of covenants before and after and
find that each loan averages 6.9 before restatement and increases to 7.5 after restatement.

15

Rule 10b-5 "Employment of Manipulative and Deceptive Devices" of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
proscribes, among other things, “the intent to deceive, manipulate, or defraud with misstatements of material
fact made in connection to financial condition, solvency and profitability.” (SEC Administration Proceeding
File #3-9588)
16
AIS rates are quoted over LIBOR. For loans not based on LIBOR, LPC converts the spread into LIBOR
terms by adding or subtracting a differential which is adjusted periodically.

14

After restatement, firms also have larger loan size 17 , their loans are more likely to have the
feature of tying the loan pricing to firm performance and are more likely to be secured, and
they pay higher annual fees. All these changes are significant in the mean. There is no
significant change in the number of lenders in a loan after restatement. We later show in the
regression analysis that after controlling for other determinants of loan contracts, the
number of lenders declines significantly after restatement.

4.

Multivariate Analysis

4.1

Effect of Restatement on the Cost of Bank Debt
In this section we use regression analysis to examine the effect of restatement on the

cost of bank debt. The main empirical model follows:
Log(Loan spread)=ƒ(Post-restatement indicator, Firm characteristics, Loan
characteristics, Industry effects, Macroeconomic factors).

(1)

In the regression, each observation represents a single loan. The dependent variable
is the natural logarithm of the cost of debt, loan spread. To capture the effect of restatement,
we define a dummy variable, post-restatement, which is equal to one if the loan is activated
after restatement announcement and zero otherwise. 18 We control for firm characteristics,

17

There are two reasons that the univariate analysis identifies an increase in loan size after restatement. First,
due to time trends, firm size increases and larger firms borrow via larger loans. Second, post-restatement
loans are more dominated by loans to larger firms than are pre-restatement loans in our sample. After
restatement, the number of loans to smaller firms (i.e., firms with total assets less than the median assets in the
final sample) drops by about 50%, while the number of loans to larger firms drops by only about 20%.
Controlling for firm size, we find that loan size scaled by total assets decreases significantly after restatement.
18
We use activation date to separate pre-restatement loans from post-restatement loans. Ideally, we would
define post-restatement loans as those that have a contracting date after the restatement announcement date.
However, Dealscan does not provide the information on the date a loan is contracted. Instead, the date a
contract becomes active, which should be no earlier than the loan contracting date, is available. Therefore, the
coefficient on the post-restatement dummy might be understated because we use the activation date.

15

loan characteristics, industry effects, and macroeconomic factors that may influence the
cost of debt. 19
[Table 3 about here]
The regression results are reported in Table 3. Column 1 analyzes the cost of debt
with post-restatement dummy as the only independent variable. The estimated coefficient
equals 0.497 and is significant at a 1% level, indicating that after firms announce
restatements, loan spreads increase by approximately one-half. 20 Therefore, the effect of
restatement on the cost of debt is economically significant.
The regression in Column 2 of Table 3 includes firm characteristics that could
influence the cost of bank loans. 21 These variables include Log(assets), the logarithm of a
firm’s total assets, to measure firm size. Larger firms have easier access to external
financing. They also are hypothesized to have less information asymmetry and are
associated with smaller monitoring costs. Therefore, larger firms are likely to borrow from
banks on better terms. We use Market to book, the ratio of market value of assets (market
value of equity plus book value of debt) to the book value of assets, to proxy for a firm's
growth opportunities. All else equal, a firm recognized as having better growth
opportunities can have a lower borrowing cost. Growth firms may be vulnerable to
financial distress or subject to information asymmetry. However, given that we will control
19

Data definitions and measurement details for all the variables are reported in the Appendix.
Because the dependent variable is expressed in logarithmic form, the coefficient estimates represent
percentage change effects of the independent variables on the dependent variable.
21
The financial restatement may of course result in altered financial numbers post-restatement. For the
purpose of our study, we use company reported non-restated financial information in the main regressions.
(For each financial statement data item, Compustat contains a company’s initially reported number and a
restated number. We use the former.) The implications from our analysis do not change if we instead use
restated financial information when analyzing the post-restatement loans. We use reported non-restated
financials when analyzing pre-restatement loans because when loans are contracted before restatement, banks
rely on reported information when setting up the loan contracts. It is possible that banks also have private
information about the firm before a restatement is announced. In such a case, the complete effect of
restatement is attenuated due to the leakage of information to lenders, and the regression coefficient on the
post-restatement dummy may measure a partial effect and be understated.
20

16

for other characteristics like tangibility of book assets, market to book may affect the loan
spread negatively if market to book represents the additional value over book assets that
debt holders can access in the event of default.
We also control for Leverage, the ratio of long-term debt to total assets. Firms with
higher leverage ratios, all else equal, have higher default risk and thus we expect them to
face a higher cost of bank borrowing. 22 We also include Profitability, the ratio of earnings
before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) to total assets, because
profitable firms generally have low default risk and thus can borrow at a lower cost.
Tangibility is defined as the ratio of tangible assets to total assets. Because lenders may
recover tangible assets should the firm default, we expect firms with more tangible assets to
have lower borrowing costs. Cash flow volatility, measured as the standard deviation of
quarterly cash flows from operations over the 16 fiscal quarters prior to the loan initiation
year, scaled by total debt, is used to proxy for a firm's earnings risk and is expected to be
positively correlated with the cost of debt.23 Finally, Altman (1968)’s Z-score is included to
further control for default risk. A higher Z-score indicates better financial health and thus
lower default risk. All of the above variables are measured as of the year prior to the loan
initiation date.
The results in Column 2 show that after controlling for firm characteristics, the
effect of restatement on the loan spread continues to be significant. The results also indicate
that small, volatile, highly levered, distressed firms with few tangible assets and few growth
options are associated with a higher cost of debt.
22

Alternatively, lower ex ante costs of debt could enable a firm to take on more debt and thus the cost of debt
and leverage could be negatively correlated. To deal with this potential endogeneity, in the regressions,
leverage is measured one year prior to the loan initiation year and is therefore predetermined.
23
Our definition of Cash flow volatility follows Bharath, Sunder, and Sunder (2006). This measure represents
earnings risk relative to the total debt commitment of the firm. In unreported analysis, we also use cash flow
volatility scaled by total assets, and the results are qualitatively unchanged.

17

We further control for loan characteristics that might be correlated with the price of
debt and report the results in Column 3 of Table 3. We control for Log(Maturity), the
natural logarithm of loan maturity in months, because the lender requires a liquidity
premium for longer term debt and this liquidity premium translates into a higher loan
spread. We also include Log(Loan Size), the natural logarithm of the amount of a loan,
which may capture economies of scale in bank lending and thus is expected to be inversely
related to the loan rate. Alternatively, this same negative relation might occur if riskier
borrowers are granted smaller loans with higher interest rates. Performance pricing is a
dummy variable equal to one if a loan contract has the performance pricing feature. 24 This
is to control for the possibility that lenders price loans differently if they contain
performance pricing clauses. The regression results show that further controlling for loan
characteristics has little effect on the magnitude and significance of the impact of
restatement on the loan spread. The results also show that larger loans and loans with
shorter maturity have smaller spreads, while performance pricing is not significantly related
to the loan spread.
Macroeconomic conditions can affect debt pricing. In Column 4 of Table 3, we use
three different variables to control for macroeconomic cycles. Credit spread is the
difference between the yields of BAA and AAA corporate bonds. Term spread is the
difference between the yields of 10 year treasury bonds and 2 year treasury bonds.
I(1996≤Year≤2000) is an indicator variable, equaling one if the loan is initiated between
1996 and 2000. The literature suggests that credit spread and term spread are good proxies

24

Performance pricing is a relatively new provision in bank debt contracts. A traditional bank loan is priced
using a fixed spread over a floating benchmark such as LIBOR or prime. Performance pricing explicitly
varies the loan spread with the borrower’s credit rating or financial performance measured with financial
ratios like debt-to-EBITDA, leverage, interest coverage, etc.

18

of macroeconomic conditions and help explain stock and bond returns (Chen, Roll, and
Ross (1986) and Fama and French (1993)). Specifically, credit spreads tend to widen in
recessions and to shrink in expansions (Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001)).
This is because investors require more compensation for increased default risk in bad
economic times. High (low) term spreads are often used as an indicator of good (bad)
economic prospects. In the regressions, we measure credit spread and term spread one
month before the time the loan becomes active. The results show that credit spread is
positively related to loan spread, suggesting that market-wide default risk is reflected in the
individual loan rate.
Finally, in Column 5 of Table 3, we control for loan type, loan purpose, and
industry effects. Loans are of different types, such as 364-day loans, term loans, and
revolving loans. Loans can also be declared for different uses like corporate purposes, debt
repayment, takeovers, working capital, etc. Because loans with different types and purposes
are associated with different risks, they may be priced differently. In addition, we employ
one digit SIC dummies to control for the potential differences in risks and debt pricing
structures across industries. After adding all the control variables, the results indicate that
the effect of restatement is still economically and statistically significant with a coefficient
that indicates a 46.2% increase in the loan spread after restatement. The average loan
spread of sample firms is 141 basis points before restatement. Therefore, a 46.2% increase
implies that, other things being equal, loan spreads increase by approximately 65 basis
points after restatement. 25 Since the average loan size for the sample firms after restatement

25

The average one year LIBOR rate is 4.94% during our 1989 to 2004 sample period (historic LIBOR rates
from the British Bankers’ Association’s Interest Rate Settlements.) In our sample, the average total loan rate
before restatement is therefore about 6.35% (1.41% + 4.94%). A 50% increase in the loan spread implies that
the average spread increases by 71 (141×50%) basis points after restatement, and the average total loan rate

19

is $404 million, the post-restatement increase in the loan spread implies an average increase
of $2.6 million per loan in annual post-restatement interest payments. 26

27

In sum, the results in this section are consistent with restatements signalling worse
and/or more uncertain future prospects. The resulting increases in the credit risk and
monitoring costs cause lenders to require a higher price of debt. It is worth highlighting that
the restatement dummy proxies for the increase in risk above and beyond any risk or
information effects captured by the other right-hand-side variables. For example,
profitability, Zscore, and market to book could partially capture the effect of firm
performance on credit risk (i.e., wealth effect), and cash flow volatility could partially
capture information uncertainty. Finding a significant coefficient on the dummy variable
indicates that the other right hand side variables do not fully capture the increase in risk due
to restatement. Moreover, the restatement dummy remains significant even when we
include forward looking variables like analyst earnings forecast and forecast dispersion (see
Table 4) as explanatory variables. Assuming that our linear model is adequate, and that our
specification includes all the relevant publicly available information, this implies that the
increases to 7.06% (6.35%+0.71%). The resulting increase in the total loan rate is 11.18% ((7.06%6.35%)/6.35%), which is in line with the 10.8% to 19.5% relative percentage increase in the cost of equity
capital found in Hribar and Jenkins (2004).
26
About 50-60% of loans in Dealscan are revolving loans, in which the borrower may draw on funds at any
time, up to an established maximum limit, and does not have to exhaust the credit limit. In these revolving
loans, the drawn loan spread (i.e., the spread on the amount drawn) is about 197 basis points, and is much
higher than the undrawn loan spread (i.e., the spread on the amount undrawn), which is about 24 basis points.
An upper bound estimate of the increase in the annual interest payments post-restatement, based on the full
loan size and the drawn spread, is $2.6 million per loan. Under the alternative assumption that firms on
average draw down 50% of the credit limit in revolving loans, a more conservative estimate of the increase in
the annual interest payments per post-restatement loan would be $1.3 million, which is still economically
important.
27
To investigate the possibility that the impact of restatement could be short-lived and fade over time, we
conduct a regression to separately estimate the effects of restatement on loans that were issued in each postrestatement year. The results indicate that there are no significant differences in the increase in loan spreads
for post-restatement loans initiated in any year t+1, t+2, t+3, t+4, or t+5. In separate analysis, when we restrict
the sample to years between t-2 to t+2 and perform a regression using the main loan spread specification, we
find some evidence of a loan rate run-up effect prior to the restatement, which we conjecture is a result of
banks using their private information prior to the public restatement announcement.

20

post-restatement dummy coefficient captures the effect of private information that banks
use to reassess the risk of the firm after restatement.
[Table 4 about here]
Besides providing the evidence that loan spreads are higher after restatement, we
examine why borrowers are viewed as being riskier after restatement. In unreported
analysis, we find that after restatement there is an increase in leverage and a decline in
profitability, Z-score, net income, return on assets, earnings per share, sales scaled by assets,
operating cash flows scaled by assets, market-to-book, and analyst consensus forecasted
earnings. An unreported regression shows that changes in net income, market value,
profitability, Z-score, and consensus earnings are negatively associated with changes in
loan spreads, while changes in leverage, cash flow volatility, and analyst forecast
dispersion are positively related to changes in loan spreads. These results suggest that
changes in firm characteristics and analyst forecasts caused by restatement reflect changes
in firm risk and such changes in risk are reflected in changed loan spreads.

4.1.1 Wealth Effect versus Information Effect of Restatement
As discussed above, there are two ways that restatement may affect the cost of
borrowing. The first is a wealth effect, in which a restatement affects estimates of the
expected future cash flows of the firm. The second is an information effect, in which a
restatement affects the degree of certainty that lenders have in their estimates of future cash
flows. Although it is difficult to disentangle the two effects, in this section, we make an
attempt to isolate the extent to which loan spreads change due to reduced earnings versus
increased uncertainty.

21

Using I/B/E/S data, we identify firms that have increased analyst forecast dispersion
after restatement. 28 These firms have increased information uncertainty due to restatement,
while the other firms do not. Both groups have mean (wealth) effects. This allows us to
estimate the extent to which loan spreads change due to the information effect, above and
beyond the wealth effect.
We estimate the following regression:
Log(Loan Spread)=α+βPost-Restatement+γPost-Restatement×DispIncrease+ δX+ ε (2)
where the dummy variable, DispIncrease, is equal to one if analyst forecast dispersion
increases after restatement, and is zero otherwise. X represents control variables. Thus, to
the extent that analyst forecast dispersion reflects information uncertainty, γ is expected to
capture the information effect and β is expected to capture the wealth effect, above any
wealth and/or information effects controlled by X.
[Table 5 about here]
In Column (1) of Table 5, we include only the post-restatement dummy and the
interaction term and do not control for any other variables. The results show that loan
spreads increase by 45.3% (i.e., β=0.453) after restatement for companies without increased
forecast dispersion. Companies that experience increased dispersion have an additional
16.5% increase in loan spreads (i.e., γ=0.165), for a total loan spread increase of 61.8%
after restatement. In other words, for firms that exhibit increased information uncertainty,
the information effect accounts for about 1/4th (16.5/61.8) of the total effect of restatement,
and the wealth effect accounts for the remaining 3/4ths.
28

As in Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002), we define dispersion as the standard deviation of analysts’
current-fiscal-year EPS forecasts, scaled by the absolute value of the mean forecast. For each restating firm,
we include only the dispersion of forecasts that are made within one year surrounding restatement
announcements and representing the same fiscal year EPS forecasts. We alternatively define dispersion as the
standard deviation scaled by fiscal year end share price preceding restatement announcement, and the results
from this alternative definition are essentially unaffected.

22

In Column (2) of Table 5, we control for various factors in X. In this case, the
wealth effect contributes to a loan spread increase of about 40.8% after restatement, and the
information effect contributes an additional 26.0%. As a result, for firms with increased
information uncertainty, after controlling for observable factors, the residual information
effect accounts for about 40% (26.0/66.8), and the wealth effect accounts for 60% of the
total effect of restatement. We find similar results if we define DispIncrease to equal one
only if the increase in dispersion is statistically significant (reported in Columns (3) and (4)
of Table 5). In Column (4), the wealth and information effects each contribute about onehalf of the overall increase in loan spreads due to financial restatement. 29

4.1.2 The Effect of Fraud on the Cost of Bank Debt
[Table 6 about here]
In this section, we examine whether fraud-related restatements lead to a larger
increase in the cost of debt than do other restatements. Compared with non-fraudulent firms,
fraud firms have more severe risk and information problems and thus are expected to
experience a greater increase in loan rates after restatement. We include an interaction term
post-restatement× fraud, where fraud is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the restating
company is found to have committed fraud. The results reported in Table 6 indicate that
fraud increases the restatement effect on the cost of debt. The coefficient on postrestatement is 0.426 and the coefficient on post-restatement× fraud is 0.263, and both
coefficients are significant. Thus non-fraudulent restatements lead to a 42.6% increase in
the loan spread, while fraudulent restatements have a much greater effect: a 68.9% (42.6%
+ 26.3%) increase in the spread.
29

The results on disentangling the two effects should be interpreted with caution. Banks could have different
perceptions from analysts, and therefore analysts’ forecast dispersion is not a perfect proxy for information
uncertainty.

23

4.1.3 The Identity of the Restatement Initiator and the Cost of Bank Debt
In this section, we study whether the identity of the party that prompts the
restatement differentially affects the cost of debt. Restatement initiated by outside parties
such as the external auditor and the SEC may signal that a company’s internal monitoring
failed not only to prevent, but also to correct, a material misstatement. Conversely,
detection and revelation by the company provides some indication of relatively stronger
internal governance. This may mitigate the adverse signal about the company’s future
prospects and the uncertainty generated by the restatement. Therefore, we suspect that the
effect of restatement prompted by external monitors might be a stronger negative reaction
than the effect of restatement prompted by the company.
To examine the potential difference in the effects of prompter identity on loan
spread, we first create four dummy variables, Company, Auditor, SEC, and Uncertain.
These dummies are respectively equal to 1 if a restatement is initiated by the company itself,
the external auditor, the SEC or other known regulators such as Nasdaq, or any unknown
party. 30 These dummies are interacted with the Post-restatement variable. Each of these
interaction terms captures the change in the loan spread after a restatement attributed to a
specific prompter, compared to the loan spread before the restatement.
The results (available upon request) show that all the interaction terms between
Post-restatement and prompter dummies are significantly positive, implying that the cost of
debt goes up after restatement no matter who initiates the refiling. The point estimates of
the coefficients of the cross terms are highest for cases prompted by external auditors

30

Since there are only five restatements initiated by external regulators such as Nasdaq, FASB, IRS, etc., we
combine them with restatements prompted by the SEC in the regression.

24

(0.612), followed by the SEC (0.535), and then the company (0.457). However, none of the
estimated coefficients differs statistically from the others.

4.2

Effect of Restatement on Other Loan Contract Terms
If restatements convey information about a company's future prospects and the

quality of information disclosure, lenders might incorporate this information into debt
contracts by altering not only the loan rate but also other contract terms, such as maturity,
collateral, and covenants. In this section, we focus on how restatement impacts the three
major non-price debt contract features: loan maturity, whether a loan is collateralized, and
the total number of covenants.
[Table 7 about here]

4.2.1 Debt Maturity
Column 1 of Table 7 reports the results on the impact of restatement on debt
maturity, controlling for other variables that could correlate with maturity. The coefficient
on the post-restatement dummy indicates that after restatement, firms use loans that have a
maturity 17.1% (7.7 months) shorter than before restatement, implying that shortened
maturity helps address risk and information problems arising from restatement.
The regression results also document the following relations between control
variables and debt maturity. First, leverage is positively related to loan maturity, which is
consistent with the empirical evidence presented in Barclay and Smith (1995), Johnson
(2003), and Stohs and Mauer (1996). In addition, a profitable firm with more tangible
assets and better financial health has access to loans with longer maturity. Further, loan size
is positively related to loan maturity. Loans without performance pricing have shorter
maturity, possibly because banks use short maturity to adjust loan terms instead of linking

25

loan pricing with firm performance dynamically. This suggests that performance pricing
could substitute for shorter debt maturity in corporate monitoring.

4.2.2 Loan Securitization
We study the impact of restatement on the likelihood of a loan being secured
because collateralization is an important feature of financial contracts. We estimate a probit
model where the dependent variable is 1 if the loan is secured and 0 otherwise and report
the result in Column 2 of Table 7. The marginal effect of the post-restatement dummy
implies that the probability of a loan being secured increases by 8.6% after restatement,
holding other variables at their means. 31 This is consistent with the view that firms with
restated financials are more likely to be required to provide collateral against their loans.
The effects of control variables on the likelihood of a loan being secured are
intuitive. Large, profitable, low leverage firms with more tangible assets and better
financial health likely have lower default risk and thus are associated with a lower
probability of the loan being secured. Loan size is negatively correlated with the likelihood
of a loan being secured likely because loan size is positively related to credit quality, while
credit quality is negatively related to collateral. Finally, in good years, market-wide default
risk declines and the likelihood of a loan being secured decreases.

4.2.3 Covenant Intensity
Covenants play an important role in private debt contracts. 32 To estimate the impact
of restatement on the covenant intensity of a loan, we follow Bradley and Roberts (2005)

31

The restatement dummy coefficient of 0.316 translates into an 8.6% marginal effect in the Probit model.
Debt covenants are more important in private debt than in public debt. According to Barclay and Smith
(1995), when a restrictive debt covenant is violated, it is often optimal to renegotiate the debt agreement
rather than forcing the borrower into bankruptcy. It is costly to renegotiate covenants in public debt
agreements outside the bankruptcy process because the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 limits the discretion that
32

26

and track the total number of covenants included in the loan agreement, in the context of a
Poisson regression. The goodness-of-fit chi-squared statistic of the Poisson regression has a
p-value of 0.11 and the null hypothesis that the dependent variable is Poisson distributed
cannot be rejected, which indicates that Poisson specification is suitable. The results,
reported in Column 3 of Table 7, indicate that lenders impose more restrictions on loans to
restating firms. The incidence ratio from the Poisson regression shows that on average, the
number of covenants increases from an average of 6.9 in a pre-restatement loan to 7.6 in a
post-restatement loan, after controlling for other characteristics.
To further investigate the type of covenants added to loan contracts after
restatement, we separately study financial covenants and general covenants. Financial
covenants place limits, which must be maintained while the debt is outstanding, on
accounting variables and ratios. General covenants are restrictions on prepayment,
dividends, and voting rights. Prepayment covenants usually specify that a loan must be
repaid from a specific source such as equity issuance, excess cash flow, excess asset sales,
excess debt issuance, or insurance proceeds related to collateral. The dividend covenant
limits the payment of dividends. The covenants on voting rights mandate the percentage of
lenders required to approve the changes of the items in the loan agreement, such as term
changes and collateral release.
Columns 4 and 5 in Table 7 show that the new covenants added after restatement
are general instead of financial covenants. Financial covenants are often violated after
restatement. Therefore, tightening financial covenant ratios or increasing the number of

may be allocated to the trustee in a public debt issue. Therefore, private lenders have a comparative advantage
in writing debt contracts that contain restrictive covenants.

27

financial covenants might be less efficient in solving the monitoring problems, relative to
increasing the general restrictions on prepayment of loans, dividend payout, etc.
The relations between other variables and covenant intensity are interesting. The
loan contracts of growth firms have fewer covenant restrictions, consistent with the finding
of Nash, Netter, and Poulsen (2003) that firms with more growth opportunities seek to
preserve flexibility by including fewer restrictive covenants in their financial contracts.
Highly levered, low asset tangibility, distressed firms have more covenants, which is
consistent with these firms having higher agency costs of debt. Profitable firms are
associated with more covenants, as are performance pricing loans. The latter might occur
because a high credit risk firm is more likely to have debt priced conditional on credit
improvements, and lenders impose more covenant restrictions on high credit risk firms.
Loan maturity and covenant intensity are positively related, possibly because more
covenants are required to control potential agency problems arising from longer term debt.
Finally, covenant intensity is positively related to credit spread, consistent with firm default
risk increasing with market-wide default risk, and more covenants being written in loans to
firms with higher default risk.

4.3

Effect of Restatement on Lender Structure
Restating firms have increased credit risk and heightened informational issues, and

these problems may affect the structure of lenders in a loan. In this section we investigate
the effects of restatement on two aspects of the lender structure: the total number of lenders
in a loan, and the transaction fees charged by lenders. 33

33

Multiple lenders are important features of bank loan structure due to syndication, which has become an
increasingly important way for commercial borrowers to satisfy their financing needs. A syndicate is a group
of lenders making a loan jointly to a single borrower. There is one lead arranger that establishes a relationship

28

4.3.1 Number of Lenders
[Table 8 about here]
Column 1 of Table 8 shows that the number of lenders declines significantly in
loans activated after restatement. The incidence ratio from the Poisson regression suggests
that, after controlling for other variables, the number of lenders in a post-restatement loan is
about three-fourths that in a pre-restatement loan: 6.5 post-restatement vs. 8.5 prerestatement.
The estimated coefficients on the control variables provide ambiguous evidence on
the relation between syndicate size and credit risk. On the one hand, highly levered firms
have more lenders, possibly to help the lenders diversify their loan portfolios. Loan size is
positively correlated with the number of lenders, probably because more lenders are needed
to assume loans with larger amounts. In addition, performance pricing and the number of
lenders are positively related, perhaps because high risk firms are more likely to have
performance loans and at the same time require more lenders to diversify the risk. The
economic boom dummy is negatively related to the number of lenders, implying that a
more diffuse lender structure is used when market-wide default risk is high. Taken together,
this evidence is consistent with the classic diversification motive for syndication: By opting
for relatively small portions, participants limit their exposure to high default risk loans.
In contrast, we also find that firm size is positively related to the number of lenders.
Larger firms typically have less severe asymmetric information problems and require less
monitoring, and therefore can borrow from syndicates that involve more lenders. We also
find evidence that lower profitability and lower term spreads are related to fewer lenders,
with the borrowing firm, negotiates terms of the contract, and guarantees an amount for a price range. The
lead arranger then turns to participant lenders to fund part of the loan.

29

possibly because of a higher default risk for such firms. The result that syndicate size
decreases with credit risk is consistent with the monitoring motive for syndication: When
borrowing firms are riskier, a more concentrated lender structure enhances group
monitoring and increases the prospects of successful restructuring in the event of default.

4.3.2 Transaction Fees
We further examine whether lenders charge higher transaction costs for borrowers
that have restated financial results. The lead bank in a syndicate arranges and manages the
syndicated loan, and typically also acts as the agent bank that monitors the firm, governs
the terms of the loan, administers the drawdown of funds, calculates interest payments, and
enforces covenants. The fee the borrower pays for this service increases with the
complexity and riskiness of the loan. Fees are often tiered, with the lead arranger receiving
a larger amount in consideration of its structuring and/or underwriting the loan. Counderwriters typically receive lower fees, and then the general syndicate members will
likely receive fees tied to their commitment.
We examine upfront fees and annual fees charged by banks. 34 An upfront fee is a onetime fee paid to lenders at the closing of the deal. It is analogous to an original-issue
discount in the bond market. This upfront payment from the borrower to the lead arranger
can be shared by the lead arranger with the other syndicate members, and it varies between
25 and 175 basis points of the total loan amount. An annual fee is simply an annual charge
against the entire commitment amount, whether used or unused, and is also called the
facility fee. The fee information is limited in our sample and our regressions are based on
384 and 555 non-missing observations for upfront fees and annual fees, respectively.
34

The fees associated with syndicated loans also include the commitment fee, the utilization fee, the letter of
credit fee, and the cancellation fee, among others. We focus on the upfront fee and the annual fee because
they are the most common and important.

30

Columns 2 and 3 of Table 8 show that after restatement, both upfront and annual fees
increase, suggesting that lenders charge higher fees to compensate for the increased costs of
monitoring after restatement.
The other coefficients indicate that small firms with high default risk and few growth
options are required to pay higher fees, possibly due to the high cost of monitoring such
firms. Longer term debt requires a greater upfront fee, but not a greater annual fee. In
addition, larger loans are associated with lower fees, probably because fees are measured as
the percentage of loan amount and larger loans have the benefit of economies of scale.
Loans with performance pricing have higher annual fees perhaps because such loans tie the
pricing of loans with firm credit quality and financial performance dynamically, and it is
more costly to administer such loans. Finally, lower fees are associated with lower credit
spreads, higher term spreads, and boom years. This is likely because firm default risk
decreases in good years and monitoring costs decrease with default risk.

4.4

Robustness Tests
In previous regressions, we controlled for various observable firm characteristics. It

is possible that unobservable firm characteristics could also affect loan contract terms.
Since each firm in our sample has at least two loans at different points in time (at least one
pre-restatement loan and one post-restatement loan), our sample is a panel, which we now
exploit to control for potential unobservable time-invariant firm-specific effects. In addition,
loans borrowed by the same firm could potentially correlate with each other, and this
correlation may lead to biased standard errors. To deal with these two issues, we conduct a
firm fixed effect regression with standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and withinfirm clustering (see Column 1 of Table 9). After controlling for firm fixed effects, the post-

31

restatement effect on loan spread decreases to 0.370 from 0.462 (from the specification in
Column 5, Table 3) but it remains economically and statistically significant. 35
[Table 9 about here]
Unobservable time series changes (such as macroeconomic or industry shocks)
contemporaneous with restatements could also affect the estimated influence of
restatements. To remove the effect of contemporaneous shocks, we employ a matched
sample differences-in-differences methodology. 36 We first create a matched sample, which
consists of firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry as a given restating firm and with sales
within +/- 10 percent of the restating firm’s sales. Then we estimate the following
regression using a sample that pools the restating and matched firms:
Log(Loan Spread)j,i,t =α t+β i +γXj,i,t+δRestating Firmi×Post-Restatementi,t+ εj,i,t

(3)

where Log(Loan Spread)j,i,t is the logarithm of loan spread for loan j borrowed by firm i in
year t, αt and βi are year and firm fixed effects, Xj,i,t represents control variables defined in
Equation (1), Post-Restatementi,t is a dummy variable that equals one after restatement, and
Restating Firmi equals one (zero) for a restatement (matched) firm. This methodology
controls for aggregate fluctuations via year dummies as well as unobservable differences
between restating and matched firms via firm fixed effects. Our estimate of δ captures the
restatement effect, which represents the change in the log loan spread specific to firms that
have restated. 37 The results, as reported in Column 2 of Table 9, show that the impact of

35

The disadvantage of the firm fixed effect approach is that most firms have only a few loans with nonmissing contract term information, so the power of contract term tests is reduced. Nonetheless, when we
implement a firm fixed effect approach all but one of our qualitative results holds. The one difference is that
in contract terms firm fixed effects analysis, the total covenants variable retains the same sign but becomes
insignificant.
36
For more details on the differences-in-differences method, see Bertrand and Mullainathan (1999, 2003) and
Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997, 1998).
37
Two difficulties arise with the differences-in-differences estimation. First, when some firms restate
financials, banks may alter the loan contract terms of non-restating firms that have similar size or industry to

32

restatements on loan spread is statistically significant and is estimated to be 0.182. Based
on this coefficient, the post-restatement increase in the loan spread implies an average
increase of $1.02 million in the annual interest payments per post-restatement loan. 38
Another potential issue is that, in the loan spread regression, one of the independent
variables, loan maturity, may be endogenous because loan spread and maturity are
sometimes simultaneously determined in a debt contract. To deal with this potential
simultaneity, we employ a two stage least square regression. In the first stage, we regress
debt maturity on a firm’s asset maturity. The predicted value of debt maturity is then used
on the right hand side of the second stage regression. 39 The result from the two stage
regression, reported in Column 3 of Table 9, shows that the post-restatement dummy
remains statistically and economically significant after controlling for the endogeneity of
loan maturity.
We also investigate whether our results could be driven by a few loans that have
extremely high post-restatement loan spreads. We perform a median regression that
estimates the effect of explanatory variables on the median loan spread, conditional on the
values of explanatory variables. The results from the median regression in Column 4 of

the restating firms (i.e., the contract terms of the matched firms). This could potentially weaken our results.
Second, missing Dealscan data in some non-price contract terms may lead to insufficient within-firm variation
and reduce the reliability of firm fixed effect estimation.
38
If we assume that firms on average draw down 50% of the credit limit in revolving loans, the 0.182
coefficient implies an increase in annual interest payments of $0.51 million per post-restatement loan. See
footnote 26.
39
Asset maturity meets the requirements to be an appropriate instrument for debt maturity in the loan spread
regression. First, the literature shows that asset maturity is positively correlated with debt maturity. Myers
(1977) argues that by matching debt maturity to asset maturity, firms ensure that the schedule of debt
repayments corresponds with the decline in the value of assets in place. Stohs and Mauer (1996) and Johnson
(2003) empirically show that debt maturity and asset maturity are significantly positively correlated. Graham
and Harvey (2001) note that CFOs rank matching loan and asset maturity as one of the most important factors
in the choice of debt maturity. Second, it can be reasonably argued that asset maturity does not affect loan
spread or the residual of the loan spread regression (see, for example, Bharath, Sunder, and Sunder (2006)).

33

Table 9 are similar to those from the OLS (mean) regression in Column 5 of Table 3,
suggesting that our results are not driven by outliers.
Finally, the basic unit of our empirical analysis is a loan. However, a loan may be
part of a multiple loan deal and the loan contract terms are the outcome of deal level
negotiations. As a result, contract terms of the loans in a deal may not be independent, and
treating these loans independently may affect the results and overstate statistical
significance. To address this issue, for each deal, we aggregate individual loans into a deal
level observation by computing weighted (by loan amount) average loan terms such as
spread, maturity, etc. We then estimate the regressions at the deal level and find that the
deal level regression results are similar to the loan level results. 40 We report the deal level
regression results on loan spreads in Column (5) of Table 9; they are quite similar to what
we report throughout the paper. Though not shown in the table, the results are also similar
for deal-level analysis of the non-spread contract terms.
In sum, the effect of restatement on the cost of debt is robust to a variety of
specifications and remains economically and statistically significant.

5.

Conclusion
The number and size of companies that restate financial statements grew

significantly in the last decade. Financial misreporting has severe ex post consequences on
financial securities, investors, and firms, resulting in a substantial loss of market value and
investor confidence and an increase in the cost of capital. The extant literature has focused

40

Loans in a deal could have different spreads, maturities, fees, lenders, and securitization, but typically have
the same covenants. We estimate the deal level regressions on spread and non-spread terms (except
covenants).

34

on the impact of misreporting from the equity holder’s perspective. In this paper, we
examine misreporting from the debt holder’s perspective by investigating how the
contracting of bank debt changes as a result of financial restatement.
We find that compared to loans initiated before the disclosure of corporate
misreporting, loans initiated after restatement have significantly higher loan spreads,
shorter maturities, higher likelihood of being secured, and more covenant restrictions. We
also find that loan syndicates contain fewer lenders and firms pay higher upfront and annual
fees after misreporting announcements.
The increase in the cost of debt caused by restatement is an ex post cost borne by
the restatement firms. The implications for ex ante social welfare, however, are more
nuanced. Kedia and Rajgopal (2005) find that the ex ante costs of anticipated misreporting
are negatively associated with the likelihood of misreporting. To the extent that the ex post
cost of misreporting is reflected in a firm’s subjective ex ante cost, the prohibitive increase
in the cost of capital ex post could be effective in curbing misreporting ex ante.
In sum, the evidence provided in this paper is consistent with the following view.
Restatement lowers the perception of companies’ future prospects and increases the
uncertainty about reported financial information. The resulting increase in risk is priced
incremental to other known sources of credit risk. Our study provides unique evidence on
how financial restatement influences the design of financial contracts and affects the cost
and terms of debt.

35

References
Altman, E. I., 1968, Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate
Bankruptcy, Journal of Finance, 23-4, 589-609
Anderson, K. and T. Yohn, 2002, The Effect of 10-K Restatements on Firm Value, Information
Asymmetries, and Investors’ Reliance on Earnings, Working Paper, Georgetown University
Bae, K. H. and V. Goyal, 2006, Creditor Rights, Contract Enforcement, and Costs of Loan
Financing, Working Paper, Queen’s University and Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology
Barclay, M. J. and C. W. Smith, 1995, The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt, Journal of
Finance, 50-2, 609-631
Barry, C. B. and S. J. Brown, 1984, Differential Information and the Small Firm Effect, Journal of
Financial Economics, 13, 283-294
Benmelech, E., M. J. Garmaise, and T. J. Moskowitz, 2005, Do Liquidation Values Affect Financial
Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning Regulation, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 120-3, 1121-1154
Berger, A. N., M. A. Espinosa-Vega, W. S. Frame, and N. H. Miller, 2005, Debt Maturity, Risk,
and Asymmetric Information, Journal of Finance, 60-6, 2895-2923
Berger, A. N. and G. F. Udell, 1990, Collateral, Loan Quality, and Bank Risk, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 25, 21-42
Berger, A. N. and G. F. Udell, 1995, Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small Firm
Finance, Journal of Business, 68, 351-381
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan, 1999, Is there Discretion in Wage Setting? A Test Using
Takeover Legislation, Rand Journal of Economics, 30-3, 535-554
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan, 2003, Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance and
Managerial Preferences, Journal of Political Economy, 111-5, 1043-1075
Bharath, S. T., J. Sunder, and S. V. Sunder, 2006, Accounting Quality and Debt Contracting,
forthcoming, Accounting Review
Billett, M. T., T. D. King, and D. C. Mauer, 2007, Growth Opportunities and the Choice of
Leverage, Debt Maturity, and Covenants, Journal of Finance, 62-2, 697-730
Blackwell, D. W., T. R. Noland, and D. B. Winters, 1998, The Value of Auditor Assurance:
Evidence from Loan Pricing, Journal of Accounting Research, 36-1, 57-70
Bolton, P. and D. S. Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors,
Journal of Political Economy, 104-1, 1-25

36

Bradley, M., and M. R. Roberts, 2005, The Structure and Pricing of Corporate Debt Covenants,
Working Paper, Duke University and University of Pennsylvania
Burns, N. and S. Kedia, 2006, The Impact of Performance-based Compensation on Misreporting,
Journal of Financial Economics, 79, 35-67
Chava, S., D. Livdan, and A. Purnanandam, 2007, Do Shareholder Rights Affect the Cost of Bank
Loans?, Working Paper, Texas A&M University and University of Michigan
Chen, N., R. Roll, and S. A. Ross, 1986, Economic Forces and the Stock Market, Journal of
Business, 59-3, 383-403
Collin-Dufresne, P., R. S. Goldstein, and J. S. Martin, 2001, The Determinants of Credit Spread
Changes, Journal of Finance, 56-6, 2177-2207
Dennis, S. and D. J. Mullineaux, 2000, Syndicated Loans, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 9,
404-426
Diamond, D. W., 1991, Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106, 709-737
Diamond, D. W., 1991, Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice between Bank Loans and Directly
Placed Debt, Journal of Political Economy, 99-4, 689-721
Diamond, D. W. and R. E. Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of Capital, Journal
of Finance, 46-4, 1325-1359
Diether, K., C. J. Malloy, and A. Scherbina, 1992, Differences of Opinion and the Cross-Section of
Stock Returns, Journal of Finance, 57-5, 2113-2141
Easley, D. and M. O’Hara, 2004, Information and the Cost of Capital, Journal of Finance, 59-4,
1553-1583
Easley, D., S. Hvidkjaer, and M. O’Hara, 2002, Is Information Risk a Determinant of Asset Returns?
Journal of Finance, 57-5, 2185-2221
Fama, E. F., 1985, What’s Different about Banks? Journal of Monetary Economics, 15, 29-39
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Return on Stocks and Bonds,
Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56
Flannery, M. J., 1986, Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice, Journal of
Finance, 41-1, 19-37
Freixas, X. and J. Rochet, 1997, Microeconomics of Banking, The MIT Press
Graham, J. R. and C. Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from
the Field, Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 187-243
Guedes, J. and T. Opler, 1996, The Determinants of the Maturity of Corporate Debt Issues, Journal
of Finance, 51, 1809-1834

37

Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, and P. E. Todd, 1997, Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme, Review of Economic Studies,
64-4, 605-654
Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, and P. E. Todd, 1998, Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
Estimator, Review of Economic Studies, 65-2, 261-294
Hribar, P. and N. T. Jenkins, 2004, The Effect of Accounting Restatements on Earnings Revisions
and the Estimated Cost of Capital, Review of Accounting Studies, 9, 337-356
Houston, J. and C. James, 1996, Bank information monopolies and mix of private and public debt
claims, Journal of Finance, 51(5): 1863-1889
James, C. M., 1987, Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of Bank Loans, Journal of Financial
Economics, 19-2, 217-235
Jimenez, G., V. Salas, and J. Saurina, 2006, Determinants of Collateral, Journal of Financial
Economics, 81, 255-281
Johnson, S., 2003, Debt Maturity and the Effects of Growth Opportunities and Liquidity Risk on
Leverage, Review of Financial Studies, 16, 209-236
Karpoff, J. M., D. S. Lee, and G. S. Martin, 2007, The Cost to Firms of Cooking the Books, ,
forthcoming, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
Kedia, S. and T. Philippon, 2006, The Economics of Fraudulent Accounting, forthcoming, Review
of Financial Studies
Kedia, S. and S. Rajgopal, 2005, Geography and the Incidence of Financial Misreporting, Working
Paper, Rutgers Business School and University of Washington
Kinney Jr., W. R. and L. S. McDaniel, 1989, Characteristics of Firms Correcting Previously
Reported Quarterly Earnings, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 11, 71-93
Lee, S. W. and D. J. Mullineaux, 2004, Monitoring, Financial Distress, and the Structure of
Commercial Lending Syndicates, Financial Management, Autumn, 33-3, 107-130
Mazumdar, S. C. and P. Sengupta, 2005, Disclosure and the Loan Spread on Private Debt,
Financial Analysts Journal, 61-3, 83-95
Melnik, A and S. Plaut, 1986, Loan Commitment Contracts, Terms of Lending, and Credit
Allocation, Journal of Finance, 41-2, 425-435
Myers, S. C., 1977, Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 147175
Nash, R. C., J. M. Netter, and A. B. Poulsen, 2003, Determinants of Contractual Relations between
Shareholders and Bondholders: Investment Opportunities and Restrictive Covenants, Journal
of Corporate Finance, 9, 201-232

38

Ortiz-Molina, H. and M. F. Penas, 2006, Lending to Small Businesses: the Role of Loan Maturity in
Addressing Information Problems, forthcoming, Small Business Economics
Palmrose, Z., V. J. Richardson, and S. Scholz, 2004, Determinants of Market Reactions to
Restatement Announcements, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 37, 59-89
Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan, 1994, The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from
Small Business Data, Journal of Finance, 49, 3-37
Pittman, J. A. and S. Fortin, 2004, Auditor Choice and the Cost of Debt Capital for Newly Public
Firms, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 37, 113-136
Qian, J. and P. E. Strahan, 2006, How Laws and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts: The Case of
Bank Loans, forthcoming, Journal of Finance
Rajan, R. and A. Winton, 1995, Covenants and Collateral as Incentives to Monitor, Journal of
Finance, 50-4, 1113-1146
Santos, J. A.C. and A. Winton, 2005, Bank Loans, Bonds, and Information Monopolies across the
Business Cycle, forthcoming, Journal of Finance
Scherr, F. C. and H. M. Hulburt, 2001, The Debt Maturity Structure of Small Firms, Financial
Management, 30-1, 85-111
Smith Jr., C. W. and J. B. Warner, 1979, On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond Covenants,
Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 117-161
Stohs, M. and D. C. Mauer, 1996, The Determinants of Corporate Debt Maturity Structure, Journal
of Business, 69, 279-312
Strahan, P. E., 1999, Borrower Risk and the Price and Nonprice Terms of Bank Loans, Working
paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Sufi, A., 2007, Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evidence from Syndicated
Loans, Journal of Finance, 62-2, 629-668
United States General Accounting Office, 2002, Financial Statement Restatements: Trends, Market
Impacts, Regulatory Responses, and Remaining Challenges (GAO-03-138)

39

Table 1
Restatement Firms
The table presents the number and percentage of restatement firms in the final sample by reason for
restatement (Panel A), prompter of restatement (Panel B), and whether restatement is related to fraud (Panel
C).

Panel A: Reason for Restatement
Reason for Restatement

Number

Frequency (%)

Revenue recognition

94

39.7

Restructuring, assets or inventory

38

16.0

Cost of sales or operating expense

31

13.1

Other

19

8.0

Acquisitions and mergers

17

7.2

Related-party transactions

8

3.4

Securities related

8

3.4

In-process R&D

7

3.0

Reclassification

7

3.0

Unspecified

6

2.5

Loan-loss

2

0.8

237

100

Total

Panel B: Prompter of Restatement
Prompter of Restatement

Number

Frequency (%)

Company

105

44.3

Uncertain

84

35.4

SEC

32

23.5

Auditor

11

4.6

Other (NASDAQ, FASB, IRS, OCC, CDFI/FDIC,
or any other external party)

5

2.1

237

100

Total

Panel C: Fraud vs. Non-Fraud
Restatement Related to Fraud

Number

Frequency (%)

No

218

92.0

Yes

19

8.0

Total

237

100

40

Table 2
Summary Statistics of Loan Contract Terms for Restatement Firms
The table presents summary statistics of loan contract terms for sample firms. Number of observations (N), mean, and standard deviation (STD) of debt contract
terms are reported for loans in the full sample, loans initiated before restatement, and loans initiated after restatement. The means of the differences between the
variables before restatement and after restatement are also reported. The details of definitions and measurements of all the variables are reported in the Appendix.
Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.
Full Sample

Before Restatement

After Restatement

Difference

N

Mean

STD

Mean

STD

Mean

STD

Mean

Loan spread (basis point)

1969

173

145

141

114

223

171

82***

Loan Maturity (month)

2189

41

30

45

33

35

24

-10***

Number of Covenants

1050

7.3

3.3

6.9

3.3

7.5

3.3

0.6***

Loan Size ($million)

2401

360

597

335

569

404

640

69***

Performance Pricing Dummy

2401

0.34

0.47

0.32

0.46

0.40

0.49

0.08***

Security Dummy

1396

0.67

0.45

0.63

0.48

0.72

0.45

0.09***

Number of Lenders

2398

8.7

10.1

8.5

10.7

8.9

9.3

0.4

Upfront Fee (basis point)

526

53

56

52

59

55

49

3

Annual Fee (basis point)

704

16

12

15

11

18

14

3***

41

Table 3
Effect of Restatement on the Cost of Bank Debt
The table presents the regression results on the effect of restatement on the cost of bank debt. The
dependent variable is log(loan spread). The dummy variable post-restatement is equal to one if the loan is
initiated after the announcement of restatement and zero otherwise. The details of definitions and
measurements of all the other variables are reported in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics
are in parentheses. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

Post-restatement

(1)
0.497***
(11.97)

(2)
0.506***
(13.87)

(3)
0.511***
(13.87)

(4)
0.469***
(10.99)

(5)
0.462***
(11.74)

-0.244***
(-25.34)
-0.117***
(-5.24)
1.129***
(11.52)
-0.812***
(-3.21)
-0.4823***
(-5.25)
0.012***
(4.08)
-0.104***
(-7.32)

-0.195***
(-10.05)
-0.108***
(-4.82)
1.082***
(10.61)
-0.924***
(-3.41)
-0.4902***
(-5.26)
0.012***
(3.99)
-0.095***
(-6.54)

-0.194***
(-10.12)
-0.108***
(-4.84)
1.049***
(10.30)
-0.877***
(-3.27)
-0.479***
(-5.17)
0.011***
(3.81)
-0.093***
(-6.38)

-0.175***
(-9.03)
-0.079***
(-3.81)
0.848***
(8.78)
-0.985***
(-4.11)
-0.475***
(-5.06)
0.009***
(3.74)
-0.053***
(-3.44)

0.1243***
(4.73)
-0.0598***
(-2.59)
0.008
(0.24)

0.1381***
(5.25)
-0.0596***
(-2.60)
0.0002
(0.00)

-0.039
(-1.20)
-0.0187
(-0.08)
-0.015
(-0.45)

0.485***
(4.82)
-0.040
(-1.14)
0.086
(1.49)

0.561***
(6.23)
-0.051
(-1.49)
0.081
(1.45)

Firm characteristics
Log(Assets)
Market to book
Leverage
Profitability
Tangibility
Cash flow volatility
Z-score
Loan Characteristics
Log (Loan Maturity)
Log(Loan Size)
Performance Pricing
Macroeconomic Factors
Credit Spread
Term Spread
I(1996≤Year≤2000)
Control for
Loan Type

No

No

No

No

Yes

Loan Purpose

No

No

No

No

Yes

Industry Effects

No

No

No

No

Yes

1969

1492

1426

1426

1426

0.068

0.503

0.522

0.531

0.589

N
2

Adj. R

42

Table 4
Effect of Restatement and Analyst Forecast Variables on the Cost of Bank Debt
The table presents the regression results on the effect of restatement on the cost of bank debt, controlling
analyst consensus earnings forecast and forecast dispersion. Analyst earnings forecast (analyst forecast
dispersion) is the mean (standard deviation) of all analyst forecasts extant the month prior to the loan
activation date. The dependent variable is log(loan spread). The dummy variable post-restatement is equal
to one if the loan is initiated after the announcement of restatement and zero otherwise. The details of
definitions and measurements of all the other variables are reported in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity
robust t-statistics are in parentheses. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and
***, respectively.

43

Post-restatement
Analyst earnings forecast
Analyst forecast dispersion

(1)
0.453***
(9.89)
-0.031***
(-5.04)
0.308***
(5.74)

(2)
0.529***
(12.76)
-0.013**
(-2.40)
0.080
(1.13)

(3)
0.459***
(10.21)
-0.014***
(-2.92)
0.173***
(4.12)

(4)
0.491***
(10.88)
-0.013***
(-2.69)
0.148**
(2.33)

Firm characteristics
-0.273***
(-23.44)
-0.098***
(-4.42)
1.445***
(12.98)
-1.017***
(-3.67)
-0.630***
(-6.38)
0.011***
(2.62)
-0.130***
(-9.55)

Log(Assets)
Market to book
Leverage
Profitability
Tangibility
Cash flow volatility
Z-score

-0.205***
(-10.85)
-0.079***
(-3.74)
1.224***
(11.15)
-0.935***
(-3.50)
-0.613***
(-5.93)
0.007*
(1.91)
-0.056***
(-3.69)

Loan Characteristics
Log (Loan Maturity)
Log(Loan Size)
Performance Pricing

-0.060*
(-1.81)
-0.176***
(-12.98)
0.049
(1.29)

-0.036
(-1.05)
-0.039*
(-1.80)
0.014
(0.36)

0.524***
(5.14)
0.021
(0.62)
0.183***
(3.41)

0.578***
(5.86)
-0.040
(-1.18)
0.117**
(2.11)

Macroeconomic Factors
Credit Spread
Term Spread
I(1996≤Year≤2000)
Control for
Loan Type

No

No

Yes

Yes

Loan Purpose

No

No

Yes

Yes

Industry Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

1571

1245

1495

1184

0.083

0.488

0.465

0.605

N
2

Adj. R

44

Table 5
Wealth Effect versus Information Effect of Restatement
The table presents the regression results on the wealth effect and information effect of restatement on the
cost of bank debt. The dependent variable is log(loan spread). The dummy variable post-restatement is
equal to one if the loan is contracted after the announcement of restatement and zero otherwise. Analyst
earnings forecast (analyst forecast dispersion) is the mean (standard deviation) of all analyst forecasts
extant the month prior to the loan activation date. The DispIncrease dummy is equal to one if for a restating
company, the analyst forecast dispersion after restatement is greater than that before restatement, and zero
otherwise. The DispIncreaseSig dummy is equal to one if for a restating company, the analyst forecast
dispersion after restatement is significantly greater than that before restatement, and zero otherwise. The
details of definitions and measurements of all the other variables are reported in the Appendix.
Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics are in parentheses. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is
indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

45

Post-restatement

(1)
0.453***
(9.85)

Analyst earnings forecast
Analyst forecast dispersion
Post-restatement×DispIncrease

0.165**
(2.23)

(2)
0.408***
(8.32)
-0.012**
(-2.56)
0.149**
(2.35)
0.260***
(4.14)

Post-restatement×DispIncreaseSig

(3)
0.470***
(10.67)

(4)
0.407***
(8.54)
-0.012**
(-2.45)
0.136**
(2.16)

0.173*
(1.94)

0.367***
(5.00)

Firm characteristics
Log(Assets)
Market to book
Leverage
Profitability
Tangibility
Cash flow volatility
Z-score

-0.207***
(-11.01)
-0.076***
(-3.64)
1.266***
(11.57)
-0.865***
(-3.26)
-0.592***
(-5.76)
0.007**
(1.99)
-0.052***
(-3.43)

-0.207***
(-11.03)
-0.082***
(-3.95)
1.245***
(11.45)
-0.852***
(-3.22)
-0.596***
(-5.82)
0.007*
(1.90)
-0.057***
(-3.80)

-0.040
(-1.20)
-0.033
(-1.52)
-0.003
(-0.07)

-0.030
(-0.90)
-0.038*
(-1.78)
0.007
(0.18)

0.581***
(5.94)
-0.030
(-0.89)
0.120**
(2.20)

0.596***
(6.11)
-0.024
(-0.71)
0.124**
(2.27)

Loan Characteristics
Log (Loan Maturity)
Log(Loan Size)
Performance Pricing
Macroeconomic Factors
Credit Spread
Term Spread
I(1996≤Year≤2000)
Control for
Loan Type

No

Yes

No

Yes

Loan Purpose

No

Yes

No

Yes

Industry Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

1969

1184

1969

1184

0.069

0.611

0.068

0.613

N
2

Adj. R

46

Table 6
Effect of Fraudulent Restatement on the Cost of Bank Debt
The table presents the regression results on the effect of fraud-related restatement on the cost of bank debt. The
dependent variable is log(loan spread). The dummy variable post-restatement is equal to one if the loan is
contracted after the announcement of restatement and zero otherwise. The fraud dummy is equal to one if the
restating company is identified as having committed fraud and zero otherwise. The definitions of the other
variables are reported in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics are in parentheses. Significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.
0.426***
Post-restatement
(10.42)
0.263***
Post-restatement×Fraud
(3.55)
Firm characteristics
-0.180***
Log(Assets)
(-9.32)
-0.082***
Market to book
(-3.99)
0.801***
Leverage
(8.40)
-0.875***
Profitability
(-3.60)
-0.461***
Tangibility
(-4.92)
0.009***
Cash flow volatility
(3.57)
-0.057***
Z-score
(-3.72)
Loan Characteristics
-0.037
Log(Loan Maturity)
(-1.17)
-0.017
Log(loan Size)
(-0.72)
-0.014
Performance Pricing
(-0.41)
Macro-economic Factors
0.568***
Credit Spread
(6.32)
-0.042
Term Spread
(-1.49)
0.084
I(1996≤Year≤2000)
(1.49)
Control For
Loan Type

Yes

Loan Purpose

Yes

Industry Effects

Yes

N

1426
2

Adj. R

0.615

47

Table 7
Effect of Restatement on Non-spread Loan Contract Terms
The table presents the regression results on the effects of restatement on non-price loan contract terms. (1) is an
OLS regression with log(debt maturity) as the dependent variable, (2) is a Probit regression with debt security as
dependent variable, and (3) is a Poisson regression with covenant intensity as dependent variable. The dummy
variable post-restatement is equal to one if the loan is contracted after the announcement of restatement and zero
otherwise. Log(Maturity) is the natural logarithm of debt maturity measured in months. Security is a dummy
variable that is equal to one if the loan is secured by collateral and zero otherwise. Number of Covenants is the
total number of covenants included in the debt agreement. Number of General (Financial) Covenants is the total
number of general (financial) covenants in the debt agreement. The details of definitions and measurements of
all the other variables are reported in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics for OLS regression and
heteroskedasticity robust z-statistics for Probit and Poisson regressions are reported in parentheses. Significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

48

Post-restatement

0.316**
(2.26)

(3)
Number of
Covenants
0.066*
(1.95)

(4)
Number of General
Covenants
0.217***
(5.31)

(5)
Number of Financial
Covenants
-0.033
(-0.95)

-0.167***
(-2.81)
0.043
(0.69)
1.532***
(4.79)
-1.841**
(-2.26)
-0.763**
(-2.07)
0.009
(0.82)
-0.336***
(-4.52)

-0.001
(-0.09)
-0.045***
(-2.75)
0.306***
(4.25)
0.431**
(2.08)
-0.183**
(-2.26)
0.002
(0.53)
-0.035***
(-3.05)

-0.026
(-1.43)
-0.084***
(-3.54)
0.441***
(5.07)
0.419*
(1.67)
-0.281***
(-2.66)
0.001
(0.22)
-0.019
(-1.48)

-0.010
(-0.59)
-0.037**
(-2.34)
0.047
(0.63)
0.467**
(2.17)
-0.040
(-0.49)
0.002
(0.60)
-0.034***
(-2.88)

0.105***
(5.08)
0.128***
(4.02)

0.125
(1.20)
-0.298***
(-3.82)
-0.126
(-1.04)

0.086***
(3.10)
-0.018
(-1.01)
0.054*
(1.74)

0.070**
(2.19)
0.053**
(2.47)
0.074*
(1.89)

0.058**
(2.27)
-0.062***
(-3.16)
0.104***
(3.24)

-0.136
(-1.57)
0.038
(1.33)
-0.025
(-0.51)

0.353
(1.17)
0.064
(0.57)
-0.332*
(-1.85)

0.314***
(4.10)
-0.026
(-0.83)
0.016
(0.33)

0.377***
(3.94)
0.060
(1.61)
0.255***
(4.43)

0.340***
(4.32)
-0.080***
(-2.63)
-0.080*
(-1.66)

Yes
Yes
Yes
1635
0.439

Yes
Yes
Yes
986
0.443

Yes
Yes
Yes
809
0.113

Yes
Yes
Yes
966
0.134

Yes
Yes
Yes
863
0.042

(1)
Log(Maturity)

(2)
Security

-0.171***
(-4.31)
-0.016
(-0.91)
-0.008
(-0.46)
0.257***
(2.75)
0.459*
(1.93)
0.265***
(2.89)
-0.001
(-0.34)
0.025*
(1.71)

Firm characteristics
Log(Assets)
Market to book
Leverage
Profitability
Tangibility
Cash flow volatility
Z-score
Loan Characteristics
Log (Loan Maturity)
Log(Loan Size)
Performance Pricing

-

Macro-economic Factors
Credit Spread
Term Spread
I(1996≤Year≤2000)
Control for
Loan Type
Loan Purpose
Industry Effects
N
R2

49

Table 8
Effect of Restatement on Lender Structure
The table presents the regression results on the effects of restatement on loan syndicate structure. The dependent
variable in Poisson regression (1) and OLS regression (2) and (3) is the number of lenders, log(upfront fee), and
log(annual fee), respectively. The dummy variable post-restatement is equal to one if the loan is contracted after
the announcement of restatement and zero otherwise. Number of lenders is the total number of lenders in one
single loan. Upfront fee is a fee paid by the borrower upon loan closing. Annual fee is the annual charge against
the entire loan commitment amount, whether used or unused. The details of definitions and measurements of all
the other variables are reported in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity robust t-statistics for OLS regression and
heteroskedasticity robust z-statistics for Poisson regression are reported in parentheses. Significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Number of Lenders
Log(Upfront Fee)
Log(Annual Fee)
-0.301***
0.223**
0.267***
Post-restatement
(-5.91)
(1.98)
(4.11)
Firm characteristics
0.139***
-0.048
-0.083**
Log(Assets)
(5.99)
(-0.87)
(-2.43)
-0.019
-0.131**
-0.090***
Market to book
(-0.69)
(-2.33)
(-3.63)
0.676***
0.671**
0.432**
Leverage
(5.25)
(2.27)
(2.26)
0.889***
0.528
-0.672*
Profitability
(2.65)
(0.77)
(-1.79)
-0.125
-0.388
-0.502***
Tangibility
(-1.05)
(-1.45)
(-3.55)
0.002
0.003
0.010***
Cash flow volatility
(0.55)
(0.38)
(3.72)
0.021
-0.209***
-0.049**
Z-score
(-0.93)
(-4.65)
(-2.03)
Loan Characteristics
0.032
0.241***
-0.015
Log (Loan Maturity)
(0.75)
(-0.26)
(2.60)
0.319***
-0.073
-0.095***
Log(Loan Size)
(11.29)
(-1.25)
(-2.62)
0.290***
0.025
0.127**
Performance Pricing
(6.61)
(0.23)
(2.56)
Macro-economic Factors
-0.035
0.631***
0.239*
Credit Spread
(-0.31)
(2.76)
(1.72)
0.074**
-0.084
-0.136***
Term Spread
(2.01)
(-0.96)
(-2.81)
-0.164**
-0.130
-0.138*
I(1996≤Year≤2000)
(-2.53)
(-0.89)
(-1.80)
Control for
Yes
Loan Type
Yes
Yes
Yes
Loan Purpose
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry Effects
Yes
Yes
555
N
1633
384
0.426
R2
0.409
0.338

50

Table 9
Robustness Tests
The table presents the robustness tests of the effect of restatement on the cost of bank debt. The dependent
variable in all the regressions in the table is log(loan spread). Regression (1) is the firm fixed effect regression
with standard errors being adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustering within firms. (2) is the matched sample
differences-in-differences regression. (3) is the two stage least square regression, with asset maturity as the
instrument variable to control for the potential endogeneity of debt maturity. A median regression robust to
outliers is reported in (4). (5) is the deal level regression, in which individual loan terms in a deal are aggregated
into a deal level observation using loan amount as weights. The dummy variable post-restatement is equal to one
if the loan is contracted after the announcement of restatement and zero otherwise. The definitions of the other
variables are reported in the Appendix. T-statistics are in parentheses. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels is indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

51

(1)
Firm Fixed
Effect with
Robust and
Clustering
Adjusted
Standard Errors
0.370***
(4.34)

(2)
Matched Sample
Differences-inDifferences
Regression

(3)
Instrument for
Loan Maturity
(Two Stage Least
Square
Regression)

(4)
Median
Regression

(5)
Deal Level
Regression

0.182***
(5.10)

0.401***
(3.53)

0.460***
(7.91)

0.497***
(10.14)

0.013
(0.17)
-0.020
(-0.46)
0.644**
(2.47)
-0.592
(-1.52)
-0.806***
(-2.62)
0.005
(1.21)
-0.090**
(-2.18)

-0.124***
(-5.68)
-0.072***
(-4.66)
0.693***
(7.34)
-0.398**
(-2.03)
-0.268*
(-1.77)
-0.003
(-1.12)
-0.076***
(-5.22)

-0.178***
(-8.92)
-0.067**
(-2.23)
0.928***
(5.11)
-0.891***
(-2.94)
-0.387*
(-1.92)
0.009***
(2.58)
-0.058***
(-4.52)

-0.178***
(-7.35)
-0.134***
(-4.70)
0.871***
(6.49)
-1.051***
(-3.05)
-0.529***
(-3.92)
0.012**
(2.39)
-0.058***
(-3.07)

-0.233***
(-10.20)
-0.115***
(-4.66)
1.092***
(8.45)
-1.081***
(-3.63)
-0.620***
(-5.26)
0.012***
(3.81)
-0.070***
(-3.30)

-0.025
(-0.85)
-0.047
(-1.30)

-0.056***
(-3.11)
-0.088***
(-7.80)

-0.459
(-0.61)
-0.015
(-0.23)

-0.063
(-1.47)
-0.018
(-0.66)

0.079**
(2.31)
-0.025
(-0.83)

-0.077
(-1.48)

-0.052**
(-2.32)

0.053
(0.41)

-0.041
(-0.82)

0.052
(1.26)

0.405***
(3.30)
0.021
(0.41)
-0.017
(0.22)

0.263**
(2.08)
0.038
(0.97)

0.516***
(4.57)
-0.047
(-1.38)
0.045
(0.52)

0.606***
(4.77)
-0.112**
(-2.52)
-0.035
(-0.47)

0.325***
(2.95)
-0.010
(-0.28)
0.022
(0.34)

Loan Type

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

N.A.

Loan Purpose

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

N.A.

Industry Effects

N.A.

N.A.

Yes

Yes

Yes

N

1426

3074

1421

1426

1000

0.402

0.775

0.547

0.415

0.567

Post-restatement
Firm characteristics
Log(Assets)
Market to book
Leverage
Profitability
Tangibility
Cash flow volatility
Z-score
Loan Characteristics
Log(Loan Maturity)
Log(Loan Size)
Performance Pricing
Macro-economic Factors
Credit Spread
Term Spread
I(1996≤Year≤2000)

N.A.

Control For

2

R

52

Appendix: Definition of Variables
Variable Names

Variable Definitions and Corresponding Compustat Data Items

Firm Characteristics
Leverage

(Long Term Debt + Debt in Current Liabilities)/Total Assets=(data9+data34)/data6

Log(Assets)

Natural log of Total Assets=log(data6)

Tangibility

Net Property, Plant and Equipment/Total assets=data8/data6

Profitability

EBITDA/Total Assets=data13/data6

Market to Book

(Market value of equity plus the book value of debt)/Total Assets=( data25*data199+data6-data60)/data6

Z-score

Modified Altman’s (1968) Z-score=(1.2working capital+1.4retained earnings+3.3EBIT+0.999Sales)/Total Assets=
41
(1.2data179+1.4data36+3.3data170+0.999data12)/data6

Cash Flow Volatility

Standard deviation of quarterly cash flows from operations (∆ quarterly data108) over the 4 fiscal years prior to the loan
initiation year scaled by the total debt (data9+data34)

Asset Maturity

Asset maturity is the book value-weighted maturity of long-term assets and current assets, where the maturity of long-term
assets is computed as gross property, plant, and equipment divided by depreciation expense, and the maturity of current
assets is computed as current assets divided by the cost of goods sold (see Barclay and Smith (1995) and Billet, King, and
Mauer (2007)). In other words, asset maturity = [PPE /(CA+PPE)]×[PPE/Depreciation] + [CA/(CA+PPE)]×[CA/COGS] =
[data7/(data4+data7)]×[data7/data14] + [data4/(data4+data7)]×[data4/data41], where PPE=gross property, plant, and
equipment, CA=current assets, and COGS=cost of goods sold

41

We use a modified Z-score, which does not include the ratio of market value of equity to book value of total debt, because a similar term,
market-to-book, enters the regressions as a separate variable.

53

Loan Characteristics
Loan Spread

Loan spread is measured as all-in spread drawn in the Dealscan database. All-in spread drawn is defined as the amount the
borrower pays in basis points over LIBOR or LIBOR equivalent for each dollar drawn down. (For loans not based on
LIBOR, LPC converts the spread into LIBOR terms by adding or subtracting a differential which is adjusted periodically.)
This measure adds the borrowing spread of the loan over LIBOR with any annual fee paid to the bank group.

Log(Maturity)

Natural log of the loan maturity. Maturity is measured in months.

Log(Loan Size)

Natural log of the loan facility amount. Loan amount is measured in millions of dollars.

Security dummy

A dummy variable that equals one if the loan facility is secured by collateral and zero otherwise.

Performance Pricing
dummy
Number of Lenders

A dummy variable that equals one if the loan facility uses performance pricing.

Upfront fee

A fee paid by the borrower upon closing of a loan. (Measured in basis points)

Annual fee

Also called facility fee, is the annual charge against the entire loan commitment amount, whether used or unused.
(Measured in basis points)

Loan Type Dummies

Dummy variable for loan types, including term loan, revolver greater than one year, revolver less than one year, and 364
day facility.

Loan Purpose
Dummies

Dummy Variable for loan purposes, including corporate purposes, debt repayment, working capital, takeover, etc.

Total number of lenders in a single loan.

54

Macroeconomic Factors
Credit Spread

The difference between AAA corporate bond yield and BAA corporate bond yield. (Data source: Federal Reserve Board of
Governors.)

Term Spread

The difference between the 10 year treasury yield and the 2 year treasury yield. (Data source: Federal Reserve Board of
Governors.)

55

