                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INVESTOR PROTECTION AND INTEREST GROUP POLITICS

                                        Lucian A. Bebchuk
                                          Zvika Neeman

                                       Working Paper 13702
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13702


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2007




We have benefited from the helpful comments of Jennifer Arlen, Michal Barzuza, Laura Beny, John
Ferejohn, Dennis Gromb, Marcel Kahan, Randy Kroszner, Stuart Myers, Holger Spamann, Fausto
Panunzi, Enrico Perrotti, Andrea Prat, Mark Roe, Paulo Volpin, and participants in workshops and
conferences at Beijing, Columbia, Georgetown, Harvard, LBS, LSE, Moscow, NYU, Oxford, Shanghai,
Stockholm, Toronto, the AFA meeting, the ALEA meeting, and the NBER-RFS corporate governance
conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Lucian A. Bebchuk and Zvika Neeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Investor Protection and Interest Group Politics
Lucian A. Bebchuk and Zvika Neeman
NBER Working Paper No. 13702
December 2007
JEL No. D72,G20,G30,K22,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

We model how lobbying by interest groups affects the level of investor protection. In our model, insiders
in existing public companies, institutional investors (financial intermediaries), and entrepreneurs who
plan to take companies public in the future, compete for influence over the politicians setting the level
of investor protection. We identify conditions under which this lobbying game has an inefficiently
low equilibrium level of investor protection. Factors that operate to reduce investor protection below
its efficient level include the ability of corporate insiders to use the corporate assets they control to
influence politicians, as well as the inability of institutional investors to capture the full value that
efficient investor protection would produce for outside investors. The interest that entrepreneurs (and
existing public firms) have in raising equity capital in the future reduces but does not eliminate the
distortions arising from insiders' interest in extracting rents from the capital public firms already have.
Our analysis generates testable predictions, and can explain existing empirical evidence, regarding
the way in which investor protection varies over time and around the world.


Lucian A. Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Zvika Neeman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
Zvika@BU.edu
1.      Introduction
     It is now well recognized that the legal rules that govern corporate law matter a great deal for the

economy. There is a large body of both empirical and theoretical literature that suggests that a

country's level of investor protection has a substantial effect on the value of firms, the development

of stock markets, and economic growth (see, e.g., the survey by La Porta et al. (2000)).

     Because insufficient investor protection can be costly for an economy’s performance, it is

important to understand what determines the level of investor protection and the reason that such

protection might fall short of being optimal. Why do countries vary so much in their level of investor

protection? Why do levels of investor protection within any given country change over time? When

investor protection is too low, is such suboptimality generally due to insufficient understanding by

public officials, which should be expected to disappear as officials become more knowledgeable

about which governance arrangements are optimal? Or are there some structural political

impediments that might enable excessively lax corporate rules to persist even after they are

recognized to be inefficient?

     The aim of this paper is to contribute to an understanding of the answers to these questions by

developing a model of how interest group politics affects the level of investor protection. To be sure,

a country's level of investor protection might be influenced by long-standing factors such as the

country's legal origin (La Porta et al., 1998; Glaezer and Shleifer, 2003), culture and ideology (Roe

(2003), Allen (2005)), or the religion of its population (Stulz and Williamson, 2003), all of which lie

outside the realm of current interest group politics. However, given that countries do change their

investor protection arrangements considerably over time, the level of investor protection at any point

in time might also at least partly be the product of recent decisions by pubic officials. We seek, in

this paper, to contribute to understanding these decisions.

     In particular, we focus on analyzing how politicians’ decisions about investor protection are

affected by interest group lobbying. We view lobbying on investor protection as important because,

in the ordinary course of events, most corporate issues are intensely followed by the interest group

with sufficient stake and expertise but are not sufficiently understood and salient to most. When this



                                                   1
is the case, politicians cannot expect their investor protection decisions to have a large direct effect

on voting behavior, which implies that voters do not typically affect politicians’ investor protection

decisions by much. In contrast, politicians’ investor protection decisions might still be significantly

affected by the influence activities of organized interest groups.

     The politicians’ choices in which we are interested are those determining the level of investor

protection in publicly traded firms. This level of investor protection determines the extent to which

“corporate insiders” -- managers and controlling shareholders who have some control over corporate

decisions -- can extract private benefits of control. The laxer the corporate governance system, the

larger these private benefits of control. Beyond a certain point, any further weakening of investor

protection is inefficient. Assuming that politicians do recognize the efficient level of investor

protection, we focus on the question of whether they will generally choose to set investor protection

at this efficient level.

     In our model, three organized interest groups compete for influence over the politicians who

determine the level of investor protection. The first group, which benefits from rules that are laxer

than optimal, consists of the corporate insiders of existing firms. The second group is made up of

institutional investors (financial intermediaries) that use funds received from individuals to invest in

public companies, and whose interests might overlap with those of "outsider" shareholders in

existing companies. The third group consists of owners of private firms (“entrepreneurs”) who plan

to take them public. We also allow for the possibility of insiders who plan to raise equity capital for

their existing public firms (or for new firms that they will take public) and thus have interests that

partly overlap with those of the entrepreneurs. We assume that individual investors, who invest in

publicly traded firms either directly or indirectly through institutional investors, are too dispersed to

become part of an effective organized interest group with respect to investor protection.

     We identify and study the equilibrium outcome of the lobbying game between the interest

groups and the politician setting the level of investor protection (for simplicity we assume that this

choice is made by a single politician). Our analysis identifies factors that might lead to inefficiently

low levels of investor protection and excessive private benefits of control. First, corporate insiders



                                                    2
may be able to use some of the resources of the publicly traded companies under their control in

order to influence politicians. These insiders have the power to direct their firms’ campaign

contributions, to offer politicians’ relatives or associates positions or business, to use their standing to

support positions and causes the politician seeks to advance, and so forth. Because insiders capture

the full benefits of lobbying by their public firms for lower levels of investor protection, while their

firms' (and in turn, other shareholders in their firms) bear some of the costs of such lobbying, insiders

have an advantage in the competition for influence over politicians. To win extra private benefits of

control, insiders will be willing to spend more resources than the value of these extra benefits to

them. Essentially, insiders' lobbying is partly done at the expense of outside shareholders.

    Furthermore, institutional investors can be expected to invest in lobbying against weak investor

protection less than would be optimal for the class of outsider investors as a whole. While

institutional investors have to personally bear the costs of lobbying themselves, they capture only

part of the benefits to outside investors resulting from improved investor protection. To begin, some

investors hold shares in companies directly, not through institutional investors. Furthermore,

depending on their relationship with their own investors, some institutional investors (for example,

mutual fund managers) may capture only a fraction of increases in the value of the portfolios they

manage that better investor protection would produce. As a result, to obtain a given improvement in

investor protection, institutional investors will be willing to spend less than the total benefit that this

improvement will produce for outside shareholders.

    Another way of seeing the problems we identify is to recognize the existence of an externality.

The parties in the lobbying game – corporate insiders, institutional investors, and the politician -- are

not the only ones affected by weak investor protection. Individual investors that invest in existing

public firms either directly or indirectly through institutional investors are also adversely affected.

These investors are adversely affected by politicians' setting of low levels of investor protection and

by insiders' using corporate resources to influence politicians. However, because such individuals are

not present at the table, as it were, this negative externality is not fully taken into account in the

lobbying game, and the produced level of investor protection is consequently too low.



                                                     3
     The problems we identify do not go away when the lobbying game includes entrepreneurs (and

existing public firms) that expect weak investor protection to make it more costly for them to raise

equity capital in the future. The entrepreneurs have a preference for an efficient level of investor

protection, and their introduction into the model moderates – but is shown not to eliminate -- the bias

in favor of excessive private benefits of control. While entrepreneurs do internalize the interests of

those public investors who will buy shares from them when they take their firms public, they do not

internalize, and neither does anyone else at the lobbying table, the interests of individuals that

directly or indirectly hold shares in existing public firms and who are not at the table.

     In an economy with existing public firms, choices of investor protection levels affect not only

the allocation of cash flows from the capital that will be raised from public investors in the future but

also the allocation of rents from the capital that public firms already have (Bebchuk and Roe (1999),

La Porta et al. (2000), Stulz (2005)). The struggle over these rents, however, need not necessarily

lead to an inefficient outcome. Lobbying would lead to an efficient outcome if those lobbying on

behalf of insiders and outside shareholders were to internalize fully the costs and benefits of investor

protection choices. When such internalization does not fully occur due to one or more of the factors

we analyze, the fight over these rents distorts the outcome of the lobbying game, and produces

suboptimal investor protection levels even in the presence of entrepreneurs lobbying for efficient

rules.

     We show that the framework we develop permits the incorporation and analysis of many

additional factors. In particular, we show how our analysis can be extended and applied to analyze

the effects of raising of new capital by existing public firms or by private firms owned by the insiders

of such firms, institutional investors that are themselves a publicly traded company or a conglomerate

with publicly traded elements, and institutional arrangements that make it more difficult to change

investor protection levels often.

     While much of our analysis focuses on the effects of interest group lobbying, we also broaden

the analysis to allow for some corporate issues to become salient enough to have significant direct

influence on individual investors' voting decisions. The ordinary pro-insider operation of interest



                                                    4
group politics can, every now and then, be interrupted by pro-investor reforms resulting from a wave

of corporate scandals or a stock market crash that makes a large number of individual investors

sufficiently engaged that their voting decisions could be affected by politicians' failure to improve

investor protection. The strength of this effect would depend on the size of the investor class, and

also, importantly, on the extent to which events and their coverage by the media contribute to the

salience of corporate governance problems. In the US, such an effect is evidenced by the adoption of

the securities laws of 1933 and 1934 following the crash of 1929, and again by the passage of the

Sarbanes-Oxley Act following the burst of the stock market bubble and the Enron and WorldCom

scandals took place under such circumstances. At such times, the normal operation of interest group

lobbying was supplemented by or perhaps even took a back seat to pressures from the public at large.

    Our model generates a wide range of testable predictions about the relationship between the

levels of investor protection and various factors. In particular, our model provides predictions

relating investor protection to the structure of political and legal decision-making, the stage of the

economy, the corporate structures dominant in the economy, as well as scandal waves and stock

market crashes. Our results have bearing both on the change in the level of investor protection over

time and around the world. These results can shed some light on patterns identified by the existing

empirical work as well as provide basis for future empirical work.

    One important pattern established by the evidence is the positive correlation between high levels

of investor protection and good economic outcomes such as well-developed stock markets and higher

levels of economic growth (see, e.g., La Porta et al. 1998, 1999a, 1999b). One possible interpretation

of this correlation is that higher levels of investor protection bring about such good economic

outcomes. Our results indicate, however, that some of the causality might go in the opposite

direction: a high level of investor protection may be, at least partly, the product of, rather than the

cause of, high economic growth, a developed stock market, or an economy in an advanced stage.

This effect might be partially responsible for the observed correlation between investor protection

and economic and capital markets growth.




                                                  5
    Our work complements other work that seeks to model the political forces shaping investor

protection. Pagano and Volpin (2005a, 2005b), Perrotti and Von-Thadden (2006), and Roe (2005)

present voting models in which investor protection is shaped by voting decisions. In contrast, our

focus is on how investor protection is affected by the lobbying activities. Because voters usually pay

little attention to most investor protection issues most of the time, such activities might play a key

role. Moreover, because corporate insiders directly control a small fraction of the electorate's votes,

these models focus on the possibility of a coalition between insiders and stakeholders against outside

shareholders (Pagano and Volpin (2005a) and Perrotti and Von-Thadden (2006) or a coalition

between insiders and outside shareholders against stakeholders (Roe, 2005). In contrast, we focus on

the many aspects of investor protection that affect insiders and outside shareholders but not

employees or other stakeholders.

    Perrotti and Volpin (2007) model interest group activities and focus, in the spirit of Rajan and

Zingales (2003), on the conflict of interest between established and new firms with respect to the

level of investor protection. In their model, incumbent firms lobby to keep investor protection low so

as to discourage entry by new firms that could dissipate the rents the incumbents are making in

imperfectly competitive product markets. In contrast, we focus on the interest that insiders of existing

firms have in extracting private benefits from the capital they control at the expense of their outside

investors. We put aside entry-deterrence interests by assuming that the profits of existing firms are

not affected by entry of new firms, and we show that insiders' interest in extracting rents from the

capital in place is by itself a force pushing toward sub-optimal investor protection. 1

    In developing our model, we use the analytical framework developed by Grossman and

Helpman (1994) on the basis of the common agency model developed by Bernheim and Whinston

(1986). This framework has been used to study various political economy issues, such as trade policy

(Grossman and Helpman, 1996; Dixit et al., 1997)), taxation (Marceau and Smart, 2003), and

environmental regulation (Yu, 2005). Our model incorporates some elements not existing in the
1
  In a recent Journal of Economic Literature survey, Morck et al. (2005) stress the importance of developing
formal political economy models of corporate governance arrangements and view this task as “a fascinating
uncharted territory for creative theorists.” Our model formally develops some of the elements they view as
important for such a model to take into account.


                                                     6
models of other contexts, such as the ability of one organized group (corporate insiders) to use

resources that belong partly to others to finance its influence activities, and agency problems on the

part of members of an organized interest group (the institutional investors group).

       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the basic model. Section

3 is devoted to the characterization of equilibrium outcomes in the basic model. Section 4 extends

and generalizes the analysis in various ways. Section 5 presents and discusses the predictions

generated by our model and how they can shed light on existing evidence as well as provide a basis

for future empirical work. Finally, Section 6 offers concluding remarks.



2.        Model
2.1.      The Economy

       Our basic premise is that the choices that public officials make with respect to investor

protection matter. Of course, there are some who believe that, no matter what legal rules and

politicians' choices are, firms can always provide themselves with optimal investor protection by

adopting appropriate arrangements in their charters (or listing on a foreign exchange (Reese and

Weisbach (2002)). 2 If one were to believe that firms from countries with inadequate investor

protection could always provide optimal investor protection privately by taking such actions, then

politicians' choices in this connection would be irrelevant and would not merit analysis. Under a

widely held view, however, which underlies our analysis, private action by firms can improve

matters but cannot perfectly substitute for the state’s contribution to investor protection through its

rules and enforcement, and politicians’ choices with respect to investor protection are thus

important. 3




2
   While a firm headquartered in one country and listed on an exchange in another country would not be
subject to all the other country’s investor protection rule, the firm could take the extra step of reincorporating
in the other country. Such a step, however, would usually have tax consequences that a mere foreign listing
would not involve.
3
  See, e.g., Glazer et al. (2002). The evidence that the development of stock markets is correlated with the
investor protection provided through legal rules and public enforcement is of course consistent with this view.


                                                        7
     Another basic assumption we make is that politicians can change the level of investor protection

from time to time. That is, investor protection is not set once and for all, before the creation of a

country's public equity markets. The rules and government institutions and practices that shape

investor protection in the US, UK, Germany, France, and many other advanced economies are not

written immutably into the constitutions of these countries. They evolve and change substantially

over time. Even when rules do not change for some time, this might be due to implicit decisions by

public officials to retain existing rules.

     Our interest is in studying a special, but clearly common and important, type of economy: an

economy with public firms and institutional investors. Although this type of an economy is only one

of those theoretically conceivable, it is of course a very important type for practical purposes because

so many economies around the world are of this type. We put aside the question of what legal rules

led to or facilitated the creation of such an economy in the first place. Our interest is in understanding

how the levels of investor protection evolve in such economies.

     We therefore study an infinite-horizon economy with public firms and institutional investors in

which choices about the level of investor protection are made periodically. In each period, interest

groups compete for influence over politicians that set investor protection until the next period in

which politicians (whether the same or others) may make changes in investor protection levels. To

the extent that political choices about investor protection levels have long-lasting consequences and

are difficult to reverse until a substantial time has passed, each period can be thought as lasting a long

time. We wish to study the nature of the equilibrium of the interest group game in such an economy.

     We consider a representative period in the life of such an infinite-horizon economy with public

firms. In every period, the sequence of events is as follows:

•   In the beginning of the period there is already a stock of N public firms that have raised capital

    from outside investors in preceding periods.

•   Interest groups compete for influence over the politician, and

•   The politician then sets the level of investor protection.



                                                    8
•      After that, against the background of the chosen level of investor protection, more capital is

       raised from outside investors. Specifically, entrepreneurs take M more firms public (or insiders

       raise more capital for existing public firms).

•      Finally, at the end of the period, public firms produce cash flows and private benefits that are the

       product of the chosen level of investor protection.

       By determining investor protection levels we refer throughout not only to the choice of the legal

rules of corporate and securities law, but also to the extent to which these rules are enforced, the

extent to which rules and government institutions permit and facilitate private efforts to enforce

these rules, and so forth. The chosen investor protection level affects the payoffs at the end of this

period to corporate insiders, outside shareholders, institutional investors, and politicians.

       Note that while the level of investor protection will change the terms under which capital will be

raised by new firms, we are assuming that the number of firms entering the market will not be

affected. We thus abstract from entry-deterrence issues that are stressed by Rajan and Zingales

(2003) and Perrotti and Volpin (2007). Including this effect in our analysis would further reinforce

the distortion in favor of excessively lax investor protection.

       Below we spell out in detail our assumptions concerning the players and the process of

competition for influence over political choices



2.2.       Insiders, Outsiders, and Entrepreneurs

       In the beginning of the period, there are N firms that raised capital from outside investors in the

past. We assume for simplicity that the N public firms in the economy are all identical. In every

period, each firm generates a stream of benefits that has value V > 0. Each firm has an “insider” who

possibly holds a majority of the shares and who controls its decision-making. If the firm has a

controlling shareholder, then this controlling shareholder may be thought of as the insider. If the

firm's shares are dispersed, then the firm’s manager may be thought of as the insider. The insider is

assumed to hold a fraction α < 1 of the firm’s shares.




                                                        9
       In addition to the capital already raised, we assume that additional capital is raised from outside

investors during the considered period. One can contemplate three types of capital raising. First,

entrepreneurs -- owners of private firms not affiliated with the current insiders -- may take their firm

public. Second, the existing insiders may take additional firms public. Third, the firms controlled by

the current insiders might raise additional capital. As will be discussed in Section 3, these three cases

affect the results in a similar way. Therefore, for concreteness, we will assume initially the first case

– that is, the presence of entrepreneurs that plan to take their firms public.

       Let us now turn to the outside investors that hold a fraction 1 − α of the equity of each public

firm. We assume that agents in the economy hold diversified portfolios -- either directly or through

institutional investors. We denote the fraction of outsiders' shares that are held through institutional

investors by β ∈ (0,1] . All other shares are held directly by small individual investors. Thus,

institutional investors hold a proportion β (1 − α ) of each firm’s shares, and small investors directly

hold a proportion (1 − β )(1 − α ) . In U.S. capital markets, institutional investors -- including mutual

funds, pension funds, hedge funds and other money managers, insurance companies, and banks --

hold over 50% of the shares of all public firms.

       The payoff of institutional investors is increasing in the value of the portfolios of shares of

public companies they hold. However, the arrangements between institutional investors and their

own investors require them to pass on to their investors at least some of the gains from these

portfolios. We assume that institutional investors have linear contracts with their own investors that

enable them to get μ ∈ (0,1) times their share of the cash that is generated by the firms in which

they invest. The parameter μ may vary of course greatly across institutional investors; in the US,

for example, figures in the range of 1%-3% are typical for mutual funds while figures in the range of

20%-30% are typical for hedge funds.



2.3.      Investor Protection




                                                    10
     The level of investor protection determines the constraints that insiders face in running the firm

and consequently also the size of the private benefits of control they can capture. Private benefits

include all the monetary and non-monetary benefits that flow to insiders by virtue of their control.

Such benefits could include diversion of cash through self-dealing transactions or diversion of

corporate opportunities, profits from trading on inside information, excessive compensation, and so

on. We suppose, for simplicity, that the laxity of corporate legal investor protection can be described

by a single number, which we denote by λ ≥ 0 . 4 A higher λ corresponds to laxer corporate legal

rules, which translate into weaker investor protection, higher private benefits of control for insiders,

which we denote by b(λ ) , and lower cash flows to shareholders. Although politicians determine the

laxity of corporate legal investor protection, λ , and not directly the level of insiders' private benefits

of control b(λ ) , given that the choice of λ            determines the level of b(λ ) , we may view the

politician's choice as a direct choice of private benefits to insiders b.

     For every value of b ≥ 0 , we denote the total reduction in cash flow rights to shareholders by

c(b ) . We assume that the function c(b ) is increasing, differentiable, and convex; that c(0) = 0 ; and

that c' (0) < 1 . The social welfare that corresponds to a level of insiders’ private benefits of control b

is therefore given by

                                                     b − c(b )

     Our assumptions imply that social welfare is maximized by setting the private benefits of control

to insiders to be such that the marginal benefit to insiders is set equal to the marginal cost to all

shareholders (including insiders). That is, the maximization of social welfare requires that private

benefits of control to insiders be set equal to the value b * > 0 that satisfies the equation

                                                      ( )
                                                    c' b * = 1




4
  See the comprehensive survey by Becht et al. (2003) for a theoretical review of the various elements
represented by this parameter of the model. For empirical testing, one could proxy this parameter with the
indices of investor protection used in the literature (see, e.g., LaPorta et al. (1998), Djankov et al. (2005), and
Leuz and Hail (2006)).


                                                        11
2.4.       The Politician

       For simplicity, we assume that in every period the level of corporate legal investor protection is

determined by a single politician. Following Grossman and Helpman (2001), we assume that the

politician's objective function combines a concern for social welfare together with a concern for the

benefits that the politician can extract from the different interest groups in the economy.

       Specifically, we assume that the objective of the politician is to maximize the following function

                   u P (b, p ) = w1 ⋅ (b − c(b )) + w2 ⋅ p                        (1)

where p denotes the monetary value of benefits given to the politician by interest groups, and w1 and

w2 denote the weights the politician assigns to social welfare and interest group contributions,

respectively.

       The benefits that an organized interest group can confer on a politician can take many forms.

Grossman and Helpman assume, for simplicity, that benefits given to the politician by interest groups

take the form of campaign contributions, which benefit politicians by enabling them to sway

impressionable voters in their favor. 5 Although campaign contributions provide a concrete and

familiar example of benefits provided by lobbying groups, there are many other ways in which

benefits can be provided. Lobbying groups can benefit the politician by providing positions or

business opportunities to associates, family members, or friends of the politician, by giving charitable

contributions to causes favored by or helpful to the politician, by supporting positions the politician

seeks to advance, and so forth.

       Note that at this stage, we assume that the politician's choice of the level of investor protection

does not have a direct effect on voters' voting decisions, because voters largely do not follow this

subject. The choice of investor protection only affects voting decisions indirectly, because the

campaign contributions of interest groups (and other things the interest groups may do for the

politician) can help the politician get votes. In Section 5 we extend the model to incorporate the

direct effect on voting decisions.



5
    See Besley and Coate (2001) for an alternative perspective.


                                                             12
       Finally, it is worth noting that, like the literature, we assume that the politician's choice is among

general rules. That is, the politician cannot set investor protection levels differently for some insiders

than for others. The politician has to choose a level that will apply to all public firms. For this reason,

players with an interest only in a given company cannot lobby for special rules for that company.

They can only participate in the lobbying for general rules whose application to their particular

company will be beneficial to them.



2.5.      The Influence Game

       In our model, in every period, the level of corporate legal investor protection affects four groups

of players: insiders, individual investors, institutional investors, and entrepreneurs. Insiders prefer

that private benefits of control b be set strictly higher than the efficient level b * , and individual

investors and institutional investors prefer that private benefits of control be set strictly lower than

the efficient level. Because an efficient level of private benefits of control maximizes the value and

hence the price of their firm when they take it public, entrepreneurs prefer that b be set equal to the

efficient level b * .

       Each of these four groups has different objectives and may consequently benefit from organizing

to influence the politician's decision, yet might be differently adept at overcoming the free-rider

problem associated with organizing itself for the purpose of collective action. At least since Olson

(1965), the literature has recognized that small, closely knit, groups whose members each have a

large stake in getting organized may be more effective in organizing for collective action.

Accordingly, we assume that insiders, institutional investors, and entrepreneurs, can organize

themselves to form special interest groups for the purpose of influencing the politician's decision. In

contrast, individual investors, who are both more numerous and dispersed and have, individually, a

much smaller stake in the politician's decision, do not form an organized interest group and engage in

lobbying. We follow the literature in assuming that each of the three organized interest groups acts so

as to maximize the total payoff to the members of the group.




                                                      13
    We denote the insiders’, the institutional investors', and the entrepreneurs', special interest

groups by I, F, and E, respectively. Following the literature (e.g., Bernheim and Whinston, 1986; and

Grossman and Helpman, 2001) we assume that interest groups of insiders, institutional investors, and

entrepreneurs offer the politician nonnegative contribution schedules, denoted C I (⋅) , C F (⋅) , and

C E (⋅) , respectively, which specify the amount they are willing to pay in return for the

implementation of legal investor protection that would set the amount of private benefits of control.

    The cost for the special interest groups of paying the politician depends on the constraints that

are imposed on the ways in which lobbyists can influence politicians. Specifically we assume that

every dollar of benefits enjoyed by the politician costs κ to the organized interest group providing it.

The parameter κ describes the cost of the “influence technology” that is available to interest groups

in the economy. In an economy in which there are no constraints on bribing politicians, interest

groups can just write a check to the politician, and κ is equal to one. In contrast, if checks cannot be

written but expensive gala dinners may be arranged, an interest group may have to spend much more

in order to provide the politician with a given level of benefits. The more constrains are imposed on

conferring benefits on politicians, the greater is κ .

    An important practical difference between insiders and other interest groups is that insiders are

able to use their control over the resources of public firms for their influence activities. Insiders have

control over the campaign contributions and the charitable contributions that firms make, so insiders

can use their control over firms' resources to provide benefits to individuals affiliated with politicians

(or the politicians themselves after they retire). Insiders also determine whether their firms will

support various policy measures that a politician seeks to advance. CEOs' command of large firm

resources substantially contributes to their ability to attract prominent politicians to their dinner

parties, to bring many high-wealth individuals to fund-raisers they throw for politicians, and so forth.

Indeed, in the U.S., the Business Roundtable, a powerful interest group representing executives of the

country’s largest companies, is largely financed by the membership fees that the executives' firms

pay to the organization.




                                                    14
     One might wonder why corporate charters do not explicitly prohibit insiders from using

company resources to influence politicians. While some of the expenditures are difficult to observe

or verify, others such as campaign donations are not. A main reason for the absence of such

prohibitions might be that some use of company resources to gain influence may be in the interest of

shareholders. Insiders can use the influence they gain with a politician to lobby for rules that are

good for firm profits (e.g., lax regulation on the industry in which the firm operates). 6 While it might

be possible to observe that insiders are lobbying politicians, it is hard to observe the particular

purpose for which they are lobbying any given politician. For example, when an insider cultivates a

relationship with a politician, shareholders can hardly observe what the former discusses with the

latter at a dinner party.

     The problems we highlight can also be viewed as an agency problem. The standard agency

problem is that, given whatever legal rules (and corporate arrangements) are in place, insiders may

use their discretion to make business decisions that serve their private interests (Jensen and

Meckling, 1976). What we highlight is that the legal rules themselves are partly a product of an

agency problem, as insiders might use direct corporate lobbying efforts in ways that serve their own

interests. Similarly, institutional investors cannot be expected to act in ways that would best serve the

interests of public investors.

     We therefore assume that insiders can use their firms to finance their influence activities.

Because insiders own a proportion α          of each firm, insiders bear only a fraction α of their

contribution to the politician. In contrast to insiders, the institutional investors and entrepreneurs

cannot engage in influence activities at the expense of existing public firms. Indeed, under the

standard contracts institutional investors have with their investors, institutional investors cannot even

charge such expenses to their managed portfolios. Thus, the institutional investors and entrepreneurs

have to bear such expenses themselves with their own private resources.




6
 For empirical evidence on how political connections can improve firm value and stock returns, see Bongini,
Claessens, and Ferri (2001), Faccio (2006), Faccio, Masulis, and McConnell (2005), and Leuz and Oberholzer-
Gee (2006), Claessens, Feijen, and Laeven (2006).


                                                    15
       The game proceeds as follows. The three interest groups simultaneously offer the politician

contribution schedules. Then, the politician chooses a level of private benefits of control that

maximizes his objective function, and the politician, insiders, institutional investors and

entrepreneurs all obtain their payoffs that are defined as follows.

       The payoff to the politician is described above in (1). The direct payoffs to insiders, institutional

investors, and entrepreneurs, when they pay the politician amounts p I , p F , and p E , respectively,

and the politician sets the level of private benefits of control at b are given by

                    u I (b, p I ) = N (b − αc(b )) − ακp I ,                                (2)

                    u F (b, p F , p I ) = − Nμβ (1 − α )c(b ) − κp F ,                      (3)

and,

                    u E (b, p E ) = M (b − c(b )) − κp E                                    (4)

respectively. 7



3.         The Equilibrium Level of Investor Protection

       We analyze Nash equilibria of the political process described above as follows. A pure strategy

Nash equilibrium is a quartet b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅), C E (⋅)        that is such that the politician chooses the

level of private benefit of control to maximize its objective function, and each interest group does not

want to change its own contribution schedule given the other interest group’s contribution schedule

and the politician's anticipated choice.

       Optimization by the politician implies that

                              b o ∈ arg max{w1 (b − c(b )) + w2 (C I (b ) + C F (b ) + C E (b ))}
                                        b≥0




7
    Observe that because insiders use their firms to finance their contributions, a payment of p I from insiders to
the politician further reduces the payoff to institutional investors by an amount     μβ (1 − α )κp I


                                                            16
       Optimization by interest group k ∈ {I , F , E} implies that there does not exist an alternative

contribution schedule Ĉ k (⋅) that would induce the politician to choose another level of benefits

                                           {                        (                      )}
                             bˆ ∈ arg max w1 (b − c(b )) + w2 Cˆ k (b ) + Ci (b ) + C j (b )
                                     b≥0


where i, j ∈ {I , F , E} \ {k }, i ≠ j , that would make the interest group k strictly better off, or such that

                                               (       ( ))
                                           u k bˆ, Cˆ k bˆ > u k (b o , C k (b o )) .

       We follow the literature and further focus our attention on Nash equilibria that are supported by

“truthful” contributions schedules. A contribution schedule is said to be truthful if starting from any

positive contribution to the politician, the additional contribution that an interest group is willing

make to the politician in return for a change in b is such that the direct payoff to the interest group

remains unchanged. In other words, a contribution schedule C k (⋅) , k ∈ {I , F , E}, is said to be

truthful if it is such that the direct payoff to the interest group is a constant that is independent of the

politician's ultimate choice of b, provided that the interest group's contribution is positive, or more

formally, if it is such that u k (b, C k (b )) = K for some constant K for every b such that C k (b ) > 0 . 8



3.1.      The Special Case in Which No New Capital is Raised

          In order to better understand our results, it is best to start with the analysis of the special (no

growth) case in which no new capital is raised from public investors by new firms (or existing firms).

Note that in this case, entrepreneurs are not participating in the lobbying game so that only two

interest groups are present, insiders and institutional investors.

          Observe that algebraic manipulation of equation (2) reveals that if insiders employ truthful

strategies, then their contribution schedule C I (b ) is equal to



8
   Confining attention to truthful Nash equilibria may not be as restrictive as it may seem. Bernheim and
Whinston (1986) show that for any profile of strategies that are chosen by other special interest groups, each
special interest has a best response contribution schedule that is truthful. And Bernheim et al. (1987) show that
the set of truthful equilibria coincides with the set of coalition-proof pure strategy Nash equilibria. The
literature has considered truthful equilibria to be the standard refinement of pure strategy Nash equilibria in
common agency games.


                                                          17
                           N (b − αc(b )) ακ                                            (5)

up to a constant if (5) is positive. Similarly, algebraic manipulation of equation (3) reveals that if

institutional investors employ truthful strategies, then their contribution schedule C F (b ) is equal to

                           − Nμβ (1 − α )c(b ) κ                                        (6)

up to a constant if (6) is positive.

        Having made this observation, we can state the following result.



Proposition 1: In an economy with public firms and institutional investors, in the absence of

lobbying by entrepreneurs planning to take new companies public, the lobbying game has a unique

truthful Nash equilibrium with an inefficiently low level of investor protection and an excessively

high level of private benefits to insiders if at least one of the following three conditions is satisfied:

     • Insiders can use the resources of existing firms to finance their influence activities,

     • Some individual investors hold shares directly in public firms, and

     • Institutional investors have to pass on to their investors some of the benefits of improved

investor protection.



Proof: The proof consists of three steps, the first of which is given here, and the other two are

relegated to the appendix. We first show that if b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅)        is a truthful Nash equilibrium in

which both interest groups contribute positive amounts to the politician (that is both

   ( ) ( )
C I b o , C F b o > 0 , then b o is characterized by the following equation

                                                      w2 N
                                               w1 +
                             ( )
                           c' b o =
                                             w2 N
                                                       ακ               ≥ 1.            (7)
                                      w1 +          (1 + μβ (1 − α ))
                                              κ

     Suppose that b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅)                                                   ( ) ( )
                                             is a truthful Nash equilibrium in which C I b o , C F b o > 0 . Let

TI denote the level of benefits where CI (b ) starts to increase above zero, and let TF denote the level




                                                            18
                                                                                      ( )    ( )
of benefits where CF (b ) becomes equal to zero. The fact that CI bo and CF bo are both positive

implies that TI < bo < TF . The fact that b o is optimal for the politician implies that it is a global

maximum of the politician's objective function. In particular, it must be that b o is an interior local

maximum of the politician's objective function on the interval [TI , TF ] . It therefore follows that

                 d
                    [w1 ⋅ (b − c(b )) + w2 ⋅ (C I (b ) + C F (b ))]   b =b o
                                                                               = 0.         (8)
                 db

    Plugging (5) and (6) into (8) implies that b o has to satisfy the following equation:


                   (       ( ))
                 w1 1 − c' b o + w2 ⎜⎜
                                           (        ( ))
                                     ⎛ N 1 − αc ' b o
                                                      −
                                                        Nμβ (1 − α )c' b o ⎞      ( )
                                                                           ⎟⎟ = 0 (9)
                                     ⎝      ακ                 κ            ⎠

Rearranging equation (9) produces equation (7).

    Note that the right-hand-side of (7) is larger than or equal to 1 for any values of α , β , μ ∈ [0,1] .

If α = 1 , then the right-hand-side of (7) is equal to 1 which implies that bo = b* . But if α < 1 and

even more so if in addition also β < 1 or μ < 1 then the right-hand-side of (7) is strictly larger than

1 which implies that bo > b* . Note also that right-hand-side of (7) is decreasing in κ . That is, the

more expensive it is to pay the politician, the less it is paid, and the closer is the outcome to the

efficient one.

    To complete the proof we have to show that in any truthful Nash equilibrium, both interests

groups make positive contributions to the politician and that these contributions are uniquely

determined, which implies that there exists a unique truthful Nash equilibrium. This follows from

Lemmas 1 and 2 in the appendix. Lemma 1 shows that the special interests equilibrium contributions

   ( )           ( )
CI bo and CF bo are positive, and Lemma 2 shows they are uniquely determined. ■



Remarks: (i) The intuition for the result is as follows. The optimal level of private benefits is

defined at the level in which the marginal benefit to insiders is equal to the marginal cost to all

shareholders. However, in the economy assumed in the proposition, investor protection will be set at




                                                         19
a level at which the marginal benefit of additional private benefits to insiders is lower than their

marginal cost to outside shareholders.

     If insiders can finance influence activities using their firms’ resources, then, for any given

increase in private benefits b, insiders will be willing to spend more on influence activities than the

value to them of this marginal benefit. Specifically, for each increase in private benefits of control

Δb , while from (5) the value of the increase to insiders is N (Δb − α (c(b + Δb ) − c(b ))) , insiders are

willing to spend up to N (Δb − α (c(b + Δb ) − c(b ))) ακ      to obtain this increase, because they bear

only a fraction α of this spending, and taking into account the cost κ of influencing the politician.

In contrast, from (6) the cost of such an increase to institutional investors is Nμβ (1 − α )Δb , but

institutional investors are only willing to spend up to Nμβ (1 − α )Δb κ          to prevent this increase,

taking into account the cost κ of influencing the politician, because they finance their lobbying

expenses out of their own pocket.

     If institutional investors do not hold all of the shares not in the hands of insiders ( β < 1 ), or if

institutional investors have to pass on to their own investors some of the increase in the value of

portfolios of public company shares held by them ( μ < 1 ), then for any given increase in private

benefits, institutional investors are willing to spend less on influence activities to prevent this

increase than the marginal costs of this increase to outside shareholders. Thus, under the conditions

specified in the proposition, insiders are willing to spend more than institutional investors to get

increases in private benefits at any level below the optimal level as well as in some levels above it.

     (ii) Another way of understanding the intuition for the result is the following. In models using

the Grossman-Helpman framework, the outcome is efficient for the lobbying interest groups and the

politician in the sense that there is no outcome that can make all of them better off compared to the

equilibrium outcome (Dixit et al., 1997). Similarly, in our model the truthful equilibrium outcome

identified in the proposition is jointly efficient for insiders, institutional investors, and the politician,

in the sense that there is no other outcome that generates the same payment to the politician that all




                                                     20
would weakly prefer to it and at least some strictly prefer to it. That is, the outcome is efficient with

respect to all the parties that are at the bargaining table, as it were.

       However, in our model, the outcome has an effect not only on the interests of the parties at the

table but also on the interests of individual investors who directly or indirectly own stock in public

companies. Spending by insiders to influence politicians to increase private benefits, and increases in

private benefits, both impose a negative externality on these individual investors, which the lobbying

groups do not take into account. The politician is influenced by this externality but also by the

influence activities of the lobbying groups, which do not take the externality into account. As a

result, the outcome is one in which private benefits are excessive.



3.2.      The General Case with Raising of New Capital

       Thus far we have identified the equilibrium level of investor protection in the special case in

which there are no entrepreneurs, and no new firms are created after the setting of the investor

protection. We now relax this assumption and allow for the possibility that, as assumed in the general

model described in Section 2, entrepreneurs create M new firms.

       A strongly held view among financial economists implies that agents who seek to raise capital

from the public by selling part of their firms to new shareholders have an interest in their firms being

governed by efficient governance arrangements, because inefficiencies would depress the price they

can obtain for shares of their firms (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). This view might lead some to

believe that in an economy in which capital is being raised, the interest of entrepreneurs in an

efficient level of investor protection for new firms will provide a powerful force pushing towards an

efficient level of investor protection.

       In our model, if entrepreneurs could unilaterally dictate the level of investor protection, they

would set it at an optimal level. However, entrepreneurs cannot dictate the investor protection level

but can only expend resources to compete for influence over the politician setting this level.

Accordingly, the level of investor protection will be set optimally only if the entrepreneur is willing

to pay the politician for setting investor protection optimally more than insiders are willing to pay the



                                                     21
politician for not doing so. As we will see below, the entrepreneurs' interest in limiting the

inefficiency of investor protection rules will reduce the distortion in favor of excessive private

benefits but will not eliminate it.

      Algebraic manipulation of equation (4) reveals that if entrepreneurs employ truthful strategies,

then their contribution schedule C E (b ) is equal to

                                    M (b − c(b )) κ                                           (10)

up to a constant if (10) is positive. Having made this observation, we can state the following result.



Proposition 2: In an economy with public firms, insiders, institutional investors, and entrepreneurs,

the lobbying game has a unique truthful Nash equilibrium with an inefficiently low level of investor

protection and an excessively high level of private benefits of control if at least one of the following

three conditions is satisfied:

      • Insiders can use the resources of existing firms to finance their influence activities,

      • Some individual investors hold shares directly in public firms, or

      • Institutional investors have to pass on to their investors some of the benefits of improved

investor protection.

      However, the level of investor protection is less sub-optimal, and the level of private benefits is

less excessive, than the corresponding levels in the case where no new capital is raised from public

investors as specified in Proposition 1.



Proof: The proof of Proposition 2 is similar to that of Proposition 1. Suppose that

 b oo , C I (⋅), C F (⋅), C E (⋅)                                                ( ) ( ) ( )
                                    is a truthful Nash equilibrium in which CI bo o , CF bo o , CE bo o > 0 .

Let TI denote the level of benefits where CI (b ) starts to increase above zero, and let TF denote the

                                                                                        ( )
level of benefits where CF (b ) becomes equal to zero. The fact that C I b o o and CF bo o             ( )      are both

positive implies that TI < bo o < TF . The fact that bo o is optimal for the politician implies that it is a

global maximum of the politician's objective function. In particular, it must be that bo o is an interior


                                                              22
local maximum of the politician's objective function on the interval [TI , TF ] (Observe that because

the entrepreneurs are interested in a level of private benefits b that is between the one that insiders

and institutional investors want, if it is positive, then their contribution is positive on the interval

[TI , TF ] )   . It therefore follows that

                      d
                         [w1 ⋅ (b − c(b )) + w2 ⋅ (CI (b ) + CF (b ) + CE (b ))]b=boo = 0.       (11)
                      db

        Plugging (5), (7), and (11) into (12) implies that boo has to satisfy the following equation:


    (          ( ))           (
                     ⎛ N 1 − αc ' b o o
w1 1 − c' b oo + w2 ⎜⎜                  −
                                         ( ))
                                          Nμβ (1 − α )c' b oo
                                                              +
                                                                   ( )
                                                                M 1 − c ' b oo(      ( )) ⎞⎟ = 0. (12)
                            ακ                    κ                  κ                       ⎟
                     ⎝                                                                       ⎠

Rearranging (13) gives

                                                 w2 ⎛ N ⎞
                                          w1 +      ⎜ +M⎟
                                                 κ ⎝α
                        ( )
                      c ' b oo =
                                       w N⎛
                                                        ⎠
                                                            M⎞
                                                                         ≥1                      (13)
                                   w1 + 2 ⎜1 + μβ (1 − α ) + ⎟
                                        κ ⎝                 N⎠

        As in the proof of Proposition 1, note that the right-hand-side of (13) is larger than or equal to 1

for any values of α , β , μ ∈ [0,1] . If α = 1 , then the right-hand-side of (13) is equal to 1 which

implies that b o o = b* . But if α < 1 and even more so if in addition either β < 1 or μ < 1 then the

right-hand-side of (13) is strictly larger than 1 which implies that b o o > b* .

        To complete the proof we have to show that in any truthful Nash equilibrium, both interests

groups make positive, uniquely determined, contributions to the politician. This follows from

Lemmas 3 and 4 in the appendix. Lemma 3 shows that the special interests equilibrium contributions

    ( )          ( )               ( )
C I bo o , CF bo o , and C E bo o , are positive, and Lemma 4 shows they are uniquely determined. ■



Remarks: The intuition for the results in Proposition 2 is as follows. Recall that the reason for the

inefficiency of the outcome in Proposition 1 resulted form the fact that the lobbying groups at the

table did not fully take into account the negative effects of private benefits on individual investors.

Because entrepreneurs expect the IPO price to reflect the costs of weak investor protection for


                                                              23
outside shareholders buying shares at the IPO from their firms, the entrepreneurs internalize the

effects of such protection on the outside investors in the firms they plan to take public.

        However, the entrepreneurs do not internalize the effects of weak investor protection on

outside investors in firms that are already public. Thus, even with the addition of the entrepreneurs

lobby to the bargaining table, there still remains a group that is adversely affected by weak investor

protection – outside investors in exiting public companies – whose interests will not be represented at

the table. As a result, the outcome is still distorted in the direction of excessively large private

benefits of control.

        The extent of the moderating effect that lobbying by entrepreneurs has on the outcome

depends on the ratio of M to N -- that is the ratio of firms that will have to go public in the future on

the basis of the chosen investor protection level and the stock of existing firms that have already

obtained their capital. The higher this ratio, the more moderated the outcome will be. This is the case

because the interests of the future outside investors in the M firms are represented at the bargaining

table whereas the interests of the outside investors in the already existing N firms are not. Thus, the

larger the former group relative to the latter group, the smaller the relative significance of the fact

that the interests of the latter group are not internalized and consequently the smaller the distortion in

favor of sub-optimal level of protection.



3.3.    Raising of New Capital by Existing Public Firms

        We have thus far assumed that the new capital is going to be raised by new firms taken public

by entrepreneurs. We now turn to explore the possibility that the existing public firms will raise new

capital. Specifically, we assume that the new M firms will be established as publicly traded

subsidiaries of the existing N companies, with the existing companies holding α of the shares and

the public holding the rest.



Proposition 3: In the case in which the new M firms are expected to be established as subsidiaries of

the existing public firms rather than as new firms taken public by entrepreneurs:



                                                   24
       1. If the private benefits of the new firms will be captured by the parent and shared by all

shareholders of the parent, then the equilibrium will be the same as the one of the case of

entrepreneurs specified in Proposition 2.

       2. If the private benefits flow directly to the insider and are not shared by the parent's outside

shareholders, then investor protection will be more lax, and private benefits will be larger, than in

the case in which the M new firms are established by entrepreneurs.



Remark: The proof of Proposition 3 is relegated to the appendix. The intuition for it is as follows:

       (i) Recall that with the introduction of entrepreneurs, there were lobbyists who beyond b * were

willing to pay M (c' (b ) − 1) κ to prevent a marginal increase in private benefits of control. In the

case under consideration, the payoff of public companies is similarly lower by M (c' (b ) − 1) . And

insiders only lose a fraction α of that. However, because insiders are generally willing to pay 1 ακ

for benefits, this reduction reduces their willingness to spend by M (c' (b ) − 1) κ .

       (ii) In the second case, the outcome is more distorted because insiders fully capture the private

benefits in the new firms but share with investors in the existing firms the costs of the reduced

willingness of the public to pay for shares in the new firms. Thus, for any increase in private benefits

by 1, they will gain M but pay only Mαc' (b ) at the margin.



4.        Extensions and Generalizations
4.1.      Publicly Traded Institutional Investors

          Until now we have assumed that the person who is making the decisions for the institutional

investors seeks to maximize the institutional investors' profits. But this might not be the case if the

institutional investors are themselves become public companies. Let us assume that the institutional

investors become themselves public companies and that insiders in the institutional investment firms

hold a share α of their firms, like insiders in the N public firms that are not engaged in such

financial intermediation.



                                                    25
Proposition 4: If the institutional investors are themselves publicly traded companies, then investor

protection will be more lax and private benefits will be larger, than in the equilibria described in

Propositions 1-3.



       As before, the proof of Proposition 4 is relegated to the appendix. The intuition is as follows.

The change in assumptions reduces the willingness of the insiders controlling the decisions of

institutional investors to spend the resources of their public companies to lobby for an increased level

of investor protection. While improved investor protection would increase the profits of the

institutional investors, which would provide a benefit to these insiders because of their holdings in

the institutional investor, improved investor protection would now also reduce the private benefit

they drive from their public company. Indeed, when the latter effect is stronger than the former, the

change might even lead those running the institutional investors to even be willing to spend resources

of their public company to lobby for weakening investor protection levels.

       Another way of understanding this result is by considering the effect of institutional investors

being themselves being publicly traded on the negative externality that weakening investor protection

would impose on parties not at the table. When the institutional investors are not closely held but

rather publicly traded, weakening investor protection would impose a negative externality on the

public investors in these institutional investors in two ways: first, by reducing the profits the

institutional investors obtains when their managed portfolios appreciate in value; and, second, by

increasing the private benefits extracted from the institutional investors by their insiders.



4.2.      The Duration of Selected Investor Protection Levels

          A country’s legal/political/institutional structure determines how often decisions are made by

the politician, at least implicitly, about investor protection levels. Consider, for example, a situation

in which significant decisions concerning investor protections are made by judges or bureaucrats who

cannot be removed easily for a given period of time once appointed by the politician. Similarly, the



                                                    26
competing claims on the agenda of the legislature imply that reconsideration of the corporate code is

likely to take a long time in many countries.

          To consider how the “durability” of investor protection decisions affects the equilibrium level

of investor protection, let us assume that the politician chooses the investor protection level not in the

beginning of each period but in the beginning of every other period. That is, two periods, rather than

one period, passes between any two nearby points in time in which the investor protection level is

set.

       Suppose that the M entrepreneurs who plan to sell their firms in the first period of the any such

two periods all participate in the lobbying game, and so does a fraction φ > 0 (which could be small)

of the M entrepreneurs who plan to sell their firms in the second of those two periods.

       Observe that the fact that the politician would set the level of benefits for two rather than for one

period implies that the weight that the politician puts on social welfare in his objective function (1)

should be multiplied by two, and so should the contributions of insiders and institutional investors in

(5) and (6) respectively, provided they are positive. The contribution in (10) of the first M

entrepreneurs who intend to sell their firms in the first of the two periods should also by multiplied

by two, because they internalize any change in the future value of their firms, and in addition, φM

of the entrepreneurs who intend to sell their firms in the second of the two periods should also

attempt to lobby the politician and offer him a contribution that is given by (10) up to a constant if it

is positive in equilibrium.

       Having made these observations, we can state the following result.



Proposition 5: In the economies described in Propositions 2 and 3, if the politician sets the investor

protection level not in the beginning of each period but in the beginning of every other period, then

in the unique truthful Nash equilibrium of the lobbying game, the level of investor protection would

be higher and private benefits of control would be lower, in comparison to the equilibria described in

Propositions 2 and 3.




                                                     27
        The intuition behind this result, whose proofs is again relegated to the appendix, is as

follows. When a decision over investor protection will affect investor protection levels in a given

future period that is relatively distant in the future, a great fraction of the capital in the hands of

public companies in that future period will be raised after the decision is made rather than one

already in place at the time of the decision. As a result, the lobbying efforts of those (entrepreneurs as

well as existing insiders) interested in raising capital in the future relative to the lobbying efforts of

those insiders seeking to capture rents from the capital already in the hands of public companies will

be strengthened. And this effect reduces (even though it does not eliminate) the distortion in favor of

excessive private benefits. Furthermore, the larger is the number of periods that pass between each

successive change in private benefits of control, the stronger is this effect and the closer is the level

of private benefits of control that is set in equilibrium to the socially efficient level.



4.3.    Voting and the Role of the Media

        Suppose that the politician's choice of investor protection level affects not only the

contributions of organized interest groups but also has a meaningful direct effect on voting decisions.

Although the number of corporate insiders in the population is small, the number of individual

investors might be significant. Suppose that a non-negligible fraction of the electorate consists of

investors that follow the choice of the investor protection level and who might be led to vote against

the politician if they perceive his choice of the investor protection level as lax. Specifically, suppose

that the politician’s objective is to maximize the following function

                 uˆ P (b, p ) = ω1 (b − c(b )) + ω 2 p − ω 3 v(θ , b, s )           (14)

where p denotes the total sum of campaign contributions to the politician as before, v(θ , b, s )

denotes the number of votes that the politician is expected to lose as a function of the private benefits

of control it sets, the fraction of the population that invests in public companies directly or indirectly

θ , and the salience of corporate governance issues s, and ω1 , ω 2 , ω 3 > 0 describe the weights given

to social welfare, campaign contributions, and lost votes, respectively, in the politician's objective




                                                            28
function. Suppose also that number of votes that the politician stands to lose v(θ , b, s ) is increasing

in the level of private benefits of control it sets, b, the salience of the issue of favorite treatment of

corporate insiders, s and in the fraction of voters who are shareholders.

       An argument similar to the one used to prove Proposition 1 implies that in the unique truthful

Nash equilibrium of the lobbying game in this case, the outcome would be less biased in favor of

corporate insider compared to the case analyzed in Section 3 where the politician ignored the voters’

response.



Proposition 6: If investor protection decisions have a direct effect on voting decisions, then the

lobbying game will have a unique truthful Nash equilibrium in which investor protection is stronger

and private benefits of control are smaller than in the equilibria identified in Propositions 1 and 2.



       The proof of Proposition 6 is relegated to the appendix. To see the intuition behind this result,

                 ()
observe that c' bˆ decreases with s. Proposition 6 thus implies that if the salience of the issue of the

favorite treatment of corporate insiders is strong, as it is expected to be either as a result of more

extensive media coverage, or after corporate scandals and market crashes, then the politician might

even set the level of the private benefits of control b to be lower than the efficient level b * . This case

may be interpreted as reflecting a surrender of the politician to populist sentiment. Proposition 6 also

indicates that, over time, as public rage subsides and the salience of corporate discipline decreases,

the level of private benefits of control is expected to increase again.



5.        Predictions and Implications

5.1.      Investor Protection and the Structure
          of Political/Legal Decision-Making


          We begin with observations about the link between the equilibrium level of investor

protection and two variables that are relevant to determining the extent to which interest group


                                                    29
lobbying efforts in the aggregate would affect the politician’s decision making. In particular, the

equilibrium level of investor protection in our model increases with the weight given to interest

group contributions in the politician’s objective function, and decreases with the influence

technology cost of contributing to the politician, which provides us with the following predictions:



Prediction 1: Investor protection will be lower when public officials setting the level of investor

protection assign a relative high weight to contributions from interest groups in their objective

function.



Prediction 2: Investor protection will be lower when interest groups seeking to influence politicians

face weaker constraints on their influence activities and thus have a less expensive “influence

technology.”



        Essentially, interest group lobbying pushes the politician away from setting private benefits

at the optimal level, which social welfare considerations would suggest. Thus, anything that increase

the role that interest group lobbying plays in the politician’s final decision will also increase the sub-

optimality of investor protection. Both predictions suggest a link between the general quality of

choices made by public officials and the quality of their choices in the investor protection area.

        The first prediction also indicates the significance of the extent to which decisions

concerning investor protection are relegated to judges and civil servants that are less susceptible to

lobbying by interest groups. This prediction is consistent with the evidence that common law systems

in which judges play a more significant role are associated with higher levels of investor protection

(LaPorta et al. (1998), Djankov et al. (2005)). To the extent that systems in which judges play a

greater role in determining investor protection levels offer higher levels of such protection, such a

pattern might be partly due to the relative insulation of judges from interest group lobbying.

        The second prediction provides a testable prediction for future empirical work. It suggests

that investor protection levels should be expected to be correlated with the existence and tightness of



                                                   30
limits on the freedom of politicians to receive benefits (either in terms of campaign contributions or

otherwise) from interest groups.



Prediction 3: Investor protection will be higher when the legal and institutional structures make the

consequences of political choices with respect to investor protection longer lasting and more difficult

to reverse.



        When the choices made at any point in time will govern far into the future, the group of

entrepreneurs who will be affected by current choices, and who therefore may be more inclined to

lobby for efficient rules, expands. Therefore, when institutional structures slow down the pace of

changes, investor protection can be expected to improve. To the extent that judge-made law is

expected to change more slowly and gradually over time, this prediction provides another reason to

expect an association between systems in which courts play a more significant role in determining

investor protection and higher investor protection levels.



5.2.    Investor protection and the stage of the economy



Prediction 4: Investor protection will be higher in growing economies in which the value of the new

capital that needs to be raised from outside investors is large relative to the value of the capital

already in the hands of existing public firms.



        In our model, when an economy is growing at a faster pace, there will be more lobbying in

favor of efficient rules by entrepreneurs and existing public companies whose plans to raise capital

from public investors make them interested in such rules. This result is consistent with the evidence

that investor protection is correlated with GDP growth (Castro et al. (2004)) and that investor

protection is correlated with the ratio of capital raised in IPOs to GDP (Djankov et al. (2005)). The




                                                  31
result indicates that the documented correlations might be at least partly due to causality going from

growth to higher investor protection than one going from higher investor protection to growth. 9



Prediction 5: Investor protection will be higher when the fraction of the electorate that directly or

indirectly owns shares in public companies is large.



        When a large fraction of the electorate holds shares directly or indirectly, episodes that make

the inadequacy of investor protection visible are more likely to lead public officials to improve

investor protection levels out of fear that failing to do so would result in direct adverse effect on

citizens’ voting decisions. This result is consistent with the evidence that investor protection levels

are correlated with the size of a country’s stock market relative to GDP (see, e.g., Djankov et al.

(2005)). This result suggests yet another reason for why stock market development might bring

about, rather than be caused by, high level of investor protection. The existence of such a causal link

from increased participation in the stock market to higher investor protection is consistent with the

evidence in Franks et al. (2006) that formal legal protection of investors in the U.K. to a substantial

extent followed rather than preceded the dispersion of ownership.



5.3.    Investor Protection and corporate structures and activities



Prediction 6: Among economies with controlling shareholders, investor protection will be lower in

those in which controllers hold a low fraction of cash flows rights due to the separation of cash flow

rights and voting rights.



        Separation between cash flow rights and voting rights is common in many countries around

the world, and its presence is associated with low levels of investor protection (La Poerta et al.
9
 Allen et al. (2005) describe how in the absence of significant investor protection, much of the growth of
China’s economy has taken place in private companies obtaining financing through means other than raising
public equity. Our analysis suggests that the increasing use of public equity markets by companies in China
might lead to future improvements in the levels of investor protection.


                                                    32
(1999), Claessens et al. (2000). One set of explanations for such an association suggests that poor

investor protection leads to an increased use of the separation between cash flow rights and voting

rights (Bebchuk (1999), Almeida and Wolfenzon (2006)).10 Our analysis indicates that this

correlation might also be at least partly explained by causality going in the opposite direction,

namely, that the common use of such structures might lead to greater tendency of insiders to use

corporate resources to lobby for low levels of investor protection.



Prediction 7: Investor protection will be lower when the economy is dominated by conglomerates,

with new publicly traded companies tending to be created as subsidiaries or affiliates of existing

public companies rather than as stand-alone entities.



        This prediction follows from our Proposition 3. In many developing countries with low levels

of investor protection, the economy and the creation of new public entities are dominated by

conglomerates/business groups (see Fogel (2006) and the evidence surveyed by Morck, Wolfenzon,

and Yeung (2005)). And reasons have been given to explain why low level of investor protection

could provide large business groups with a great role in the creation of new business entities

(Almeida and Wolfenzon (2006), Khanna and Palepu (2000)). Our analysis suggests a

complementary explanation: the association between conglomerates/business groups and low levels

of investor protection could also be explained by conglomeration bringing about, and not merely

being caused by, low investor protection.



5.4.    Investor Protection and Public Perceptions

        As our analysis in section 5 suggests, whether public officials will be concerned about how

decisions concerning investor protection will directly affect voting decisions will depend on various

factors, which leads to the following predictions.


10
  Relatedly, Morck and Yeung (2004), and Morck et al. (2005) argue that unaccountable/corrupt systems,
which are correlated with low investor protection, provide incentives to create control pyramids, because such
entities are more effective than freestanding firms in lobbying politicians.


                                                     33
Prediction 8: Investor protection will be higher when individuals investing (directly or indirectly) in

public companies are more financially educated and when the media is more active.



       This prediction is consistent with the evidence of Dyck and Zingales (2004) that that investor

protection levels (as proxied by premia on control blocks) are correlated with high per capital level of

newspaper circulation. One explanation for this association is that, for any level of legal investor

protection, an active media operates to reduce insider opportunism (see Dyck et al. (2006). Our

analysis suggests another, complementary explanation for this pattern: media exposure of insider

opportunism might increase the pressure on politicians concerned about citizens’ voting decisions to

improve investor protection regulation. Furthermore, to the extent that individuals’ financial and

general education is higher in richer countries, this result can help explain why investor protection is

higher in countries with higher GDP per capita.



Prediction 9: Investor protection will be higher following scandals or crashes that make the

problems of insider opportunism more salient.



       This prediction is consistent with a pattern that is observed in many countries where major

reforms that boost the level of investor protection take place after major financial scandals. In the

US, for example, most of the major legislative overhauls strengthening investor protection, such as

the 1933 and 1934 securities legislation and the 2002 adoption of Sarbanes-Oxley, followed major

waves of financial scandals. One explanation for this pattern is that the waves of scandals played an

informational role, making public officials recognize the desirability of certain investor protection

measures. The alternative, possibly complementary explanation offered by our analysis, is that the

scandals served an important educational role for the public, highlighting for many voters the flaws




                                                  34
of existing arrangements. 11 By doing so, the scandals made it in the interest of public officials to

adopt measures whose efficiency might not have been recognized earlier. The scandals added another

factor – the fear that failure to adopt investor protection reforms might produce a direct adverse

effect on voting decisions – that outweighed the lobbying efforts of insiders. Finally, it is worth

noting that this prediction is consistent with the findings in Benny 2002) that insider trading

regulation tends to follow period with negative stock market returns.



6.      Conclusion
     This paper has developed a framework for analyzing how lobbying by interest groups affects the

level of investor protection. Our analysis has identified several factors that may lead the equilibrium

level of investor protection to be sub-optimal. These factors include the ability of corporate insiders

to use the corporate assets they control to influence politicians, as well as the inability of institutional

investors to capture the full value of efficient investor protection for outside investors. The interest

that entrepreneurs have in raising equity capital in the future reduces but does not eliminate the

distortions that arise from insiders' interest in extracting rents from the capital that public firms

already have. Our analysis is consistent with existing empirical evidence, and provides testable

predictions for further empirical work regarding the way in which investor protection varies over

time and around the world.




11
   Kane (1996) makes a similar argument with respect to the rules governing banking regulation, arguing that a
main reason that crises lead to reform is not by changing the aggregate effect of interest group lobbying but
rather by serving an important educational role for the public.


                                                     35
                                                                Appendix


Lemma 1: If b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅) is a truthful Nash equilibrium, then both CI bo and CF bo are         ( )            ( )
positive.
Proof: Suppose that b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅) is a truthful Nash equilibrium in which C I b o = C F b o = 0 . ( )          ( )
              (       ( )        ( ))         ( )
Because u P b o , C I b o + C F b o = u P b o ,0 it must be the case that b o ∈ arg max u P (b,0 ) from which
                                                                                                  b≥ 0


it follows that b o = b* .
This cannot be an equilibrium because insiders would rather pay the politician for it to choose the

level of benefits bˆ > b* that maximizes the function


                                                 ⎛ N (b − αc(b )) ⎞
                             w1 (b − c(b )) + w2 ⎜                ⎟                                 (15)
                                                 ⎝      ακ        ⎠
                  [      )
on the interval b* , ∞ (note that the politician receives a payment of zero throughout this range). To

induce the politician to choose the level of benefits b̂ insiders would pay the politician an amount a

little smaller than       (N (bˆ − αc(bˆ)))− (N (b − αc(b ))) ακ ,
                                                      *              *
                                                                                which costs them a little less than

  ( ( )) ( ( ))
N bˆ − αc bˆ − N b* − αc b* . The payoff to the politician would then increase to a little less than

w (bˆ − c (bˆ )) + w (N (bˆ − αc(bˆ )) − N (b − αc(b ))) ακ
  1               2
                                          *               *
                                                                         which, by definition of b̂ , is larger than the

                                                  (           ( ))
politician’s payoff in equilibrium w1 b* − c b* , and the payoff to insiders would increase from

   (
N b* − αc b*( )) to a little more than N (bˆ − αc(bˆ))− (N (bˆ − αc(bˆ))− N (b           *
                                                                                                 ( ))) = N (b
                                                                                             − αc b*             *
                                                                                                                         ( ))
                                                                                                                     − αc b* .

We have thus shown that it must be the case that if b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅)                   is a truthful Nash equilibrium

            ( )                  ( )
where C F b o = 0 , then C I b o > 0 . We now show that it must be the case that C F b o > 0 as well.      ( )
                                                                                                 ( )
Suppose that b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅) is a truthful Nash equilibrium in which C I b o > 0 and C F b o = 0 .               ( )
              (       ( )        ( ))         (
Because u P b o , C I b o + C F b o = u P b o , C I b o   ( )) it must be the case that          b o ∈ arg max u P (b, CI (b ))
                                                                                                               b≥0


from which it follows that b o maximizes the function (15, or b o = bˆ .
This cannot be an equilibrium because institutional investors would rather pay the politician for it to
                              ˆ
choose the level of benefits bˆ > b* that maximizes the function




                                                                 36
                     ⎛ N (b − αc(b )) Nμβ (1 − α )c(b ) N 2 μβ (1 − α )(b − αc(b )) ⎞
w1 (b − c(b )) + w2 ⎜⎜               −                 −                            ⎟⎟ (16)
                     ⎝      ακ              κ                      ακ                ⎠
on the interval [0, ∞ ) . The rest of the proof proceeds as before. To induce the politician to choose the
                   ˆ
level of benefits bˆ institutional investors would pay the politician an amount that is a little smaller
                                           ˆ
than the difference in their payoff under bˆ and bˆ which costs them a little less than that amount
                                     ˆ
multiplied by κ . The definition of bˆ implies that the payoff to the politician would increase if it
                                          ˆ
would set the level of benefits equal to bˆ , and the payoff to institutional investors would increase by
a little.
We have thus shown that if b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅)         is a truthful Nash equilibrium then it must be that both

    ( )               ( )
C F b o > 0 and C I b o > 0 .                                                 ■


Lemma 2: The contribution schedules CI (⋅) and C F (⋅) of the special interests groups are uniquely
determined in a truthful Nash equilibrium.
Proof: Let bF < b* denote the truthful Nash equilibrium level of private benefits of control to

insiders if insiders do not lobby the politician, and let bI > b* denote the truthful Nash equilibrium
level of private benefits of control to insiders if institutional investors do not lobby the politician. We

show that if b o , C I (⋅), C F (⋅) is a truthful Nash equilibrium, then



                     (       ( )         ( ))
                  u P b o , C I b o + C F b o = u P (bI , C I (bI )) = u P (bF , C F (bF ))   (17)


Recall that TI denotes the level of benefits where CI (⋅) starts to increase above zero, and TF

denotes the level of benefits where C F (⋅) becomes equal to zero. The fact that bF ≤ TI and that

TF ≤ bI implies that CI (bF ) = CF (bI ) = 0 . Optimality of the politician's choice implies that

   (        ( )      ( ))
u P b o , C I b o + C F b o ≥ u P (bI , C I (bI )), u P (bF , C F (bF )) . We show that the inequality must be

                               (       ( )         ( ))
binding. Suppose that u P b o , C I b o + C F b o > u P (bI , C I (bI )) . It follows that institutional investors
can reduce their contribution schedule by some small amount ε > 0                             without affecting the




                                                             37
politician's        optimal        choice        bo .       A       contradiction.            Similarly,   it   also   follows   that
      (       ( )       ( ))
u P b o , C I b o + C F b o = u P (bF , C F (bF )) .
Equation (17 allows us to calculate the two interest groups contributions as follows: the differences
               ( )                  ( )
C I (bI ) − C I b o and C F (bF ) − C F b o are determined by the fact that the equilibrium is truthful.

Hence, the equation u (b , C (b ) + C (b )) = u (b , C (b )) uniquely determines the value of
                                   P
                                         o
                                             I
                                                 o
                                                            F
                                                                o
                                                                         P    I   I   I


C (b ) , and the equation u (b , C (b ) + C (b )) = u (b , C (b )) uniquely determines the value of
  F
          o
                                         P
                                             o
                                                  I
                                                        o
                                                                F
                                                                     o
                                                                              P   F       F    F


C (b ) . The fact that the equilibrium is truthful implies that it is sufficient to determine the value of
  I
          o


an interest group's contribution at one point at which it is positive to determine its entire contribution
schedule.                          ■


Lemma 3: If                                                                                                       ( ) ( )
                      b oo , C I (⋅), C F (⋅), C E (⋅) is a truthful Nash equilibrium, then C I bo o , C F b o o , and

      ( )
CE bo o are positive.
Proof: The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma 1.                                                 ■


Lemma 4: The special interest groups’ contribution schedules C I (⋅) , C F (⋅) , and C E (⋅) , are uniquely
determined in a truthful Nash equilibrium.
Proof: The proof is similar to the proof of Lemma 2.                                                 ■


Proof of Proposition 3: The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 2. The only difference is
due to the fact that both the cost term and the contribution itself that is made by the entrepreneurs are
multiplied by α because entrepreneurs who are insiders bear only a fraction α of the cost c. As a
consequence, the contribution of the entrepreneurs is given by M (b − αc(b )) ακ up to a constant

(instead of M (b − c(b )) κ ). The analog to equation (13) is given by the following equation:


                                                      w2 N
                                             w1 +               (N + M )
                       ( )=
                     c' b   o oo

                                           w N⎛
                                                        ακ
                                                                M⎞
                                                                                      ≥1
                                       w1 + 2 ⎜1 + μβ (1 − α ) + ⎟
                                            κ ⎝                 N⎠




                                                                         38
The private benefits in this case are larger than in the case where M new firms are established by
entrepreneurs because the numerator above is larger than the numerator in the right-hand-side of
(13).                                                    ■


Proof of Proposition 4: The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 2. Note that on top of the
losses that are caused to institutional investors as a consequence of an increase in the private benefits
of control b, which are multiplied by α because insiders in these institutional investment firms only
hold a fraction α                 of these firms, insiders in institutional investment firms also enjoy the private
benefits of control b like other insiders while only losing a fraction α of the cost. Therefore, if
insiders in institutional investment firms employ truthful strategies, then their contribution schedule
C F (b ) is equal to
                       N μβ (1 − α )(b − αc(b ) − c(b )) κ                                  (18)
up to a constant if (19) is positive.
     It therefore follows that if b oooo is part of a truthful Nash equilibrium b oooo , C I (⋅), C F (⋅), C E (⋅)

then it has to satisfy the following equation:

          (       ( ))
        w1 1 − c' b   oooo
                                 + w2 ⎜⎜
                                              (      ( ))
                                       ⎛ N 1 − αc' boooo
                                       ⎝       ακ

           +
                                    (
               Nμβ (1 − α ) 1 − (1 + α )c' b oooo    (     )) + M (1 − c' (b )) ⎞⎟ = 0.
                                                                               o oo o


                                          κ                           κ                 ⎟
                                                                                        ⎠
Rearranging the last equation gives
                                                w2 N ⎛                   αM ⎞
                                              w1 +   ⎜1 + μβα (1 − α ) +    ⎟
                                                 ακ ⎝
                             (
                       c ' b o oo o   )   =
                                                                          N ⎠
                                                                              ≥1            (19)
                                            w1 +
                                                 w2 N ⎛
                                                  κ ⎝
                                                                  (
                                                      ⎜1 + μβ 1 − α + ⎟
                                                                    2    M⎞
                                                                           )
                                                                          N⎠
                                                                                            ■


Proof of Proposition 5: The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 2. The difference is due to
the fact that the benefit that the politician derives from social welfare and the payments from insiders
and institutional investors to the politician are multiplied by two while the payment of the
entrepreneurs to the politician are multiplied by 2 + φ .
The analog of equation (13) is therefore given by the following equation:


                                                                      39
                                                  w2 ⎛ N 2 + φ         ⎞
                                             w1 +    ⎜ +           ⋅M ⎟
                                                  κ ⎝α
                   (
                c ' b o ooo o   )   =
                                           w2 N ⎛
                                                              2        ⎠
                                                                   2 +φ M ⎞
                                                                             ≥1
                                      w1 +      ⎜1 + μβ (1 − α ) +       ⋅ ⎟
                                            κ ⎝                      2    N⎠
                                                                                  ■


Proof of Proposition 6: The proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 2. The only difference is
due to the fact that the payoff function of the politician has changed.
The analog to equation (13) is given by the following equation:


                                           w2 ⎛ N   ⎞        ∂v(θ , b, s )
                                      w1 +    ⎜ + M ⎟ − w3 ⋅
                                            κ ⎝α
                   (
                c ' b o oo ooo =)            w N⎛
                                                    ⎠            ∂b
                                                                 M⎞
                                        w1 + 2 ⎜1 + μβ (1 − α ) + ⎟
                                              κ ⎝                 N⎠
                                                          . ■




                                                           40
                                           References
Allen, Franklin (2005), “Corporate Governance in Emerging Economies,” Oxford Review of
    Economic Policy, 21, 164-177.
Allen, Franklin, Juan Qian, and Meijun Qian (2005), “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth in
    China,” Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 57-116
Almeida and Wolfenzon (2006), “A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and Family Business Groups.”
   Journal of Finance.
Baron, David (1994). “Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters,” 88 The
    American Political Science Review, 33-47.
Bebchuk, Lucian (1999). “A rent-Protection Theory of Corporate Ownership and Control,” NBER
    Discussion Paper No. 7203.
Bebchuk, Lucian and Mark Roe (1999). “A Theory of Path Dependence in Corporate Governance
    and Ownership,” Stanford Law Review 52, 775-808.
Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton, and Ailsa Roel (2003), “Corporate Governance and Control,” in
    Handbook of the Economics of Finance (G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, ed.)
Beny, Laura (2002), “The Political Economy of Insider Trading Legislation and Enforcement:
    International Evidence,” Harvard Law and Economics Discussion Paper No. 348.
Bernheim, Doug. and Michael Whinston (1986). “Menu auctions, resource allocation and economic
    influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 1-31.
Bernheim, Doug., Betzalel Peleg, and Michael Whinston (1986). “Coalition proof Nash Equilibria, I:
    Concepts,” Journal of Economic Theory 42, 1-12.
Besley, T., and S. Coate (2001). “Lobbying and Welfare In a Representative Democracy,” Review of
    Economic Studies 68, 67-82.
Bolton, Patrick and Howard Rosenthal, “Political Intervention in Debt Contracts,” Journal of
    Political Economy (2002), 1103-1134.
Bongini, Paola, Stijn Claessens, and Giovanni Ferri (2001), “The Political Economy of Distress in
     East Asian Financial Institutions,” Journal of Financial Services Research.
Castro, Rui, Gian Luca Clement, and Glenn MacDonald (2004), “Investor Protection ,Optimal
     Incentives, and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1131-1175.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Dijankov, and Larry H.P. Lang (2000). “The Separation of Ownership and
     Control in East Asian Corporations.” Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 81-112.
Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven (2003), “Financial Development, Property Rights and Growth,”
     Journal of Finance, LVIII, 2401-2436.
Claessens, Stijn, Erik Feijen, and Luc Laeven (2006), “Does Campaign Finance Imply Political
     Factors?,” Working Paper, forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2005), “The
    Law and Economics of Self-Dealing,” NBER Discussion Paper No. 11883.


                                               41
Dixit, Avinash, Gene Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman (1997) “Common Agency and Coordination:
    General Theory and Application to Government Decision Making, Journal of Political Economy
    105, 752-769.
Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales (2004), “Private Benefits of control: an International
   comparison,” Journal of Finance 59, 537-600.
Dyck, Alexander, Natalya Volchkova, and Luigi Zingales (2006), Corporate Governance Role of the
   Media: Evidence from Russia, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Faccio, Mara (2006), “Politically Connected Firms.” American Economic Review, 96, 369-386.
Faccio, Mara, Ronald Masulis and John J. McConnell (2005), “Political Connections and Corporate
   Bailouts,” Journal of Finance, 61, 2597-2635.
Fogel, Kathy (2006), “Oligarchic Family Control, Social Economic Outcomes, and the Quality of
    Government,” Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 603-622.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi (2006), “Ownership: Evolution and Regulation,”
    Working Paper.
Glaezer, Ed, Simon Johnson, and Andrei Shleifer (2001), "Coase vs. the Coasians." Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 116, 853-899.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1994) “Protection for Sale,” American Economic Review,
    74, 833-850.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1996) “Electoral competition and special interest politics,”
    Review of Economic Studies 63, 265-286.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (2001) Special Interest Politics, MIT University Press,
    Cambridge Mass.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (2002) Interest Groups and Trade Policy, Princeton
    University press.
Helwig, Martin (2000). "On the Economics and Politics of Corporate Finance and Corporate
    Control." In Corporate Governance: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives (Xavier Vives,
    ed.).
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling (1976) “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
    Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-60.
Kane, Edward (1987), “No Room for Weak Links in the Chain of Deposit Insurance Reform,”
   Journal of Financial Services Research.
Khanna, Tarun, and Krishna Palepu (2000), “Is group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging Markets?
   An Analysis of Diversified Indian Business Groups.” Journal of Finance, 55, 867-93.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (1999) “Corporate Governance Around the
    World,” Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998) “Law and Finance,” Journal of
    Political Economy 107, 1113-1155.


                                               42
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2000), “Investor Protection and
    Corporate Governance,” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.
Leuz, Christian, and Luzi Hail (2006), “International Differences in Cost of Capital: Do Legal
    Institutions and Securities Regulation Matter?,” forthcoming in the Journal of Accounting
    Research.
Leuz, Christian, and Felix Oberholzer-Gee (2006), “Political relationships, Global Financing, and
    Corporate Transparency: Evidence from Indonesia, Journal of Financial Economics (2006), 81,
    411-439.
Marceau, N. and M. Smart (2003) “Corporate Lobbying and Commitment Failure in Capital
   Taxation,” American Economic Review 93, 241-251.
Mayer, Collin. (1998) “New Issues in Corporate Finance,” European Economic Review 32, 1167-
   1183.
Morck, Randall, and Bernard Yeung (2004). “Family Control and the Rent-Seeking Society.”
   Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 28, 391-409.
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung (2005), “Corporate Governance, Economic
   Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 657-722.
Olson, Mancur (1965) The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass.
Pagano, Marco and Paul Volpin (2005a) “The Political Economy of Corporate Governance,”
    American Economic Review, 95, 1005-1030.
Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin (2005b), “Workers, Managers, and Corporate Control,” Journal of
    Finance, 60, 841-868.
Perrotti, Enrico, and Paolo Volpin (2007) “Politics, Investor Protection and Competition,” Working
    Paper.
Perotti, Enrico and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden (2006), “The Political Economy of Corporate Control
    and Labor Rents," Journal of Political Economy, 114, 145-174.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (2003) “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
    Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.
Reese, William and Michael Weisbach (2002), “Protection of Minority Shareholder Interests, Cross-
    listings in the United States, and Subsequent Equity Offerings,” Journal of Financial
    Economics, 66, 65-104.
Roe, Mark (2003), Political Determinants of Corporate Governance, Oxford University Press.
Stulz, Rene and Rohan Williamson (2003) “Culture, Openness, and Finance,” Journal of Financial
     Economics 70, 313-349.
Stulz, Rene (2005). "The Limits of Financial Globalization." Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, 1595-
     1638.
Yu, Zhihao (2005) “Environmental Protection: A Theory of Direct and Indirect Competition for
    Political Influence,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 269-286.


                                               43
