NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CEO CENTRALITY
Lucian A. Bebchuk
Martijn Cremers
Urs Peyer
Working Paper 13701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13701

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

For helpful comments, we are grateful to Alma Cohen, Will Goetzmann, Yaniv Grinstein, Steve Kaplan,
Paul Oyer, Charu Raheja, Eric Rasmusen, and seminar and conference participants at Amsterdam,
Columbia, Frankfurt, Harvard, INSEAD, Oslo, the NYU-Penn Law & Finance conference, the annual
Stern Conference of Finance and Accounting, the Conference on Empirical Legal Studies, and the
ALEA annual meeting. We are also grateful to Dirk Jenter for sharing with us his data on CEO turnover
and to Ronald Masulis for sharing with us his data on acquirer returns. For financial support, we would
like to thank the Guggenheim Foundation, the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business,
and the Harvard Law School Program on Corporate Governance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Lucian A. Bebchuk, Martijn Cremers, and Urs Peyer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CEO Centrality
Lucian A. Bebchuk, Martijn Cremers, and Urs Peyer
NBER Working Paper No. 13701
December 2007
JEL No. D23,G32,G38,J33,J44,K22,M14
ABSTRACT
We investigate the relationship between CEO centrality -- the relative importance of the CEO within
the top executive team in terms of ability, contribution, or power -- and the value and behavior of public
firms. Our proxy for CEO centrality is the fraction of the top-five compensation captured by the CEO.
We find that CEO centrality is negatively associated with firm value (as measured by industry-adjusted
Tobin's Q). Greater CEO centrality is also correlated with (i) lower (industry-adjusted) accounting
profitability, (ii) lower stock returns accompanying acquisitions announced by the firm and higher
likelihood of a negative stock return accompanying such announcements, (iii) higher odds of the CEO’s
receiving a “lucky” option grant at the lowest price of the month, (iv) greater tendency to reward the
CEO for luck in the form of positive industry-wide shocks, (v) lower likelihood of CEO turnover controlling
for performance, and (vi) lower firm-specific variability of stock returns over time. Overall, our results
indicate that differences in CEO centrality are an aspect of firm management and governance that
deserves the attention of researchers.

Lucian A. Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
Martijn Cremers
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
martijn.cremers@yale.edu

Urs Peyer
INSEAD - Finance
Boulevard de Constance
F-77305 Fontainebleau Cedex FRANCE
urs.peyer@insead.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Public firms are likely to vary in terms of how central the CEO is within the top
executive team. We use the term ‘CEO centrality’ to refer to relative importance – in terms of
ability, contribution, or power – that the CEO has within the team of top executives. This paper
is an empirical study of CEO centrality and how it relates to firm value and behavior. We find
that the level of CEO centrality has a rich set of relations with firm outcomes, including
correlation with lower firm value as measured by Tobin’s Q, lower accounting profitability,
lower quality of acquisition decisions, lower CEO turnover, more luck-based pay, and lower
firm-specific variability of stock returns.
Our proxy for CEO centrality is the CEO's pay slice (CPS), which we define as the
percentage of aggregate top-five total compensation captured by the CEO. Because higher CPS
will tend to reflect a greater relative importance of the CEO within the executive team, CPS can
serve as a proxy for the CEO’s centrality within the top team. Moreover, as CPS is calculated
using compensation information from executives that are all at the same firm, this controls for
any firm-specific characteristics that affect the average level of compensation in the firm’s top
executive team.
Firms might differ in their CPS levels for two reasons. First, the firms might differ in
their optimal (or “appropriate”) CPS level. This optimal CPS level in a given firm reflects the
extent to which the CEO is a "star CEO" -- a CEO having superior talents or qualifications that
enhance the CEO's relative contribution to the firm as well as the value of outside opportunities.
The optimal CPS level also depends on incentive considerations. The higher the CPS level, the
stronger the "tournament incentives" for the other executives in the top management team who
might be promoted to the CEO post (Lazear and Rosen (1981)). Furthermore, the extent to which
it is optimal for the firm to have a management model based on a “dominant player” might well
depend on the firm’s circumstances.
Second, firms might differ in how their CPS levels depart (if at all) from the optimal level
for the firm. To the extent that the CEO has power and influence over the board and company
decision-making, the CEO might use this power and influence to raise CPS above its optimal
level. In such a case, the “excess CPS” – that is, the excess of the actual CPS over the optimal

1

CPS – will reflect rents captured by the CEO. Excess CPS can be viewed as a product of
agency/governance problems.
This separation of CPS into two components, optimal (or appropriate) CPS and excess
CPS, is relevant for interpreting any identified association of CPS with firm characteristics or
behavior. A correlation of a given variable with firm differences in observed CPS levels may be
due to (i) a correlation of the variable with the optimal level of CPS for a given firm, or (ii) a
correlation of the variable with excess CPS (or, of course, a correlation with both).
Our investigation of the relation between CPS levels and firm outcomes and behavior
has two parts. The first part examines the relationship between CPS and firm value as measured
by Tobin's Q. As will be explained, theory allows for alternative, competing predictions as to
whether CPS and Q will be systematically correlated and, if so, in what direction. We find a
strong empirical relation between CPS and Q. Controlling for the various factors that prior work
has shown to be correlated with Q, there is a significant – and economically meaningful –
negative correlation between CPS and Q.
These findings are inconsistent with the hypothesis that firm value and the selection of
CPS levels are uncorrelated or with the hypothesis that high-value firms find it optimal to choose
high CPS levels. Rather, there are two, not mutually exclusive, explanations. First, an “optimal
selection” explanation: the optimal level of CPS might be higher for low-value firms, and the
identified pattern might be due to the tendency of such firms to choose high CPS levels. Second,
a “governance” explanation: the identified pattern might be due to the correlation between low
value and excess CPS; having a high excess CPS might reflect agency and governance problems
that in turn bring about a reduction in firm value.
Exploring whether the negative correlation between CPS and value is fully driven by
optimal selection, we find that the negative relation is robust to controlling for lagged Q. We also
find that increases in CPS are related to decreases in Q, and lower Tobin’s Q does not lead to
increases in CPS. These results do not enable rejecting the governance/causality explanation in
favor of an optimal selection explanation.
Furthermore, we investigate how Q depends on the interaction between CPS and
measures of shareholder rights (Gompers et al (2003); Bebchuk et al (2004). Consistent with the
governance explanation, we find that the negative association between Q and CPS is
concentrated among firms whose boards are entrenched. Because entrenchment itself is
2

negatively correlated with Q, Q is especially low for firms that have a high entrenchment level
and a high CPS.
In the second part of our analysis, we examine how CEO centrality is associated with
several types of corporate outcomes and decisions, including ones that might reflect governance
problems. First, CPS is negatively correlated with accounting profitability. Firms with high CPS
tend to have low industry-adjusted return on assets.
Second, high-CPS firms tend to make worse acquisition decisions as judged by the
market’s reaction to acquisition announcements. If the acquiring firm has a high CPS level, the
stock return accompanying the acquisition announcement is lower and more likely to be
negative.
Third, firms with higher CPS are more likely to provide their CEO with opportunistically
timed option grant. High CPS is associated with increased likelihood of the CEO’s receiving a
“lucky” option grant with an exercise price equal to the lowest price of the grant month.
among others, find a significant correlation between governance weaknesses and the
occurrence of opportunistically timed option grants to CEOs. Consistent with their findings, we
find that a higher CPS is positively associated with the likelihood of opportunistically timed
grants.
Fourth, high-CPS firms are more likely to reward their CEOs for luck in the sense of
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) – that is, to increase CEO compensation following positive
“industry shocks” that are not attributable to the CEO’s own performance. Such luck-based
performance is viewed in the literature as a possible sign of governance problems.
Fifth, CPS is associated with CEO turnover. The probability of CEO turnover is lower if
CEO centrality is higher controlling for the CEO’s length of service and performance.
Sixth, CPS is negatively correlated with the firm-specific variability of stock returns over
time, a result that might be due to the tendency and power of dominant CEOs to play it safe and
avoid firm-specific volatility (which would impose risk-bearing costs on them but could be less
costly to diversified investors).
We should stress that an association between actual CPS levels and excess CPS does not
imply that all high-CPS firms have excessive CPS. In some high-CPS firms, the observed high
level of CPS might be optimal given the firm’s circumstances. Thus, even if the negative
correlation between value and CPS is due to the association between high CPS levels and excess
3

CPS, this does not imply that the value of any given high-CPS firm would be increased by
reducing its CPS level. 1 Overall, our analysis unearths a rich set of systematic relations between
CPS levels and firm value and outcomes. The body of evidence we put forward is consistent with
the possibility that these associations are at least partly driven by the correlation between the
“excessive CPS” component of CPS, which in turn reflects governance problems. At minimum,
our results indicate that CPS, and the relationship between it and the value and behavior of firms,
are an important issue for study by financial economists. Our analysis calls for further study of
the identified associations, including the development of a formal theoretical framework for
studying CEO centrality.
Our work is related to several bodies of literature. To begin, our work relates to the
literature examining how firm value as measured by Tobin's Q is associated with governance
arrangements. For example, studies show that Tobin's Q is negatively correlated with the
presence of staggered boards (Bebchuk and Cohen (2005)), the strength of shareholder rights
more generally (Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2004), and
Cremers and Nair (2005)), and the presence of a large board (Yermack (1996)). We contribute to
this literature by identifying yet another aspect of the firm's governance arrangements – the CPS
level – that is associated with Tobin's Q.
In addition, this paper relates to the work on stock market reaction to acquisition
announcements. Financial economists have paid close attention to buyers’ willingness to make
acquisitions which, as measured by the stock market returns accompanying the acquisition
announcement, the market views as value-decreasing (see, e.g., Lang, Stulz, and Walkling
(1991); Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990); Qui (2004); and Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz
(2005)). Masulis, Wang, and Xie (2007) show that these returns are related to governance
characteristics and, in particular, entrenchment provisions. We extend their work by showing that

1

Also, because our analysis is cross-sectional, it does not imply that increases in average CPS levels over
time are necessarily negative. Some recent work argues that general management skills possessed by
CEOs has become more important over time relative to the skills possessed by other top executives
(Frydman (2005), Murphy and Zabojnik (2004)). This view suggests that the average optimal CPS level
has increased over time. However, even if optimal CPS levels have been trending upwards, our crosssectional results suggest that there is a correlation at each point in time between (excess) CPS and the
governance problems.

4

these returns are also negatively correlated with CPS even after controlling for entrenching
provisions.
Similarly, our work is related to the literature on opportunistic timing of option grants
and its relation to firm governance and structure (see, e.g., Yermack (1997), Lie (2005), Bebchuk
et al (2006)). We extend this work by showing that, controlling for other governance provisions,
opportunistic timing of option grants is associated with high CPS.
Our work is also related to the work on rewarding CEOs for luck by Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2000, 2001). These authors focus on increases in CEO compensation following
positive industry-wide shocks that cannot be attributable to the CEO’s performance and thus
constitute “luck,” and they showed that such rewards for luck are more likely to occur in the
absence of a large outside blockholder. We complement this work by identifying CPS as another
factor that is associated with such rewards for industry-wide positive shocks.
Similarly, our work is further related to the substantial literature on CEO turnover (see,
e.g., Jenter and Kanaan (2006), Kaplan and Minton (2006)). We extend this literature by
showing that high CPS is associated with a lower CEO turnover controlling for performance.
Two earlier studies have used different measures of CEO dominance within the top
executive team. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989), in a study of alternative mechanisms for
transfer of corporate control, define CEOs as powerful when no other person holds the title of
President or Chairman and no other person co-signs the letter to shareholders in the annual
report. More recently, in investigating how the presence of a powerful CEO is correlated with the
variability of stock returns, Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira (2005) assume CEOs to be more
powerful when they serve as chair of the board, when they are the only insider on the board, and
when they have the status of a founder. We put forward in this paper CPS as a measure of CEO
dominance that might capture differences not captured by formal status variables. As we shall
see, CPS is positively correlated with such variables, but they explain only a small part of the
variability in CPS.
Finally, we should note the growing literature on the type and style of CEOs for firm
outcomes (see e.g. Malmendier and Tate (2005) and Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). Our work
seeks to highlight the importance of the relative importance of the CEO vis-à-vis other members
of the top team for firm outcomes.

5

Our analysis is organized as follows. Section II describes our data and presents summary
statistics. Section III analyzes the relationship between CEO centrality and Tobin's Q as well as
accounting profitability. Section IV examines the relation between centrality and abnormal
acquirer returns, firm-specific variability of returns, CEO turnover, CEO pay for luck, and
abnormal returns around announcements of CPS changes. Finally, Section VI concludes.

II. DATA AND SUMMARY STATISTICS

A. The CEO Centrality Index

Because CEO centrality is not directly observable to researchers, the proxy for CEO
centrality used in this paper is the CEO’s pay slice (CPS). CPS is defined as the percentage of
the total compensation to the top five executives that goes to the CEO. The importance of the
CEO relative to the other members of the top executive team -- in terms of contribution, ability,
or power – is expected to be reflected in CPS.
Because CPS is likely the product of many observable and non-observable dimensions of
the firm’s top executives and management model, CPS may enable us to capture dimensions of
the CEO’s role in the top team beyond the ones captured by formal and easily observed variables
such as whether the CEO also chairs the board. CPS is positively correlated with (i) a dummy
equal to one if the CEO also chairs the board, and (ii) a dummy equal to one if the CEO is the
only executive of the firm who is a member of the board. 2 However, a regression of CPS on
these two variables results in an adjusted r-squared of only 0.009, indicating that CPS is likely to
capture other information not contained in those two variables. In addition, because CPS is
calculated using the compensation figures for the top executives at the same firm, it directly
controls for any firm-specific characteristics that affect the average level of executive
compensation at the firm level.

2

The correlation of CPS with the first variable is 0.055 (significant at the 1% level) and the correlation
of CPS with the second variable is 0.073 (significant at the 1% level). The second variable is related not
only to the relative importance of the CEO within the top executive team but also to the relative
importance of the executive team on the board (Raheja (2005)).

6

We compute the CEO's pay slice (CPS) using data from Compustat’s ExecuComp
database from 1993 – 2004. 3 Our main measure is based on the total compensation to each
executive, including salary, bonus, other annual pay, the total value of restricted stock granted
that year, the Black-Scholes value of stock options granted that year, long-term incentive
payouts, and all other total compensation (as reported in ExecuComp item # TDC1).

B. Summary Statistics

Univariate statistics for the average CPS and its dispersion across the 12 Fama-French
industries are shown in Table 1, where averages are computed using a panel dataset of 12,011
observations. Using the universe of firms in the ExecuComp database, we find that CPS is, on
average, 34.4% in our time period of 1993 – 2004.
For each of the 12 industries, we compute the industry mean and median CPS. We find
that there is some variation across industries in average CPS. The lowest CPS industry is
Telecom with 31.1%, and the highest CPS industry is Chemical with 37.4%.
To assess the significance of the differences in industry average CPS, we run Tobit
regressions with CPS as the dependent variable and industry dummies as the independent
variables. The results are reported in the last two columns of Table 1. Using the Energy industry
as the holdout industry, we find that five of the twelve industries display significantly different
levels of CPS. In addition to the observed variation in industry average CPS, within-industry
variations in CPS are even more substantial. For example, the Energy industry has a withinindustry standard deviation of CPS of 10.4% on an average of 35.1%. This suggests that CPS is
in part determined by industry characteristics, but to a large extent, CPS is CEO- and firmspecific.
Table 2 provides descriptive statistics of several pertinent firm characteristics that will be
used in our analysis. We use various Compustat, CRSP, IRRC, and ExecuComp variables:
Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of equity plus the book value of assets minus the book
value of equity, all divided by the book value of assets. The industry adjustment is made at the
four-digit SIC level. Industry-adjusted ROA is the return on assets computed as net income
3

Whenever ExecuComp reports more than five executives in a given year, we select the top five
executives (in terms of total compensation) only to compute CPS for that year.

7

divided by book value of assets adjusted by the median ROA of the firms in Compustat in a
given four-digit SIC industry and year. It is expressed in percentage terms. The entrenchment
index (Eindex) consists (following Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2004)) of 6 shareholder rights
provisions in a firm’s charter. Eindex ranges between 0 and 6, where higher values indicate
weaker shareholder rights or more entrenched management. 4 Book value (in logs) is the book
value of assets. Insider ownership is the fraction of shares held by insiders as reported by
ExecuComp. Capex/Assets is the ratio of capital expenditures to assets. Leverage is the ratio of
long-term debt to assets. R&D is the ratio of research and development to sales. If R&D is
missing, it is set to zero and the dummy variable R&D missing is set to one. Company age is
computed as the current year minus the year in which the company was first listed on CRSP.
Table 2 reports averages and standard deviations for all these variables. In addition, we
show the average separately for firms with high versus low CPS, proxying for high CPS by
industry-adjusting CPS. Firms with a positive industry-adjusted CPS display a lower industryadjusted Tobin’s Q and lower industry-adjusted ROA. These firms also have lower insider
ownership, a higher Eindex, a larger book value, higher leverage, and higher age.
By themselves, these univariate results are inconclusive. High entrenchment and high age
are both correlated with low industry-adjusted Q. Thus, it is possible that the negative correlation
between CPS and Tobin’s Q is due to the tendency of high-CPS firms to have high Eindex and
high age. Therefore, it is necessary to examine whether the negative correlation between CPS
and firm value holds in a multivariate regression, which we shall do in the next section.

III. CEO CENTRALITY AND FIRM VALUE

A. How Should CPS and Firm Value Be Expected to Correlate?

Before proceeding, we first discuss whether and how CPS should be expected to correlate
with firm value on theoretical grounds. In thinking about this question, it is useful to distinguish
4

The Eindex is based on data from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), which are
updated in the years 1990, 1993, 1995, 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004. For the years where IRRC data is not
updated, we use the last value available. For further details, see Bebchuk et al. (2004). As a robustness
test, we have also used the Gompers et al. (2003) governance index (Gindex), consisting of 24 charter
provisions, and the results are qualitatively similar. The results using Gindex are available upon request.

8

between two possible components of a firm’s CPS level. One component is the “optimal” level
of CPS in this firm given the pool of executives available to the team and the business
environment the firm is facing. The other component is the “excess CPS,” which is the amount
(if any) by which actual CPS exceeds the optimal CPS.
(i) Optimal CPS Levels: The optimal CPS level might vary across firms. Among other
things, this optimal level depends on (i) the extent to which it is desirable for the firm to have a
dominant player model based on one especially important player rather than a management
model based on a team of top executives, (ii) the extent to which it is desirable to provide
“tournament incentives” to top executives other than the CEO, (iii) the extent to which it is
desirable to concentrate dollars spent on incentive generation on the CEO, and (iv) the pool of
candidates available to the firm from which the members of the top executive team were hired.
Each of these considerations clearly depends on factors that might vary from firm to firm (or
even from time to time for the same firm).
For example, compared with a team player model, a dominant player management model
could have both advantages and disadvantages, the magnitude of which could well vary from
case to case. On the one hand, a dominant player model could provide clarity, steadiness, and
reduction in the cost of decision-making. On the other hand, there is a large body of literature,
starting with Shaw (1932), 5 extolling the benefits of group rather than individual decisionmaking, and there is some experimental data showing that groups often outperform individuals in
decision-making (see Bainbridge (2002) for a survey). Furthermore, a dominant player model
and the high CPS coming with it can lead to resentment on the part of the other members of the
top team (Brill (1993) and Cook (1990)).
Similarly, a tournament environment can provide both positive and negative incentives to
top executives other than the CEO (Milgrom and Roberts (1992)). On one hand, a tournament
may provide executives other than the CEO with incentives to excel to increase their chances of
succeeding the CEO. On the other hand, a tournament may also produce deadweight costs by, for
example, causing executives vying for the CEO position to cooperate less with, or even seek to
undermine, their rivals.
(ii) Selection of Optimal CPS Levels: Consider the case in which there are no agency
problems that might lead firms to set CEO centrality at any level other than the optimal one. In
5

See also Miner (1984), Blinder and Morgan (2000), and Hill (1982).

9

this case, by definition, no firm would be able to increase its value by changing its CPS level;
any increase or decrease of CPS from the optimal level could only hurt value.
In the considered case, however, CPS levels could well differ among firms, as they all
make the selection optimal for their circumstances, and accordingly an association between CPS
levels and firm values could arise. To the extent that such an association would arise, it would
reflect a selection mechanism.
As to the direction of this selection effect, theory does not provide us with an
unambiguous prediction. First, it could be argued that low-value firms in need of a turnaround
might have a greater need for a dominant player and powerful tournament incentives for their
other top players. Following this hypothesis, optimal CPS and value are expected to be
negatively correlated. Secondly, the need for a dominant player and powerful tournament
incentives may in fact be greater with high-value firms that have high growth opportunities that
need to be decisively and vigorously pursued. Following this hypothesis, optimal CPS and firm
value would be positively correlated. Third, the factors calling for more or less CEO centrality
are ones that could be distributed independently of firm value. According to this hypothesis
optimal CPS would be uncorrelated with firm value. Thus, to the extent that selection effects
play a significant role, an empirical investigation would be necessary to choose among these
competing hypotheses.
(iii) Deviations from Optimal CPS Levels: Thus far the discussion has assumed that all
CPS levels are optimally set. However, because choices are partly made by agents whose
behavior is influenced by their private interests and thus involves agency costs, choices might
not be made in an optimal fashion. For example, a CEO might use her power and influence to
push for a greater use of a dominant player model and higher CPS than optimal for the firm. In
such a case, CPS might be higher than optimal, with the excess reflecting rents captured by the
CEO.
Let “excess CPS” denote the excess of the actual CPS level over the optimal level. As
long as the excess level does not have a perfectly negative correlation with the optimal level,
actual CPS level can be expected to be positively correlated with excess CPS. In this case,
correlation between excess CPS levels and a given variable can translate into a correlation
between this variable and observed CPS levels.

10

A high level of excess CPS – that is, a substantial departure from the optimal CPS level –
can be viewed as a manifestation of significant governance problems. It might reflect a state of
affairs in which the CEO is making a considerable use of the CEO’s power, and plays an
excessively central role in the top executive team, in pursuit of private rents. Accordingly, high
levels of excess pay, and the governance problems they reflect, would be correlated with low
firm value. Thus, to the extent that observed CPS levels do indeed contain a potentially
significant component of excess CPS, such presence can be expected to produce a negative
correlation between CPS and firm value.

B. The Association between CPS and Tobin's Q

In this section, we turn to studying empirically the association between CPS and firm
value. Our principal measure of firm value is Tobin’s Q. This follows a substantial literature on
the association between firm value and various corporate arrangements, which extensively used
Tobin's Q as a measure of firm value (e.g., Demsetz and Lehn (1985); Morck, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1988); Lang and Stulz (1994); Yermack (1996); and Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick
(2003)). Our definition of Tobin’s Q is that used by Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and
subsequently also by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003). 6 Our dependent variable is the
industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q, using industry-adjustments at the four-digit SIC code level. 7
Our regressions include the standard controls used in the above literature. In particular,
we control for firm size (in logs of the book value of assets), insider ownership and insider
ownership squared (see McConnell and Servaes (1990)), profitability (ROA), the ratio of capital
expenditures to assets (Capex/Assets), leverage, the ratio of R&D expenditures to sales (R&D), a
dummy for missing R&D data, the age of the firm (in logs) (see Shin and Stulz (2000)), and year
fixed effects. We also include the entrenchment index, Eindex, which has been shown to be

6

According to this specification, Q is equal to the market value of assets divided by the book value of
assets (Compustat item 6), where the market value of assets is computed as the book value of assets (item
6) plus the market value of common stock (item 24 * item 25) less the sum of book value of common
stock (item 60) and balance sheet deferred taxes (item 74).
7
An alternative specification of our regressions, with log Q as the dependent variable and SIC codes as
industry fixed effects, yields similar results throughout. Also, using the Fama-French classification of 48
industry groups, rather than four-digit SIC codes, yields similar results throughout.

11

negatively correlated with firm value controlling for standard controls (Eindex) (Bebchuk,
Cohen, and Ferrell (2004)).
The results, which are displayed in Table 3, indicate that higher CPS has a strong
association with lower firm value. The first four regressions employ pooled panel regressions
with year fixed effects. Column 1 uses a contemporaneous association between industry-adjusted
Q and CPS, and column 2 uses lagged CPS and lagged ownership variables. 8 The economic
significance is strongest in column 2: a one standard deviation shock in the value of CPS (equal
to 11.73%) is associated with a reduction in next year’s Tobin’s Q of 5.5% (= 11.73% x -0.475).
Column 3 and 4 indicate that these results continue to hold using industry-adjusted CPS.
As another robustness check, columns 5 and 6 present the Fama-MacBeth type (average)
coefficients of 12 annual cross-sectional regressions. The average coefficients of CPS and lagged
CPS are negative and significant, and their average levels are quite similar to those of the
corresponding coefficients in regressions 1 and 2, respectively.
In column 7 of Table 3, we test whether the documented relation in regression 1 between
CPS and Tobin’s Q is due to the fact that CPS contains information that is already available in
the form of proxies such as whether the CEO is also the Chair and whether the CEO is the only
member of the board of directors among the top five executives. Such variables have been used
by Adams et al. (2006) as proxies for CEO-versus-group decision making and are expected to be
related to the concept of CEO centrality. We find that CPS remains strongly negatively
associated with Tobin’s Q even after controlling for these two additional variables, and that none
of these two additional variables is significantly related to Tobin’s Q. This result indicates that
CPS is capturing more than these two already-available proxies for the relative importance of the
CEO in the top executive team.

C. Optimal Selection and Agency Explanations

The above results concerning the negative correlation between CPS and Tobin’s Q are
inconsistent with some of the hypotheses discussed in section III.A. In particular, the results rule
out the hypothesis that firms set their CPS levels optimally and these levels are uncorrelated with
8

When using lagged CPS (t-1), we require that the CEO remains in place the following year (t). The
results are qualitatively similar without this constraint (not shown separately).

12

firm value. The results similarly rule out the hypothesis that firms set CPS levels optimally and
these levels are positively correlated with firm value.
The identified pattern is consistent with and can be explained by the following two (not
mutually exclusive) hypotheses:
• Optimal Selection: firms’ optimal CPS levels are negatively correlated with firm value.
• Governance/agency: some firms do not set CPS optimally, and excess CPS levels are
negatively correlated with firm value.
In the subsequent three tables, we conduct several tests as to whether it is possible to
establish that the identified negative correlation between CPS and industry-adjusted Q is all due
to a tendency of low-Q firms to choose high CPS. Table 4 displays the results of regressions
similar to those shown in Table 3 with the addition of one- and two-year lagged industryadjusted Tobin’s Q. This controls for the level of industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q that the firm had
prior to the setting of the CPS level serving as a dependent variable. The results indicate that
CPS or lagged CPS (industry-adjusted or not) remains negatively associated with industryadjusted Q (though with weakened statistical significance) even when controlling for lagged Q.
This finding does not support the hypothesis that the association between CPS and low Q is fully
driven by a tendency of low-Q firms to adopt high CPS levels.
Next, Table 5 shows regressions of percentage changes in Tobin’s Q on changes in CPS.
We find that changes in firm value are negatively correlated with changes in CPS. This result is
robust to including control variables or changes in control variables. (In the latter case, the
statistical significance of the CPS coefficient is weaker, with a p-value of 0.055, but the size of
the coefficient is almost identical to the other two specifications.)
Finally, in Table 6, we investigate all 1,326 CEO changes in the universe of firms in our
sample, and compare CPS between the new and the old CEO depending on the Tobin’s Q of the
firms. If low value firms are more optimally run with a high CPS, then we would expect to find
that the new CEO has a significantly higher CPS than new CEOs of high value firms. We find no
significant differences in CPS, nor industry-adjusted CPS between newly hired CEOs in lowervalued (with an industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q that is negative or with a Tobin’s Q below 1) versus
higher valued firms. Furthermore, there is no significant difference between low and high value
firms in terms of the increase in CPS that the new CEO receives relative to the predecessor. The
p-value of the difference in the change of CPS from the old CEO to the new CEO across firms
13

with Tobin’s Q above versus below 1 has a p-value of 11%, and using negative versus positive
industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q the p-value is 82%. Thus, this analysis does not provide significant
evidence that the identified negative correlation between CPS and Q can be fully explained by a
tendency of low-value firms to set high levels of CPS.

D. Interaction with Shareholder Rights

To further explore the possibility that the negative correlation between CPS and firm
value is amenable to a governance/agency explanation, we examine whether the association is
more or less pronounced in firms with high entrenchment levels. In such firms, the CEO and the
board are relatively insulated from market discipline and the threat of removal, and the potential
for agency problems in general, and departures from optimal levels of CEO centrality in
particular, is higher.
Table 7 displays the results of adding the interaction of CPS with the Eindex as an
additional independent variable to the specifications of Table 3. Columns 1 (using
contemporaneous CPS) and 2 (using lagged CPS) show that the lower value for firms with
higher CPS is driven by firms with high entrenchment as measured by the Eindex. We include
both CPS and CPS interacted with the Eindex, and only the interaction has a significant (and
negative) coefficient. This suggests a complementary relationship, as it is only firms with both
entrenchment and high CPS that have lower firm values.
The results using lagged CPS are especially strong, indicating that there is a strong
relation between today’s CPS and future firm value. For firms with maximum entrenchment
(Eindex value of 6), a one standard deviation positive shock to CPS is associated with a
reduction in next year’s industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q of 22% (= 11.73% x 6 x -0.311, see column
2). Interestingly, using lagged CPS and the interaction of lagged CPS with the Eindex drives out
the importance of the Eindex in isolation.
Column 3-6 use alternative specifications along the lines developed earlier in Table 3.
Column 3 and 4 use industry-adjusted CPS rather than CPS. Columns 5 and 6 use FamaMacBeth type regressions with industry-adjusted CPS. Throughout, the interaction term of CPS
and Eindex is negative and significant.

14

Thus, the data suggest that the negative correlation between CPS and firm value is more
pronounced in firms with high entrenchment levels. In such firms, the potential for departures
from optimal CPS levels might be more significant, and as a result the distribution of actual CPS
levels could be more influenced by the distribution of excess CPS levels. As a result, in such
firms, CPS levels might be more correlated with excess CPS and the governance problems it
reflects.

E. An Event Study

The preceding subsections document that firms with higher CPS are associated with
lower firm value as measured by Tobin’s Q. In this subsection, we explore whether the release of
information about changes in CPS is associated with abnormal stock returns. New information
about the elements necessary for calculating CPS is provided in firms’ proxy statements, which
are the source of public information about executive compensation.
Our event study uses the data on proxy filing dates collected by Dlugosz, Fahlenbrach,
Gompers, and Metrick (2006). They collect those dates for 1,916 companies for the years 1996 –
2001. Using the date of the proxy filing as the event date, we calculate the cumulative abnormal
return (CAR) around each event date using the market model. The event window is -10 to +10
days around the event. We use a 21-day window since the proxy date and the filing date are not
always the same. We assign events to groups according to the change in CPS in the event year
relative to the previous year. 9
Table 8 Panel A presents the comparison of the average CAR for firms with decreasing
versus increasing CPS, as well as the average CAR for the 25% of firms with the most negative
changes to CPS versus the 25% of firms with the most positive changes to CPS. Comparing
across groups, the 25% of firms with the highest decreases in CPS had a significantly higher
CAR than the 25% of firms with the highest increases in CPS. The difference in the 21-day event
window of 1.2% is statistically and economically significant. Comparing firms with decreasing
versus increasing CPS, we again find a positive difference in CAR equal to 0.3%, but it is not
statistically significant.
9

We also weigh the observations by the inverse of the variance of the estimate of the cumulative
abnormal return to incorporate estimation risk.

15

We also find a small but strongly statistically significant correlation of -3.5% between the
change in CPS and the CAR (see panel B). As reported in panel C of Table 8, this correlation
survives after controlling for differences in firm size and book-to-market characteristics. In
particular, the second regression of CAR also includes the interaction of the change in CPS with
a dummy indicating whether or not the firm has an Eindex above the sample median. The
negative relationship between news about increases in CPS and abnormal returns is driven by
firms with high entrenchment. This is consistent with the previous result that the negative
correlation of CPS with Q is driven by firms with high entrenchment.
One interpretation of our results is that the market reacts negatively to news about
increases in CPS. An alternative interpretation, consistent with the view that CPS levels are
correlated with worse governance, is that increases in CPS are also correlated with other
information released in firms’ proxy statements that investors view unfavorably.

IV. CEO CENTRALITY AND COMPANY DECISIONS AND OUTCOMES

Thus far we have focused on the relation between CPS and one measure of firm
outcomes and performance – Tobin’s Q. We now turn to examine whether CPS is associated
with several other significant aspects of firm behavior and outcomes. This investigation provides
a robustness check on the conclusion reached in the preceding section regarding the negative
association between CPS and firm value.
Furthermore, this inquiry can also help in assessing whether cross-sectional differences
should be viewed as related to governance/agency problems. While a low Tobin’s Q might be
due to governance problems, an optimally governed firm might also have low Q due to its
circumstances. In contrast, some of the aspects to be considered in this section – such as the
quality of acquisition decisions – are ones that are closely connected to suboptimal decisions.
We consider in turn five aspects of firm decisions and outcomes: accounting profitability
(subsection A); quality of acquisition decisions as judged by the market’s reaction to their
announcement (subsection B); rewards to the CEO for luck in the form of industry-wide positive
shocks (subsection C); CEO turnover (subsection D); and variability of firm-specific stock
returns (subsection E).

16

A. Accounting Profitability and CPS

The first dimension of firm outcomes and performance we consider is that of accounting
profitability. Table 9 reports regressions similar to those in Table 3 with industry-adjusted ROA
as the dependent variable instead of industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q.
Panel A reports results of pooled-panel regressions with year fixed effects, and panel B
reports results of Fama-MacBeth type regressions where we only display the coefficients of
interest (for brevity). Both panels display six columns with different specifications. In the first
column, the only independent variable is contemporaneous CPS. In the second column, we add
to contemporaneous CPS the various standard controls we used in the Q regressions (see Table
3). The third column differs from the second column in that lagged CPS replaces
contemporaneous CPS as the independent variable. In the fourth and fifth columns, the
coefficient of interest is industry-adjusted CPS, with its contemporaneous level used in the
regression of column 4 and its lagged level in the regression of column 5. Finally, the sixth
column adds as additional controls the two formal variables that capture some dimensions of
CEO centrality: a dummy for the CEO being a chair, and a dummy for the CEO being the only
top executive who is also member of the board.
In both panels, in each of the six specifications, the coefficient on CPS – whether CPS is
contemporaneous or lagged, whether it is industry-adjusted or not – is negative and significant
throughout. The effect of CPS is also economically sizable. For example, using the estimate in
column 6, a one standard deviation increase in CPS (0.1172) decreases industry-adjusted ROA
by 1.317% (=0.1172 * -11.239), which is close to the mean value of the sample. The conclusion
that we draw from this analysis is that CPS is negatively associated with (industry-adjusted)
accounting profitability, which reinforces our earlier finding that high CPS is associated with
lower firm value as measured by Tobin’s Q.

B. CEO Centrality and Acquirer Returns

In order to gain insight into our finding that high-CPS firms display a lower firm value,
we follow the study of Masulis et al. (2007). This study investigates the negative correlation
between firm value and shareholder rights, measured by the governance index or the
17

entrenchment index, by asking whether shareholder rights are associated with the stock returns
accompanying bidders’ announcements. The main result is that announcement returns for
acquirers with high entrenchment level are significantly lower. Using the same data, we add CPS
in the year prior to the acquisition announcement as an additional explanatory variable. Our test
asks whether, controlling for the level of entrenchment, high CPS is associated with lower stock
returns upon the announcement of an acquisition.
We start with the 3,333 events from Masulis et al. (2007). 10 The sample is based on
acquisitions recorded by the Securities Data Corporation (SDC) between January 1, 1990 and
December 31, 2003. Since we require that CPS is available at the fiscal year-end prior to the
takeover bid our sample is reduced to 1,241 events. 11 For this subsample, we find an average
(standard deviation) abnormal announcement return in the eleven days around the announcement
date of 0.26% (6.60). These are very similar to the values of 0.22% (6.59) reported by Masulis et
al. (2007) for the full sample, and it is thus unlikely that the restrictions imposed by the
availability of CPS introduce any particular bias.
Table 10 shows the results for two sets of regressions. Regressions 1, 2 and 5 are OLS
regressions with the abnormal announcement return of the bidder in the eleven days around the
initial announcement as the dependent variable (cumulative abnormal return, CAR[-5,+5]).
Regressions 3 and 4 are logit regressions where the dependent variable is equal to one if the
CAR was negative and zero otherwise. Both types of regressions use robust standard errors that
are clustered at the firm level to account for correlations if firms make multiple acquisitions. The
main variable of interest is the CPS of the bidder, computed at the fiscal year end prior to the
takeover bid.
In regressions 1, 2, and 5, we find that the coefficient is negative and significant at the 10%
level even after controlling for other determinants found to be significant in Masulis et al.
(2007). In particular, CPS has additional explanatory power over and above the entrenchment
Eindex (regression 1) or the governance Gindex (regression 2) and over and above additional
proxies for power such as the CEO also being the Chair and the CEO being the only director
among the top five executives.
10

For a detailed description of the sample and the selection process, see Masulis et al. (2007), pages 5-6.
We thank Ronald Masulis for sharing this data.
11
We have CPS date from 1993 onwards and only use CPS when the CEO is not changing during the
year.

18

Economically, the coefficient on the CPS variable of -0.024 indicates that a one standard
deviation increase in CPS—in this sample that is 12—is associated with a reduction of the
announcement return of 0.288% (12 x -0.024). Given the average market value of the bidder in
our sample of $6,358 million, a one standard deviation increase in CPS results in a loss of about
$18 million per acquisition announcement. This is in the same order of magnitude as the effect
from adding one more provision in the Eindex (the coefficient on the Eindex in regression 1 is 0.497).
The coefficients on CPS in regressions 3 and 4 are positive and significant at the 5% level,
indicating that high-CPS firms are more likely to make acquisitions judged by the market to be
value-destroying, i.e., acquisitions where the bidder announcement return is negative.
Economically, the coefficient of 0.012 implies that a one standard deviation increase in CPS
increases the chances of an acquisition being judged to be value-destroying by the market by
15% (exp(12*0.012)=1.15). This is again of similar importance to increasing the Eindex by one.
From this analysis, we conclude that one potential reason for the lower valuation of firms
with high CPS is that high-CPS firms make acquisitions viewed less favorably by the market
and, in particular, are more likely to make acquisitions viewed as value-destroying by the
market.

C. CPS and Opportunistic Option Grant Timing

This section considers the relation between CPS and the occurrence of opportunistically
timed option grants to the CEO. Yermack (1997) showed that option grants are opportunistically
timed, being systematically followed by abnormal positive stock returns, and Lie (2005) showed
that the abnormal stock returns around CEO option grants are at least partly due to backdating.
We examine in this section whether opportunistic timing is related in any systematic fashion to
CPS.
We use, as is standard in current work on opportunistic timing, data from Thomson
Financial’s insider trading database, which is available from 1996 onwards. Bebchuk et al (2006)
show that lucky grants – grants with an exercise price equal to the lowest price of the month –
provide a useful proxy for opportunistically timed grants, and we focus below on such lucky
grants.
19

We create an independent variable called “luckydum”, a dummy equal to one if the firm
has granted an option to the CEO on a day where the stock price was the lowest price in the
calendar month. While such grants might be due to pure luck, Bebchuk et al (2006) shows that
the incidence of lucky grants is much higher than could be explained by pure luck. Our
dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the firm granted its CEO a lucky grant during the
year.
We run three logit regressions. The first is a pooled regression with the standard errors
clustered at the firm level. The second (third) regression is a firm (CEO) fixed effects regression.
We include standard controls: a dummy that is equal to one for the years are SOX (after 2002) to
take into account that backdating became more difficult following the passage of SOX; insider
ownership; size; industry (neweconomy dummy); and a proxy for stock return volatility
(computed as the standard deviation of daily stock returns over a year) to account for the fact that
opportunistic timing is more profitable when stock volatility is high.
The results are displayed in Table 11. In all three specifications, the coefficient of the
CPS variable is positive and significant (at 95% confidence). there is a significant positive
coefficient on the CPS variable indicating that a higher CPS is positively associated with the
occurrence of opportunistic option grant timing. In untabulated regressions, we replace CPS with
industry-adjusted CPS and we find that the coefficient of the latter is also positive and
significant. Overall, our findings indicate that high CPS is correlated with opportunistic timing of
option grants.

D. Pay for Industry-Wide Shocks

This section considers the relation between CPS and changes in CEO compensation
accompanying industry-wide value and profitability shocks. Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001)
argue that CEO compensation increases following such industry-wide shocks can be viewed as
rewards for luck. They further argue and show that the existence and magnitude of such rewards
is likely to correlate with agency problems and the lack of effective outside checks. 12 Given this
view, we explore in this section whether CPS is related to such rewards for luck.
12

Of course, there may be exceptions to viewing industry-wide performance shocks as exogenous to the
firm, especially in cases where the firm is large and has significant market power. In that case, as

20

Table 12 presents the results for industry-fixed effects pooled panel regressions with the
log of the CEO’s total compensation as the dependent variable. We introduce a dummy variable
indicating whether there was a positive industry-wide shock in performance, using either Tobin’s
Q (regressions 1-4) or ROA (regressions 5-8) as measures for performance. As results are robust
to the choice of which performance metric is used, we discuss the results for industry shocks of
Tobin’s Q. We control for the level of (or change in) CPS and firm-level Tobin’s Q in all
specifications in Table 12.
Column 1 confirms the main result in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) that exogenous,
positive performance shocks produce, on average, an increase in CEO compensation. Column 2
and 3 show that this is only the case for firms where CPS is relatively high or went up during the
year of the industry shock. Thus, rewarding CEOs for luck during an industry-wide positive
shocks is concentrated among firms with high CPS or CPS increases.
An important criticism of the Bertrand-Mullainathan view of pay for lucky performance
is given by Himmelberg and Hubbard (2000) and Hubbard (2005). They argue that if the supply
of CEOs is inelastic, then positive industry-wide shocks increase the relative importance of
managerial ability and could in equilibrium lead to higher compensation. We investigate this
point using their view that the supply of CEOs is most inelastic for the largest firms. Regression
4 shows that our results are not driven by the larger firms for which Himmelberg and Hubbard
argue that the supply of CEOs is most likely to be inelastic. We find no difference between large
and small firms in terms of how the reaction of CEO compensation to industry-wide shocks is
associated with CPS.

E. CEO Centrality and CEO Turnover

We have seen that firms with high CPS have lower Q and lower accounting profitability
and make acquisition decisions that are viewed less favorably by the market. It could thus be

Bertrand and Mullainathan mention, Gibbons and Murphy (1990) note that relative performance
evaluation (i.e., filtering out industry-wide shocks) can distort CEO incentives if they can ‘take actions
that affect the average output of the reference group.’ However, Bertrand and Mullainathan do not find
evidence that this is a severe problem when using industry-wide performance shocks, as their results for
that measure are very similar to using shocks that are more clearly beyond the CEO’s control, such as oil
price and exchange rate shocks.

21

expected that the CEOs of such firms would be replaced more often unless the high CPS is at
least partly due to agency problems in the first place, which could make CEO replacement more
difficult and unlikely. We explore this possibility by testing whether, controlling for
performance, CEO turnover is related to CPS.
Table 13 displays the results of logit regressions where the dependent variable is equal to
one if there is a CEO turnover in year t. We use the ExecuComp dataset to identify CEO
turnover, which we define as taking place if the CEO title in this dataset has changed from one
person to another. We find 1,326 turnovers in our sample of 11,221 firm-years with available
data on the prior-year CPS.
The independent variable of interest in the base regression of column 1 is the industryadjusted CPS at the end of the preceding year. The control variables include the stock return of
the company during the year and dummies for the year of the CEO’s service (we do not use
tenure as a continuous variable since its effect on turnover might not be monotonic). The
coefficient on industry-adjusted CPS is negative and significant, indicating that CEOs with high
CPS are less likely to be replaced.
In column 2, we add an interaction between the industry-adjusted CPS and the stock
return. The question is whether high-CPS CEOs are less likely to turn over even if their stock
performance is bad. The coefficient on the interaction variable is positive, and marginally
significant, indicating that turnover is less performance-sensitive for high-CPS CEOs.
To assess the economic significance, we consider the effect of a 10% increase in
industry-adjusted CPS on the performance sensitivity of CEO turnover. The coefficient on stock
return is -0.404 implying that with a -50% stock return, CEO turnover probability increases by
22% (exp(-0.5*-0.404) - 1). The coefficient on the interaction term between the stock return and
industry-adjusted CPS is 1.684, implying a reduction in the performance sensitivity of 8% (exp(0.5*1.684*0.1) - 1), or about a one-third reduction in the performance sensitivity of turnover.
Following Jenter and Kanaan (2006), regression 3 splits the stock return into firmspecific and market returns, where firm specific returns are defined as the difference between the
overall stock return and the market return. Consistent with Jenter and Kanaan (2006) we also
find that CEO turnover is sensitive to market returns, albeit not significantly so. The main
conclusion is that CEO turnover is less sensitive to firm specific returns for CEOs with a high
industry-adjusted CPS. If a lower performance sensitivity is an indication of more agency
22

problems (e.g., Kaplan and Minton (2006)), then our findings here could help explain the overall
negative association between CPS and firm value.

F. CEO Centrality and the Variability of Firm-Specific Returns

We conclude our investigation of the relation between CPS and firm outcomes by
examining the relation between CPS and the variability of firm-specific stock returns. This
variability reflects the frequency with which and the extent to which investors make revisions in
their estimate of the firm’s prospects.
A priori, theory does not provide us with an unambiguous prediction about the
relationship between CEO centrality and the variability of firm-specific stock returns. On the one
hand, it might be argued that such centrality should be associated with lower variability for two
reasons. To begin, a CEO playing a dominant role in the firm’s decision-making might lead to
decisions that are more conservative (risk-averse); the CEO may want to play it safe to reduce
the chance of a negative stock return which might lead to dismissal. Because the CEO’s
compensation and tenure are more sensitive to the firm’s performance than those of other top
executives, the CEO might have an especially strong incentive to avoid risks and, in the words of
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003), “enjoy the quiet life.” Second, if one person plays a dominant
role in the firm’s decision-making, this could lower the market’s uncertainty about the firm’s
strategy and thus decrease the variability of the firm-specific returns.
On the other hand, Sah and Stiglitz (1986, 1991) and Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira
(2005) argue that firms with powerful CEOs would tend to make less “balanced” decisions
relative to those reached by consensus and coalition-building within a team. On this view,
dominant CEOs can be expected to lead to more extreme outcomes and thus be associated with
higher variability of firm-specific stock returns.
Table 14 presents the results of Glejser’s (1969) heteroskedasticity test. The dependent
variable is the absolute value of monthly residual returns, where we use the four-factor FamaFrench model to compute residuals. The pooled panel regressions either include industry fixed
effects (clustering standard errors by industry) or firm fixed effects (clustering standard errors by
firm). As independent variables, we include CPS alongside several other governance variables
(founder dummy, CEO as chair dummy, CEO tenure, CEO stock ownership) and other firm
23

characteristics (leverage, firm size, firm age and capital expenditures). Our specification closely
follows the heteroskedasticity test in Adams et al. (2005) with CPS as an additional variable.
We find a negative relation between CPS and firm-specific variability. This finding is
robust to firm or industry fixed effects and to the inclusion of the other governance variables. To
the extent that the lower idiosyncratic volatility of high-CPS firms is due to the tendency of their
CEOs to avoid firm-specific volatility which imposes risk-bearing costs on them but not on
diversified investors, this evidence is consistent with the view that the association between high
CPS and lower firm value is related to governance and agency problems.
In addition to CPS, the dummy of whether the CEO chairs the board also has a negative
coefficient, consistent with the view that CEO centrality is associated with lower variability. The
CEO’s ownership stake and CEO tenure have a non-linear relationship with variability: the first
moment has a positive coefficient and the second moment a negative (though significance
disappears for CEO tenure when firm fixed effects are included). 13

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we investigate CEO centrality as proxied by CPS, the fraction of top-five
compensation captured by the CEO. We find that cross-sectional differences in CEO centrality
are associated with lower Tobin's Q, lower accounting profitability, less favorable market
reaction to acquisition announcements made by the firm, more luck-based pay, less CEO
turnover controlling for performance and tenure, and lower variability of firm-specific stock
returns.
Beyond our particular findings, our general conclusion is that CEO centrality is an aspect
of firm governance and management to which financial economists should pay attention in their
future work. Research on the effects of governance arrangements and management processes --

13

With respect to variables other than the CPS, our results correspond partly to, and differ partly from,
those in Adams et al. (2005). For example, in our estimates the dummies for CEO-founder and CEO as
the only executive on the board are not significant, while CEO ownership is consistently significant.
These differences might be partly due to the difference in samples. Our sample uses a longer time period
(1992-2005 rather than 1992-1999 as in Adams et al.) and uses all firms in ExecuComp rather than those
in the 1998 Fortune 500 only.

24

as well as research on a wide range of aspects of firm behavior and decision-making -- should
consider using CEO centrality as either a necessary control or a subject of investigation.

25

References

Adams, R. H. Almeida, and D. Ferreira (2005), “Powerful CEOs and Their Impact on Corporate
Performance,” Review of Financial Studies 18, 1403-1432.
Aggarwal, R. K. and A. Samwick (2003), “Performance Incentives within Firms: The Effect of
Managerial Responsibility,” Journal of Finance 58-4, 1613-1649
Bainbridge, S. M. (2002), “Why a Board? Group Decision Making in Corporate Governance,”
Vanderbilt Law Review 55, 1-55.
Bebchuk, L. A. and A. Cohen (2005), “The Cost of Entrenched Boards,” Journal of Financial
Economics 78, 409-433.
Bebchuk, L. A., A. Cohen, and A. Ferrell (2004), “What Matters in Corporate Governance,”
Harvard University Olin Discussion Paper No. 491.
Bebchuk, L. A., Y. Grinstein, and U. Peyer (2006), “Lucky CEOs,” NBER Discussion Paper
12771.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2000), “Agents With and Without Principals,” American
Economics Review 90, 203-208.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2001), “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones without
Principals Are,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 901-932.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2003), “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance and
Managerial Preferences,” Journal of Political Economy 115, 1043-75.
Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar (2003), “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
Policies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-208.
Blinder, A. S. and J. Morgan (2000), “Are Two Heads Better than One? Monetary Policy by
Committee,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 37, 798-811.
Brill, Jesse M. (1993), “Stock Ownership Guidelines for Executives,” The Corporate Executive,
March-April, 381-385.
Cook, F. W. (1990), “How Much Stock Should Management Own?” Compensation and Benefits
Review, September/October, 20-28.
Cremers, K. J. M. and V. B. Nair (2005), “Governance Mechanisms and Equity Prices,” Journal
of Finance 60-6, 2859-2894.

26

Demsetz, D. and K. Lehn (1985), “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and
Consequences,” Journal of Political Economy 93-6, 1155-1177.
Dlugosz, J., R. Fahlenbrach, P. Gompers, and A. Metrick (2006), “Large Blocks of Stock:
Prevalence, Size, and Measurement,” Journal of Corporate Finance 12, 594-618.
Frydman, C. (2005), “Rising through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for Corporate
Executives, 1936-2003,” MIT Sloan School Working Paper.
Gompers, P. A., J. L. Ishii, and A. Metrick (2003), “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.
Gibbons, R. and K. J. Murphy (1990), “Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief Executive
Officers,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43, 30-51.
Glejser, H. (1969), “A New Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association 64, 316-323.
Hill, G. W. (1982), “Group versus Individual Performance: Are N+1 Heads Better than One?”
Psychological Bulletin 91, 517-539.
Himmelberg, C.P. and R. G. Hubbard (2000), “Incentive Pay and the Market for CEOs: An
Analysis of Pay-for-Performance Sensitivity,” Working paper.
Hubbard, R. G. (2005), “Pay Without Performance: A Market Equilibrium Critique,” Journal of
Corporation Law 30, 717-720.
Jenter, D. and F. Kanaan (2006), “CEO Turnover and Relative Performance Evaluation,” MIT
Sloan Working Paper 4594-06, forthcoming in the Journal of Finance.
Kaplan, S. N. and B. Minton (2006), “How has CEO Turnover Changed? Increasingly
Performance Sensitive Boards and Increasingly Uneasy CEOs,” NBER Working Paper
12465.
Kaplan, S. N. and L. Zingales (1997), “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169–216.
Lang, L. H. P. and R. M. Stultz (1994), “Tobin's q, Corporate Diversification, and Firm
Performance,” Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248-1280.
Lang, L., R. Stulz, R. Walkling (1991), “A Test of the Free Cash Flow Hypothesis: The Case of
Bidder Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 29, 315-336.
Lazear, E. P. and S. Rosen (1981), “Rank-order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts,”
Journal of Political Economy 89, 841-864.

27

Lie, E., 2005, On the timing of CEO stock option awards, Management Science 51, 802- 812.
Malmendier, U. and J. A. Tate (2005), “Superstar CEOs,” Working paper.
Masulis, R., C. Wang, F. Xie (2007), “Corporate Governance and Acquirer Returns,” Journal of
Finance 62, 1851-1889.
McConnell, J. and H. Servaes (1990), “Additional Evidence on Equity Ownership and Corporate
Value,” Journal of Financial Economics 27, 595-612.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1992), Organization and Management, Prentice Hall, NJ.
Miner, F.C. (1984), “Group versus Individual Decision Making: An Investigation of
Performance Measures, Decision Strategies and Process Losses/Gains,” Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance 33, 112–114.
Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1988), “Management Ownership and Market Valuation:
An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293–315.
Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1989), “Alternative Mechanisms for Corporate Control,”
American Economic Review 7, 842-853.
Morck, R., A. Shleifer, R.W. Vishny (1990), “Do Managerial Objectives Drive Bad
Acquisitions?” Journal of Finance 45, 31-48.
Murphy, K.J. and J. Zabojnik (2004), “Managerial Capital and the Market for CEOs,” Working
Paper.
Raheja, Charu (2005), “Determinants of Board Size and Composition: A Theory of Corporate
Boards,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 40.
Qui, L. (2004). “Which Institutional Investors Monitor?: Evidence from Acquisition Activity,”
Working Paper, Brown University.
Sah, R.K. and J. Stiglitz (1986), “The Architecture of Economic Systems: Hierarchies and
Polyarchies,” American Economic Review 76, 716-727.
Sah, R.K. and J. Stiglitz (1991), “The Quality of Managers in Centralized versus Decentralized
Organizations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 289-296.
Shaw, M.E. (1932), “A Comparison of Individual and Small Groups in the Rational Solution of
Complex Problems,” American Journal of Psychology 44, 491-498.
Shin, H. and R.M. Stulz (2000), “Firm Value, Risk, and Growth Opportunities,” NBER Working
Paper No. 7808.

28

Yermack, D. (1996), “Higher Market Valuation for Firms with a Small Board of Directors,”
Journal of Financial Economics 40, 185–211.
Yermack, David, (1997), Good timing: CEO stock option awards and company news
announcements,
Journal
of
Finance
52,
449-476.

29

TABLE 1: CPS BY INDUSTRY
The table displays industry average and median CPS where industry is defined as the 12 Fama-French
industries. The averages are computed using the panel data set of 12,011 observations (Obs). Within
industry variation is computed as the standard deviation of the CPS within an industry. The regression
coefficients are from a tobit regression with CPS as the dependent variable and industry dummies. The hold
out industry is Energy. P-values of the coefficients are also reported.
Industry

Obs

Industry
average

Industry
Median

Regression
coefficient

p-value

0.335

Within
Industry
variation
0.109

Non Durable Consumer Goods

1018

0.330

-0.016

0.009

Durable Consumer Goods

422

0.363

0.121

0.359

0.011

0.141

Manufacturing

1902

0.354

0.106

0.353

0.003

0.602

Energy

520

0.351

0.104

0.344

Chemical

477

0.374

0.107

0.370

0.022

0.003

Business Equipment

1782

0.321

0.132

0.304

-0.031

0.000

Telecom

267

0.311

0.118

0.300

-0.040

0.000

Utilities

1080

0.351

0.087

0.347

0.000

0.974

Shops

1491

0.331

0.116

0.321

-0.021

0.000

Health

819

0.354

0.128

0.340

0.002

0.704

Money

922

0.342

0.128

0.330

-0.009

0.138

Other

1311

0.343

0.125

0.330

-0.009

0.138

Average

0.344

Standard deviation

0.018

30

TABLE 2: UNIVARIATE STATISTICS
Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of equity plus the book value of assets minus the book value of
equity, all divided by the book value of assets. The industry adjustment is made at the four-digit SIC level.
Industry-adjusted ROA is the return on assets computed as net income divided by book value of assets
adjusted by the median ROA of the firms in Compustat in a given four-digit SIC industry and year. It is
expressed in percentage terms. Eindex is the entrenchment index of Bebchuk and Cohen (2004). Log book
value is the log of the book value of assets. Insider ownership is the fraction of shares held by insiders as
reported by Execucomp. Capex/Assets is the ratio of capital expenditures to assets. Leverage is the longterm debt to assets. R&D is the ratio of R&D to sales. If R&D is missing, it is set to zero and the dummy
variable R&D missing is set to one. Company age is computed as the current year minus the year in which
the company was first listed on CRSP. We present the number of observations, the overall sample mean
and standard deviation, as well the mean of the variables for two subsets. The first one is the subset of firms
with industry-adjusted CPS bigger than zero, the second is where the industry-adjusted CPS is below or
equal to zero. The last column reports the p-value of a mean comparison between the two subsamples.

Obs

Mean

.Std. Dev

Ind-adj
CPS>0

Ind-adj
CPS<=0

p-value
difference

Ind-adj Tobin's Q

12011

0.359

1.119

0.343

0.374

0.091

Ind-adj ROA

12011

1.462

10.122

1.220

1.699

0.009

Eindex

12011

2.152

1.308

2.225

2.081

0.005

Log book value

12011

7.513

1.606

7.555

7.473

0.000

Insider ownership

12011

0.063

0.073

0.057

0.068

0.000

insider ownership2

12011

0.009

0.033

0.008

0.011

0.000

Capex/Assets

12011

0.185

2.178

0.168

0.202

0.383

Leverage

12011

0.205

0.169

0.209

0.201

0.006

R&D

12011

0.124

3.925

0.114

0.133

0.790

R&D missing

12011

0.481

0.500

0.474

0.489

0.098

Company Age

12011

25.766

19.235

26.381

25.168

0.000

Variable

31

TABLE 3: RELATION BETWEEN TOBIN’S Q AND CPS
This table presents year fixed effects regressions in columns 1-4 and 7, and Fama-MacBeth type regressions in columns 5 and 6. The dependent variable is the fourdigit SIC industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q. Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of equity plus the book value of assets minus the book value of equity, all divided
by the book value of assets. CPS is the ratio of CEO total compensation to the sum of all top executives’ total compensation, and is expressed as decimals here.
Total compensation is data item TDC1 from ExecuComp. The industry adjustment in CPS is made at the four-digit SIC level. Eindex is the entrenchment index of
Bebchuk and Cohen (2004). Log book value is the log of the book value of assets. Insider ownership is the fraction of shares held by insiders as reported by
Execucomp. ROA is the return on assets computed as net income divided by book value of assets. Capex/Assets is the ratio of capital expenditures to assets.
Leverage is the long-term debt to assets. R&D is the ratio of R&D to sales. If R&D is missing, it is set to zero and the dummy variable R&D missing is set to one.
Company age is computed as the current year minus the year in which the company was first listed on CRSP. Column 7 includes two additional variables.
CEOChair is a dummy equal to one if the CEO is also the Chairman and zero otherwise. CEO is only director is a dummy equal to one if none of the other top four
executives is on the Board, and zero otherwise. The sample size is smaller for data availability reasons related to the Board memberships of the other top
executives. $, *, ** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

32

Dependent Variable:
CPS

(1)
-0.256
(3.20)**

CPS, t-1

Industry-adjusted Tobin's Q
(2)
(3)

Insider Ownership
Insider Ownership2

-0.099
(13.55)**
-0.045
(6.93)**
0.592
(2.04)*
-2.267
(3.56)**

Leverage
R&D
R&D missing dum
Company age

-0.097
(11.21)**
-0.038
(4.88)**

-0.099
(13.66)**
-0.045
(6.93)**
0.632
(2.17)*
-2.319
(3.64)**

-0.344
(3.48)**
-0.098
(11.33)**
-0.038
(4.92)**

3.759
(37.41)**
0.003
(0.76)
-0.715
(12.25)**
0.027
(11.28)**
-0.190
(9.91)**
-0.003
(5.79)**

0.413
(1.24)
-2.113
(2.96)**
4.089
(32.70)**
0.006
(1.05)
-0.739
(10.59)**
0.017
(7.08)**
-0.192
(8.51)**
-0.003
(5.26)**

3.743
(37.27)**
0.003
(0.79)
-0.722
(12.38)**
0.027
(11.21)**
-0.190
(9.92)**
-0.003
(5.92)**

0.454
(1.36)
-2.157
(3.02)**
4.074
(32.58)**
0.006
(1.05)
-0.750
(10.75)**
0.017
(7.04)**
-0.193
(8.51)**
-0.003
(5.43)**

12011
0.17

8661
0.18

12011
0.17

8661
0.18

Insider Ownership2, t-1

Capex/assets

-0.093
(9.260)**
-0.040
(4.386)**
1.270
(3.169)**
-3.899
(4.561)**

-0.086
(7.667)**
-0.031
(2.778)**

4.565
(14.810)**
0.041
(1.536)
-0.615
(6.381)**
0.301
(3.286)**
-0.149
(3.327)**
-0.003
(5.403)**

0.839
(2.751)**
-2.528
(3.677)**
5.159
(13.625)**
0.056
(1.184)
-0.610
(4.038)**
0.403
(4.264)**
-0.134
(2.866)**
-0.003
(3.071)**

12

12

CEOChair dum
CEO only Dir dum
Observations
R-squared

(7)
-0.282
(2.97)**

-0.108
(1.92)$

Insider Ownership, t-1

ROA, t

(6)

-0.431
(4.070)**

Ind-adj CPS, t-1

Log book value

(5)
-0.246
(2.279)*

-0.475
(4.91)**

Ind-adj CPS total comp

Eindex

(4)

33

-0.099
(11.06)**
-0.019
(2.40)*
0.807
(2.20)*
-3.395
(4.01)**

4.568
(35.61)**
0.004
(0.99)
-0.941
(12.97)**
0.297
(15.49)**
-0.212
(9.09)**
-0.003
(4.85)**
-0.007
(0.26)
-0.013
(0.54)
8771
0.20

TABLE 4: TOBIN’S Q AND CPS CONTROLLING FOR LAGGED TOBIN’S Q
This table presents year fixed effects regressions in columns 1-4 and 7, and Fama-MacBeth type regressions in columns 5 and 6. The dependent variable is the fourdigit SIC industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q. Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of equity plus the book value of assets minus the book value of equity, all divided
by the book value of assets. CPS is the ratio of CEO total compensation to the sum of all top executives’ total compensation, and is expressed as decimals here.
Total compensation is data item TDC1 from ExecuComp. The industry adjustment in CPS is made at the four-digit SIC level. Eindex is the entrenchment index of
Bebchuk and Cohen (2004). Log book value is the log of the book value of assets. Insider ownership is the fraction of shares held by insiders as reported by
Execucomp. ROA is the return on assets computed as net income divided by book value of assets. Capex/Assets is the ratio of capital expenditures to assets.
Leverage is the long-term debt to assets. R&D is the ratio of R&D to sales. If R&D is missing, it is set to zero and the dummy variable R&D missing is set to one.
Company age is computed as the current year minus the year in which the company was first listed on CRSP. Column 7 includes two additional variables.
CEOChair is a dummy equal to one if the CEO is also the Chairman and zero otherwise. CEO is only director is a dummy equal to one if none of the other top four
executives is on the board, and zero otherwise. The sample size is smaller for data availability reasons related to the board memberships of the other top executives.
$, *, ** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Dependent Variable:
CPS, t

(1)
-0.236
(3.99)**

CPS, t-1

(2)

Industry-adjusted Tobin's Q
(3)
(4)

-0.255
(2.89)**

Ind-adj CPS, t

Log book value
Insider Ownership
Insider Ownership2
Insider Ownership, t-1
Insider Ownership2, t-1

(7)
-0.243
(3.49)**

-0.194
(3.22)**
-0.219
(2.44)*
0.554
(107.00)**

Ind-adj Tobin's Q, t-2
Eindex

(6)

-0.190
(2.083)*

Ind-adj CPS, t-1
Ind-adj Tobin's Q, t-1

(5)
-0.191
(2.659)**

-0.025
(4.56)**
-0.025
(5.21)**
0.080
(0.36)
-0.682
(1.33)

0.554
(107.07)**
0.393
(58.92)**
-0.038
(4.89)**
-0.019
(2.72)**

0.119
(0.39)
-1.057
(1.57)

-0.025
(4.64)**
-0.025
(5.22)**
0.091
(0.41)
-0.689
(1.34)

0.668
(13.220)**
0.393
(59.00)**
-0.039
(4.95)**
-0.019
(2.72)**

0.128
(0.42)
-1.060
(1.58)

34

-0.017
(2.571)**
-0.012
(1.566)
0.162
(0.599)
-0.682
(1.559)

0.529
(90.98)**
0.521
(10.932)**
-0.021
(2.797)**
-0.004
(0.357)

0.279
(0.993)
-0.953)
(2.000)*

-0.024
(3.67)**
-0.018
(3.19)**
0.148
(0.55)
-1.029
(1.61)

ROA, t
Capex/assets
Leverage
R&D
R&D missing dum
Company age

1.598
(20.82)**
0.000
(0.13)
-0.295
(6.83)**
0.012
(7.20)**
-0.040
(2.86)**
0.000
(0.79)

2.817
(24.84)**
0.004
(0.93)
-0.461
(7.30)**
0.015
(7.54)**
-0.079
(3.88)**
-0.000
(0.35)

1.590
(20.73)**
0.000
(0.14)
-0.300
(6.95)**
0.012
(7.17)**
-0.041
(2.88)**
0.000
(0.65)

2.808
(24.79)**
0.004
(0.93)
-0.466
(7.39)**
0.015
(7.51)**
-0.079
(3.89)**
-0.000
(0.46)

1.292
(5.046)**
0.002
(0.115)
-0.215
(2.479)**
0.097
(2.112)*
-0.024
(1.287)
0.001
(1.278)

2.624
(11.165)**
0.044
(1.112)
-0.347
(3.299)**
0.727
(1.890)$
-0.025
(0.626)
0.000
(0.621)

10793
0.60

7437
0.44

10793
0.60

7437
0.44

12

11

CEOChair dum
CEO only Dir dum
Observations
R-squared

35

2.126
(21.82)
0.001
(0.35)
-0.429
(8.17)**
0.106
(6.13)**
-0.045
(2.68)**
0.000
(0.50)
0.001
(0.04)
-0.021
(1.22)
8319
0.60

TABLE 5: CHANGES IN CPS AND CHANGES IN TOBIN’S Q
The table shows year fixed effects regression results where the dependent variable is the percentage change
in Tobin’s Q from t-1 to t. The independent variable of interest is the percentage change in CPS from t-1 to
t. The second regression controls for lagged variables similar to Table 3. The third regression uses control
variables defined as percentage changes in those respective variables. Column 4 includes two additional
variables. CEOChair is a dummy equal to one if the CEO is also the Chairman and zero otherwise. CEO is
only director is a dummy equal to one if none of the other top four executives is on the board, and zero
otherwise. The sample size is smaller for data availability reasons related to the board memberships of the
other top executives. $, *, ** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Dependent Variable:

Percentage Change in Tobin’s Q from t-1 to t

Percentage Change in CPS

(1)
-0.075
(2.05)*

(2)
-0.082
(2.10)*
0.003
(0.27)
0.019
(1.75)$
0.039
(0.08)
0.508
(0.48)
0.196
(1.06)
-0.009
(1.14)
-0.127
(1.24)
-0.013
(0.64)
-0.054
(1.68)$
0.000
(0.26)

Eindex, t-1
Log book value
Insider Ownership, t-1
Insider Ownership2, t-1
ROA, t-1
Capex/Assets, t-1
Leverage, t-1
R&D, t-1
R&D missing dum, t-1
Company age, t-1
Change in Eindex
Change in insider ownership
Change in insider ownership2
Change in Capex/Assets
Change in Leverage
Change in ROA
Change in R&D

(3)
-0.075
(1.92)$

(4)
-0.057
(1.32)

0.001
(0.75)
0.047
(1.08)
-0.926
(1.91)$
1.870
(1.49)
-0.003
(0.60)
-0.375
(1.84)$
0.292
(1.44)
0.011
(2.42)*

0.001
(0.75)
0.075
(1.50)
-0.800
(1.46)
0.327
(0.21)
-0.003
(0.60)
-0.135
(0.58)
0.209
(0.87)
0.040
(1.33)
-0.028
(0.64)
-0.014
(0.38)
6731
0.002

CEOChair dum
CEO only Dir dum
Observations
R-squared

9526
0.000

8756
0.002

36

8751
0.003

TABLE 6: DOES LOW TOBIN’S Q LEAD TO INCREASES IN CPS?
The table shows average values and p-values of differences for a sample of 1,326 firms where the CEO changed during
our sample period. The year of the CEO change is denoted by time t. The three variables of interest are the CPS of the
new CEO in his/her first full year in charge (t+1), conditional on the CEO being in office for the full year. The second
variable subtracts the industry median CPS of surviving CEOs in year t+1 from the new CEO’s CPS at t+1. The
industry adjustment is at the 2-digit SIC level. The third variable is the change in the CPS from the former CEO to the
new CEO. The former CEO’s CPS is measured in year t-1, the last full year in office, conditional on the CEO being in
charge for the full year. The averages of these variables are displayed for subsamples. The first sample split is at
Tobin’s Q in year t, the second is at the industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q in year t.

CPS t+1

Ind-adj CPS
t+1

Change in CPS
t-1 to t+1

Obs

TQ>=1

33.48

-0.21

4.01

1,124

TQ<1

34.44

0.76

5.94

202

p-value difference

0.26

0.26

0.11

Ind-adj TQ>=0

33.56

-0.16

4.21

725

Ind-adj TQ<0

33.67

0.05

4.41

601

p-value difference

0.83

0.73

0.82

37

TABLE 7: ENTRENCHMENT AND THE RELATION BETWEEN TOBIN’S Q AND CPS
This table presents year fixed effects regressions in columns 1-4 and Fama-MacBeth type regressions in columns 5 and 6. The dependent variable is the four-digit
SIC industry-adjusted Tobin’s Q. Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of equity plus the book value of assets minus the book value of equity, all divided by the
book value of assets. CPS is the ratio of CEO total compensation to the sum of all top executives’ total compensation, and is expressed as decimals here. Total
compensation is data item TDC1 from ExecuComp. The industry adjustment in CPS is made at the four-digit SIC level. Eindex is the entrenchment index of
Bebchuk and Cohen (2004). Log book value is the log of the book value of assets. Insider ownership is the fraction of shares held by insiders as reported by
Execucomp. ROA is the return on assets computed as net income divided by book value of assets. Capex/Assets is the ratio of capital expenditures to assets.
Leverage is the long-term debt to assets. R&D is the ratio of R&D to sales. If R&D is missing, it is set to zero and the dummy variable R&D missing is set to one.
Company age is computed as the current year minus the year in which the company was first listed on CRSP. $, *, ** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.
Dependent Variable:
CPS, t

(1)
0.007
(0.04)

CPS, t-1

Industry-adjusted Tobin's Q
(2)
(3)

0.241
(1.35)

Ind-adj CPS, t-1

-0.311
(3.41)**
-0.143
(1.92)$

Eindex * ind-adj CPS, t-1

Insider Ownership
Insider Ownership2
Insider Ownership, t-1
Insider Ownership2, t-1

0.423
(0.934)

-0.115
(1.88)$

Eindex * ind-adj CPS, t

Log book value

(6)

0.239
(0.997)
0.281
(1.27)

Eindex * CPS, t-1

Eindex

(5)

0.066
(0.31)

Ind-adj CPS, t

Eindex * CPS, t

(4)

-0.069
(2.61)**
-0.049
(6.23)**
0.868
(2.47)*
-2.810
(3.65)**

0.003
(0.09)
-0.041
(4.27)**

-0.108
(12.20)**
-0.049
(6.21)**
0.921
(2.62)**
-2.881
(3.74)**

0.587
(1.43)
-2.504
(2.83)**

-0.166
(1.680)$
-0.347
(3.70)**
-0.101
(9.26)**
-0.041
(4.27)**

0.643
(1.56)
-2.572
(2.91)**

38

-0.134
(1.925)$
-0.043
(3.695)**
1.624
(3.837)**
-4.538
(4.918)

-0.409
(2.223)*
-0.247
(1.814)$
-0.033
(1.996)*

1.163
(3.811)**
-3.147
(4.953)**

ROA, t
Capex/assets
Leverage
R&D
R&D missing dum
Company age
Observations
R-squared

4.036
(33.25)**
0.003
(0.53)
-0.685
(9.72)**
0.040
(13.75)**
-0.224
(9.65)**
-0.004
(5.95)**
12011
0.14

4.434
(28.65)**
0.005
(0.77)
-0.732
(8.47)**
0.029
(9.80)**
-0.231
(8.27)**
-0.004
(5.27)**
8661
0.15

4.017
(33.13)**
0.003
(0.55)
-0.693
(9.84)**
0.039
(13.68)**
-0.224
(9.68)**
-0.004
(6.04)**
12011
0.14

39

4.415
(28.54)**
0.005
(0.77)
-0.745
(8.63)**
0.029
(9.79)**
-0.233
(8.30)**
-0.004
(5.42)**
8661
0.15

4.850
(14.190)**
0.041
(1.494)
-0.602
(4.496)**
0.324
(3.178)**
-0.180
(3.131)**
-0.003
(4.574)**
12

5.528
(12.945)
0.056
(1.101)
-0.639
(3.024)**
0.445
(4.147)**
-0.158
(2.630)
-0.004
(2.687)**
11

TABLE 8: ABNORMAL RETURNS AROUND ANNOUNCEMENTS OF CPS CHANGES
We use the date of the proxy filing as the event date, where the proxy dates are from Dlugosz et al. (2006), who collect
proxy dates in the years 1996-2001 for 1,916 companies. We find 4,062 firm-years with available data to compute the
change in CPS from year t-1 to year t and with sufficient data available on CRSP to compute abnormal returns. We
calculate the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) around the event using the market model. The event window is -10 to
+10 days around the event, using a 21-day window since the proxy date and the filing date are not always the same. We
weigh the observations by the inverse of the variance of the estimate of the cumulative abnormal return. CPS is based
on total compensation and is expressed as a percentage. Panel A presents mean comparisons between samples that
increase (top quartile) or decrease (lowest quartile) their CPS from one year to the next. Panel B reports the correlation
coefficient between CPS and CAR, with the p-value in brackets. Panel C reports a weighted least squares regression
where the dependent variable is CAR. The independent variables are the change in CPS from year t-1 to year t, firm
size measured as the log of the book value of assets and the book-to-market ratio, both measured at t. Observations are
weighed by the inverse of the variance of the estimate of the cumulative abnormal return. $, *, ** indicate significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The regression in panel C also reports the absolute value of t-statistics in
parentheses.

Panel A: Mean comparisons
For Firms increasing CPS
For Firms decreasing CPS
Difference (decrease-increase):

Average CAR
0.699%**
1.028%**
0.329%

Number of observations
2062
2000

Top quartile change in CPS
Lowest quartile change in CPS
Difference (lowest-top):

0.531%
1.691%**
1.160%**

1015
1015

Panel B: Correlation coefficient
Correlation between the change in CPS and CAR (p-value): -0.035 (0.02)

Panel C: Regression Analysis
Dependent Variable
Independent Variables:
Change in CPS (t-1, t)

CAR[-10,+10] in %

-0.0328
(2.03)*

-0.0044
(0.21)
-0.0525
(1.86)$
-0.3907
(1.24)
-0.1014
(0.89)
0.1514
(2.02)**
1.357
(1.56)
0.003
3763

Change in CPS
* Dum(Eindex>median)
Dum(Eindex>median)
Firm Size
Book-to-Market
Constant
R-squared
Observations

-0.1299
(1.07)
0.1448
(1.61)
1.610
(1.79)$
0.002
4062

40

TABLE 9: CPS AND ACCOUNTING PROFITABILITY
Panel A shows year fixed regression results using the industry adjusted return-on-assets (net income divided by book value of assets)
as the dependent variable. The industry adjustment is made at the 4-digit SIC level by subtracting the industry median ROA from the
firm’s ROA. The industry median ROA is based on the universe of Compustat firms in a given year. The dependent variable is
winzorized at the 1% and 99% level and is expressed in percentage terms. Panel B shows the same regression specifications except
that we use Fama-MacBeth type regressions instead of year fixed effects regressions. We only report the coefficients and t-statistics
of the CPS variables for brevity. $, *, ** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Year Fixed Effects Regressions
Dependent Variable:
CPS, t

(1)
-10.469
(14.01)**

CPS, t-1
Ind-adj CPS, t

Ind-adj ROA (in percentage)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-9.105
(11.72)**
-2.388
(2.89)**
-9.141
(11.54)**

Ind-adj CPS, t-1
Eindex
Log book value
Insider Ownership
Insider Ownership2
Capex/assets
Leverage
R&D
R&D missing dum
Company age

(5)

0.042
(0.58)
0.600
(9.43)**
13.988
(4.89)**
-15.596
(2.46)*
0.026
(0.50)
-11.584
(20.82)**
-0.245
(10.69)**
-0.943
(5.07)**
0.010
(2.00)*

0.032
(0.42)
0.616
(9.20)**
17.510
(5.45)**
-22.258
(2.97)**
0.028
(0.54)
-11.713
(19.84)**
-0.196
(8.53)**
-1.072
(5.47)**
0.009
(1.72)$

0.023
(0.32)
0.599
(9.42)**
13.939
(4.87)**
-15.136
(2.39)*
0.027
(0.53)
-11.774
(21.17)**
-0.246
(10.73)**
-0.968
(5.21)**
0.008
(1.58)

-2.055
(2.43)*
0.026
(0.35)
0.616
(9.19)**
17.607
(5.48)**
-22.308
(2.97)**
0.028
(0.55)
-11.758
(19.92)**
-0.197
(8.55)**
-1.077
(5.49)**
0.009
(1.62)

12011
0.07

10936
0.06

12011
0.07

10936
0.06

CEOChair dum
CEO only Chair dum
Observations
R-squared

12011
0.01

41

(6)
-11.239
(12.88)**

0.099
(1.19)
0.272
(3.69)**
15.197
(4.45)**
-23.729
(2.99)**
0.022
(0.43)
-11.003
(16.80)**
-2.911
(16.91)
-1.573
(7.36)**
0.013
(2.15)*
0.198
(0.82)
-0.894
(4.14)**
8775
0.10

Panel B: Fama-MacBeth Type Regressions (only CPS coefficients reported)
Dependent Variable: Ind-adj ROA (in percentage)
CPS, t

(1)
-11.328
(8.936)**

(2)
-10.192
(6.854)**

CPS, t-1

(3)

(4)

(6)
-11.588
(12.369)**

-4.959
(3.291)**

Ind-adj CPS, t

-9.948
(7.155)**

Ind-adj CPS, t-1
Additional Controls
Observations

(5)

yes
12

yes
12

yes
11

yes
12

42

-4.556
(3.365)**
yes
11

yes
9

TABLE 10: CPS AND ACQUIRER RETURNS
The sample consists of 1,241 takeover announcement events from the sample of Masulis, Wang, and Xie (2007). The dependent variable is
the cumulative abnormal announcement return of the bidder in the eleven days around the announcement (CAR[-5,+5]) in regressions 1, 2
and 5, and a dummy equal to one if the CAR is negative in regressions 3 and 4. Regressions 1 and 2 (3 and 4) are OLS (logit) regressions
with robust standard errors and errors clustered at the firm level. Absolute values of t-statistics are in parentheses. CPS is the ratio of CEO to
the sum of all top executives’ compensation. CPS is based on total compensation as measured by data item TDC1 from ExecuComp
containing salary, bonus, other annual compensation, total value of restricted stock granted, Black-Scholes value of stock options granted,
long-term incentive payouts, and all other total incentive compensation. G-index is the governance index of Gompers, et al. (2003). E-index
is the entrenchment index of Bebchuk et al (2004). ‘Fraction Blockowners’ is the fraction of the shares outstanding owned by institutional
blockholders. Log book value bidder is the book value of the bidder at the end of the fiscal year prior to the takeover. Relative deal size is
the ratio of the deal value (from SDC) to the market value of equity of the bidder at the fiscal year end prior to the takeover. Tobin’s Q is the
market-to-book ratio of the bidder at the fiscal year end prior to the takeover. Leverage is the ratio of book value of long-term debt to assets.
Herfindahl is based on sales of firms in the same four-digit SIC industry. Run-up is the cumulative stock return in the year prior to the
takeover. ‘High tech industry dummy’ is equal to 1 if the firm operates in an industry with four-digit SIC code of 3570, 3571, 3572, 3576,
3577, 3661, 3674, 4812, 4813, 5045, 5961, 7370, 7371, 7372, or 7373. Cash used (stock only) dummy is equal to one if the bidder pays at
least a part in cash (all in equity). The status of the target is private, public or subsidiary indicated by the respected dummy variables. $, *,
** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Year dummies and a constant are included but omitted to save space.
Column 5 includes two additional variables. CEOChair is a dummy equal to one if the CEO is also the Chairman and zero otherwise. CEO
is only director is a dummy equal to one if none of the other top four executives is on the board, and zero otherwise. The sample size is
smaller for data availability reasons related to the board memberships of the other top executives. The r-squared reported for the logit
regression is a pseudo r-square.

Dependent Variable:
CPS (Bidder)
Eindex (Bidder)
Gindex (Bidder)
Fraction Blockholders (Bidder)
Log book value (Bidder)
Relative Deal Size
Tobin's Q (Bidder)
Leverage (Bidder)
Herfindahl (Bidder)
Run-up (Bidder)
High tech dummy (Bidder)
Cash Used dummy
Stock Only dummy
Private (Target)
Subsidiary (Target)
Public (Target)

CAR [-5,+5]
(1)
(2)
-0.024
-0.024
(1.74)$
(1.70)$
-0.497
(4.14)**
-0.180
(2.77)**
0.025
0.028
(0.97)
(1.08)
-0.270
-0.238
(2.36)*
(2.10)*
-0.770
-0.786
(0.62)
(0.62)
-0.019
0.017
(0.12)
(0.11)
2.189
2.141
(1.67)$
(1.63)
5.311
5.950
(1.96)$
(2.13)*
-1.375
-1.387
(2.29)*
(2.33)*
-1.058
-0.989
(1.67)$
(1.56)
0.005
0.006
(1.11)
(1.19)
-0.906
-0.896
(1.80)$
(1.76)$
1.723
1.262
(0.46)
(0.31)
2.311
1.894
(0.62)
(0.46)
0.262
-0.212
(0.07)
(0.05)

Dummy=1 if CAR Negative
(3)
(4)
0.011
0.011
(2.21)*
(2.18)*
0.098
(2.19)*
0.029
(1.30)
-0.013
-0.014
(1.20)
(1.28)
0.073
0.067
(1.70)$
(1.57)
0.244
0.246
(0.80)
(0.80)
-0.008
-0.016
(0.18)
(0.37)
-0.162
-0.143
(0.35)
(0.31)
-2.163
-2.295
(1.65)$
(1.74)$
0.200
0.199
(1.30)
(1.32)
0.226
0.206
(1.34)
(1.21)
-0.000
-0.000
(0.16)
(0.20)
0.510
0.504
(2.85)**
(2.81)**
-0.389
-0.290
(0.25)
(0.18)
-0.572
-0.481
(0.37)
(0.30)
-0.027
0.076
(0.02)
(0.05)

CEOChair dum
CEO only Dir dum
Constant
Observations
R-squared

3.101
(0.78)
1241
0.10

3.750
(0.85)
1241
0.09

-0.969
(0.61)
1241
0.05

43

-1.041
(0.61)
1241
0.05

CAR [-5,+5]
(5)
-0.035
(1.92)$
-0.397
(2.71)**

0.017
(0.44)
-0.293
(1.98)**
-0.471
(0.28)
-0.040
(0.22)
2.897
(1.69)$
5.675
(1.59)
-1.430
(2.14)*
-1.239
(1.68)$
0.009
(1.49)
-0.719
(1.07)
1.839
(0.47)
2.535
(0.66)
0.078
(0.02)
0.615
(1.07)
0.299
(0.70)
-0.493
(0.12)
857
0.11

TABLE 11: CPS AND OPPORTUNISTIC TIMING OF OPTION GRANTS
The sample consists of 11,712 firm-year observations between 1996-2004. The dependent variable
is a dummy equal to one if the firm has provided at least one option grant to the CEO during the
year where the grant day was the day with the lowest stock price of the month. Option grant
information is from Financial’s insider trading database. For details on the definition of
the variable and the sample, see Bebchuk et al (2007). The independent variables are: CPS, the
ratio of CEO to the sum of all top executives’ compensation. CPS is based on total compensation as
measured by data item TDC1 from ExecuComp containing salary, bonus, other annual
compensation, total value of restricted stock granted, Black-Scholes value of stock options granted,
long-term incentive payouts, and all other total incentive compensation; SOX, a dummy equal to
one if the year of the option grant is after 2002; Neweconomy, is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm
operates in an industry with four-digit SIC code of 3570, 3571, 3572, 3576, 3577, 3661, 3674,
4812, 4813, 5045, 5961, 7370, 7371, 7372, or 7373; Insider Ownership, ); Insider ownership is the
fraction of shares held by insiders as reported by Execucomp; Log book value is the log of the book
value of assets; Eindex is the entrenchment index of Bebchuk and Cohen (2004); Stdev Stock
Return is the standard deviation of daily stock return over a calendar year. The first regression is a
logit regression with error clustered at the firm level. The second regression is a firm-fixed effects
logit regressions, the third is a CEO fixed effects logit regression. $, *, ** indicate significance at
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Year dummies are included but omitted to save space.

CPS
SOX
Neweconomy
Insider Ownership
Insider Ownership2
Log book value
Eindex
Stdev Stock Return
Constant
Observations

luckydum
(1)
3.607
(15.97)**
0.577
(10.40)**
0.333
(3.31)**
1.816
(1.79)$
-2.227
(0.94)
0.005
(0.27)
0.020
(0.90)
-0.186
(5.99)**
-3.195
(14.27)**
11712

(2)
7.244
(18.07)**
0.160
(1.81)$

(3)
9.259
(17.69)**
-0.025
(0.23)

1.685
(1.00)
-1.518
(0.46)
0.422
(4.07)**
0.059
(0.80)
-0.345
(7.57)**

-1.803
(0.82)
6.565
(1.37)
0.361
(2.69)**
0.072
(0.77)
-0.393
(6.87)**

11712

11712

44

TABLE 12: CPS AND COMPENSATION FOR INDUSTRY-WIDE SHOCKS
This table presents industry fixed effects regressions. All industry groups are defined at the four-digit SIC level. The dependent variable is the log of the CEO total
compensation (data item TDC1 from ExecuComp). ‘Industry Average TQ UP dum t-1 to t’ is a dummy equal to one if the industry average Tobin’s Q went up over the last
year. ‘CPS up from t-1 to t dum’ is a dummy equal to one if the firm’s CPS increased the previous year. ‘Industry Average ROA UP dum t-1 to t’ is a dummy equal to one if the
industry average ROA went up over the last year. ‘Small dum’ is a dummy equal to one if the firm’s market cap is below the median for that year. See previous table descriptions for
the remaining variable descriptions. *, ** indicate significance at 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Dependent Variable:
Industry Average TQ UP dum t-1 to t
Industry Average TQ UP dum t-1 to t
x CPS, t
Industry Average TQ UP dum t-1 to t
x CPS up from t-1 to t dum
Industry Average TQ UP dum t-1 to t
x CPS, t x small dum
CPS, t

(1)
0.043
(2.12)**

(2)
-0.074
(1.22)
0.338
(2.04)**

(3)
-0.024
(0.59)

ln(Total Compensation)t
(4)
(5)
-0.083
(1.27)
0.402
(2.22)**

1.932
(22.39)***

-0.056
(0.51)
1.696
(13.26)***

1.764
(14.78)***

0.059
(2.95)***

Constant
Observations
R-squared

(8)

1.854
(15.65)***

0.005
(0.09)
0.156
(1.95)*

1.806
(14.22)***
0.093
(3.32)***
0.000
(0.00)

0.011
(0.17)
0.214
(2.18)**

0.068
(2.33)**
-0.123
(1.11)
0.443
(52.18)***

0.443
(52.17)***

0.445
(51.46)***

Small dum

CeoChair dum

1.931
(22.38)***

0.107
(3.75)***

Industry Average ROA UP dum t-1 to t

Tobin's Q

(7)

0.080
(2.73)***

CPS up from t-1 to t dum

Industry Average ROA UP dum t-1 to t
x CPS, t
Industry Average ROA UP dum t-1 to t
x CPS up from t-1 to t dum
Industry Average ROA UP dum t-1 to t
x CPS, t x small dum
Log book value

(6)

0.186
(23.34)***
0.130
(5.64)***
3.111
(42.94)***
8755
0.33

0.187
(23.36)***
0.130
(5.64)***
3.169
(40.69)***
8755
0.33

0.191
(23.30)***
0.152
(6.42)***
3.678
(52.81)***
8400
0.31

0.443
(52.19)***
-0.940
(28.87)***
0.191
(22.27)***
0.206
(8.37)***
6.907
(126.35)***
8755
0.23

45

0.188
(23.57)***
0.132
(5.70)***
3.100
(42.73)***
8755
0.33

0.443
(52.19)***

0.187
(23.52)***
0.132
(5.71)***
3.127
(40.22)***
8755
0.33

0.445
(51.44)***

0.193
(23.58)***
0.153
(6.48)***
3.682
(53.00)***
8400
0.31

-0.929
(28.55)***
0.192
(22.43)***
0.208
(8.43)***
6.854
(124.96)***
8755
0.23

TABLE 13: CEO TURNOVER AND CPS
The sample consists of 11,221 firm year observations with available data on CEO turnover in year t and independent
variables the year prior to the turnover. The regressions shown are logit regressions with robust standard errors,
clustered at the firm level. We display the coefficients and t-statistics in brackets underneath. The dependent variable is
a dummy equal to one if the CEO for firm i in year t-1 is not the same as in year t (there are 1326 turnovers). CPS is
based on total compensation as measured by data item TDC1 from ExecuComp containing salary, bonus, other annual
compensation, total value of restricted stock granted, Black-Scholes value of stock options granted, long-term incentive
payouts, and all other total incentive compensation. The industry-adjustment is done at the four-digit SIC level per
year. The tenure dummies are equal to one if a CEO has exactly that number of years of tenure. Zero is the hold out
group, i.e., CEOs who in year t-1 just joined the company. Stock return, t-1 is the return over the calendar year prior to
the CEO turnover. Market return is the value-weighted CRSP return. Firm specific return is the difference between the
firm and the market return. Column 5 includes two additional variables. CEOChair is a dummy equal to one if the CEO
is also the Chairman and zero otherwise. CEO is only director is a dummy equal to one if none of the other top four
executives is on the board, and zero otherwise. The sample size is smaller for data availability reasons related to the
board memberships of the other top executives. $, *, ** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Absolute values of t-statistics are in parentheses.

Dependent Variable:
Ind-adj CPS, t-1
Stock return t-1

CEO turnover dummy
(1)
-2.957
(6.76)**
-0.372
(3.49)**

(2)
-2.802
(6.48)**
-0.404
(3.77)**
1.684
(1.82)$

Stock return, t-1 * Ind-adj CPS, t-1
Firm Specific Return, t-1

7.279
(10.04)**
5.146
(7.26)**
0.069
(0.08)
-1.187
(0.97)
0.057
(0.06)
-0.142
(0.14)
0.483
(0.63)

7.281
(10.05)**
5.142
(7.25)**
0.069
(0.08)
-1.193
(0.97)
0.057
(0.06)
-0.142
(0.14)
0.480
(0.62)

-0.397
(3.62)**
3.833
(1.69)$
-0.424
(1.62)
1.385
(1.43)
7.285
(10.04)**
5.142
(7.25)**
0.070
(0.08)
-1.191
(0.97)
0.056
(0.06)
-0.146
(0.15)
0.482
(0.62)

-5.739
(8.09)**
11221

-5.734
(8.08)**
11221

-5.734
(8.10)**
11221

Firm Specific Return, t-1 * Ind-adj CPS, t-1
Market Return, t-1
Market Return, t-1 * Ind-adj CPS, t-1
Tenure = 1, t-1
Tenure = 2, t-1
Tenure = 3, t-1
Tenure = 4, t-1
Tenure = 5, t-1
Tenure = 6, t-1
Tenure > 6, t-1

(3)
-2.587
(5.41)**

CEOChair dum
CEO only Dir dum
Constant
Observations

46

(4)
-2.916
(5.69)**
-0.209
(1.66)$

7.202
(9.88)**
4.851
(6.81)**
-0.305
(0.33)
-1.265
(1.03)
0.035
(0.04)
-0.151
(0.15)
0.106
(0.14)
-0.363
(2.91)**
0.144
(1.09)
-5.318
(7.37)**
11221

TABLE 14: CPS AND VARIABILITY OF FIRM-SPECIFIC STOCK RETURNS
Pooled panel regressions (1) using industry fixed effects and standard errors clustered by industry, (2) using firm fixedeffects and standard errors clustered by firm. The dependent variable is the absolute value of the monthly excess stock
return, using the four-factor Fama-French model to compute excess returns. The sample is January 1992 to December
2005. The description of the variables is contained in tables 2 and 3. $, *, ** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively. Absolute values of t-statistics are in parentheses.

Variable

CPS
Eindex
Founder
CEO only exec. dir
Ceochair
CEO ownership
(CEO ownership)^2
Tenure
tenure^2
Leverage
Size
Firm age
Capex/Assets
Constant

observations
number of sic2 fe
number of firms fe
R-squared

Industry
fixed
effects

Firm
fixed
effects

-0.027
(4.76 )**
-0.002
(3.08 ) **
-0.003
(1.03)
0.002
(1.16)
-0.005
(3.07 ) **
0.121
(2.05 ) **
-0.402
(2.22 ) **
0.050
(2.17 ) **
-0.141
(2.31 ) **
0.031
(4.64 ) **
-0.008
(6.94 ) **
-0.056
(4.21 ) **
0.014
(0.30)
0.182
(11.9 ) **

-0.013
(2.30 ) **
-0.002
(1.73 ) $
-0.005
(0.85)
-0.001
(0.40)
-0.010
(6.07 ) **
0.253
(3.52 ) **
-0.665
(2.37 ) **
-0.032
(0.95)
-0.007
(0.07)
0.030
(3.52 ) **
-0.007
(4.05 ) **
0.003
(0.18)
0.132
(2.40 ) **
0.146
**
(9.84 )

87536
63

87536

0.0313

47

1638
0.0249

