                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PENSION PLAN INTEGRATION AS
             INSURANCE AGAINST SOCIAL SECURITY RISK



                        Robert   C. Merton

                           Zvi Bodie

                         Alan J. Marcus



                     Working Paper No. 1370




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 1984




Robert C. Merton is J.C. Penny Professor of Management at the Sloan
School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and
Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. Zvi
Bodie is Professor of Finance and Economics at the School of
Management, Boston University, and Research Associate, National
Bureau of Economic Research. Alan J. Marcus is Assistant Professor
of Finance and Economics at the School of Management, Boston
University, and Faculty Research Fellow, National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper was funded by a grant from the U. S.
Department of Health and Human Services. It was presented at the
NBER Pension Conference at the Del Coronado Hotel in San Diego,
California, April 13, 1984. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research project in Pensions. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1370
                                              June 1984



                      Pension Plan Integration as
                Insurance Against Social Security Risk

                                 ABSTRACT

            The manifest purposes of integrating an employer—provided pension plan

with social security are:     (1) to ensure retirement income adequacy for all

covered employees; and (2) to ensure retirement income equity, defined as equal

total replacement rates for all employees regardless of salary level. The focus

of this paper, however, is on an equally important (and perhaps latent)

consequence of integration: the alteration of the risk—bearing relationships

between employees, employers and the government vis—a—vis social security bene—

fits. The main alteration is that the employer in effect insures his covered

employees against adverse changes in their social security retirement benefit.

Using the option—pricing methodolo,r of modern contingent claims analysis, we

develop a formal model to explore the quantitative aspects of this change.

            While the focus of the analysis is on full integration, we do explic-

 itly deal with various degrees of partial integration as is currently prac-

ticed. We also analyze the effects of a switch from a non—integrated to an

equivalent—cost integrated plan when private benefits are fixed in nominal terms

and when they are indexed. In this connection we examine how integrated plans

are affected when the sponsor makes ad hoc post—retirement benefit increases.

We also consider the incentive effects on worker mobility of the adoption of

integrated plans. The analysis is also used to highlight what we believe to be

important unintended consequences of integrating pension plans with social

security.


Robert C. Merton                 Zvi Bodie                 Alan J. Marcus
Sloan School of Management       School of Management      School of Management
Massachusetts Institute          Boston University         Boston University
 of Technology                   70 Commonwealth Pv.       104 Commonwealth Av.
Cambridge, MA 02139              Boston, MA 02215          Boston, MA 02215
611/253-6611                     611/353-16o               611/353-6652
       Pension Plan Integration As Insurance Against Social Security Risk

                                          by

                                    Robert C. Merton

                                       Zvi Bodie

                                    Alan J. Marcus


I.     Introduction


         According to recent surveys, more than half of private pension plans

and a significant fraction of public plans in the United States today are

explicitly integrated with social security.1 The n.nifest purposes of this

integration are: (1) to ensure retirement income adequacy for all covered

employees; and (2) to ensure retirement income equity, defined as equal total

replacement rates for all employees regardless of salary level. Integrated

plans seek to achieve these goals by taking into account the amount that the

retiree will be receiving from social security and then providing a benefit from

the plan sufficient to produce a combined plan—plus—social security benefit that

constitutes   approximately the same percentage of the employee's preretirement

compensation independent of his position on the pay scale.

        Virtually all of the existing literature on integration and integrated

plans has been concerned with the issues of adequacy and equity of integrated

plans versus nonintegrated plans. The focus of this study is quite different.

One of the primary side effects of plan integration is the alteration or the

change in the risk—bearing relationships between employees, employers, and     the
government vis—a—vis social security benefits. In effect, an integrated plan

causes the employer to insure his   covered    employees against adverse changes in
                                       —2—



the social security benefit to which they will be entitled. Specifically, the

employer provides a contingent liability against the firm in retarn for the

claim which the employee currently has on the social security system, and thus

substitutes in part the risks inherent in holding liabilities of the firm for

the risks inherent in holding the claim on the social security system.

         There exists in the United States today considerable uncertainty

surrounding the future structure of the social security system and the level of

benefits which that system will provide. The issue of social security risk and

schemes for providing insurance against that risk is therefore of substantive

importance from a policy perspective. Prior analyses of integration have

exclusively addressed the issues of retirement—income adequacy and equity of

integrated plans and thereby left the risk—sharing implications of integration

as "unintended consequences" of those schemes.     We therefore have chosen to

focus on these risk—sharing aspects.

         In two previous papers, one of us tMerton (1983a,bfl addressed the

issues of retirement income risk and adequacy and the role of social security.

The specific normative questions analyzed in those papers were whether social

 security should be a mandatory or voluntary system, how it should be funded, and

what form contributions and/or benefits should take. This paper, while related

 to the previous ones in its general perspective and methodoior, focuses on the

 positive questions about integration surrounding the interaction between

 employer—provided pensions and social security.

          The plan of the paper is as follows: in section II, we briefly explain
                                      —3—



how integration works. In section III we present a stylized formal model of an

integrated plan which seeks to explore and highlight the insurance and

risk—sharing aspects of integration and to determine its costs and benefits.

The model uses the tools and the analytical framework of contingent claims

analysis in order to quantify the tradeoffs involved. In section IV we extend

the formal rrdel in several directions in order to add greater realism.

Finally, the concluding section summarizes our main results and presents our

agenda for future research on the integration issue.


II.    How Integration Works


         As noted, the general purpose of integration is to provide a retiree

with a combined benefit that will constitute approximately the same percentage

of the employee's preretirement compensation independent of his position on the

pay scale. Since the social security benefit formula is highly progressive or

tilted towards the lower end of the pay scale, the effect of integration is to

provide a benefit from the employer which is tilted in the opposite direction.

There are two main approaches that can be and are used to produce this result.

One is the "offset" approach and the other the 'excess" approach.

         In offset plans, a portion of an individual's social security benefit

is subtracted from the benefit to which he is entitled according to some defined

benefit formula to determine the amount the employer will have to provide. Thus

a typical defined benefit plan might provide for a benefit which is equal to 2

percent of the worker's final average salary per year of service. For a worker
                                        --

with   25 years of service and a final average salary of $2)-,000, this plan leads

to. an annual benefit of $12,000 per year. If the social security benefit which

that worker is entitled to comes to $1,000 and if there is a full 100 percent

offset under the plan, the employer would have to pay the worker only

($12,000 — 7,000 or) $5,000 per year. The Internal Revenue Service however does

not currently permit a full 100 percent offset. The maximum allowed offset

presently is 83 and one—third percent of an employee's primary insurance amount

(PIA). Whatever the offset percentage is, once the benefit payable by the

employer is determined, it is then frozen at that level throughout the

retirement period and will not be lowered if there are subsequent increases in

social security. The effect of an offset plan is illustrated in Table 1, which

is taken from Schulz and Leavitt (1983).

           The table illustrates the effect on total replacement rates of an

integrated plan with an 83 and one—third percent offset. The last column of

Table 1A illustrates the "progressivity" of the tilt associated with social

security replacement rates, falling from 10 percent for the lowest paid worker

to 9 percent for the highest paid. Column (5) in Table LB illustrates the

impact of the social security offset. Through the offset, the lowest paid

workers in effect lose all of their private pension, while the highest paid

retain almost all. The ultimate impact of integration is to make the total

replacement rates shown in column (8) more equal across salary levels than they

otherwise would be.

           The other form of integration is the so—called excess approach. Unlike
                Table 1: Effect of an Offset Plan on Replacement Rates


         A. Social Security Benefits and Replacement Rates for Workers

                Retiring at Age 65 in l982a



                                                                   Social Security
                Average Annual   Final Year's   Social Security      Replacement
                  Earningsb        Earnings          Benefit            Ratec


Worker 1d         $ 6,000         $ 6,599           $ )4,61l                70%

Worker   2          12,000          13,198             7,l49                5)4


Worker 3f           22,5)40         29,700             8,1)48               27

Worker )4           67,620          89,100             8,1)48                9



             a. Assumed to retire at the beginning of 1982.

             b. Average of higbest five years of earnings, which in these

hypothetical example are the last five years.

             c. Benefit divided by final year's earnings.

             d. Annual earnings are assumed to be $5,)429 in the fourth year before

retirement. Earnings are assumed to change at a rate of 5 percent per year.

             e. Annual earnings are assumed to be $10,858 in the fourth year before

retirement. Earnings are assumed to change at a rate of 5       percent   per year.

             f. Worker earns the taxable wage base in all years.

             g. Worker earns three times the taxable wage base in all years.
                                         Table 1: continued

           B.     Pension Benefits, Total Benefits and Replacement Rates for Workers in                  a Pension Plan
                  with an 83 1/3 Percent Offseth



           Gross Benefit        Social                     Final Pension             Pension          Total        Total
             Prior to          Security        Offset        Benefit=              Replacement       Benefit    Replacement
              Offset            Benefit       (2) x .833   max[O,(l)—(3)1             Rate1          (2)+()4)      Rate'

                  (1)              (2)          (3)                (4)                 (5)             (6)          (1)


Worker 1        $ 3,000        $    4,611     $3,841          $           0             0%       $     4,61i       10%
Worker 2          6,ooo             1,1)49     5,955                     45            ——J             1,19)4      55

Worker 3         11,268             8,1)48     6,181               4,481               15                          43
                                                                                                     12,629
Worker 4         33,8014            8,1)48     6,181                                   30
                                                                  21,011                             35,165        140




Source: Schulz and Leavit (1983), p.11.

           h.     Calculations assume workers retire at age sixty—five in 1982.               Calculations also assume

that plan provides a benefit equai to 50 percent of final average earnings, minus 83 1/3
                                                                                         percent of
social security benefits.          Final average earnings represent the average of the highest five years,

which in these hypothetical cases are the last five years.                    See table 1A for the value of the

high—five average and final year's earnings in each case.

           i.    Benefit divided by final year's earnings.

           j.    Less than   1 percent.
                                         —5—




offset   plans, excess plans do not directly use social security benefits in

calculating pension benefits. Instead they use social security contributions,

or to be rxre precise the taxable wage base for social security. Plan benefits

are computed and paid only on earnings in excess of an "integration level,"

which is directly related to the social security taxable wage base (also called

"covered compensation"). Under defined benefit plans, the pension benefit

accrual rate is applied only to earnings in excess of the plan integration

level. In defined contribution plans, the contribution rate is applied only to

earnings in excess of the integration level. In the case of step—rate excess

defined contribution plans, contributions on earnings below the integration

level, while not zero, are lower than they are on the earnings above the

integration level. Excess plans have a similar effect to offset plans on the

profile of combined replacement rates.

          It should be clear that offset plans are by their nature defined

benefit plans while in the case of defined contribution plans the excess

approach is the only one which can be used to perform integration. In the

stylized rdel which we present in the next section of the paper, we assume for

simplicity a defined benefit plan with a 100 percent social security offset.

The same mode of analysis can be applied to examine the effects of an excess

plan.
                                        —6—




III.   A Formal Model of Pension Integration


           To analyze the effects of integration, we first describe the equivalent

nonintegrated plan to be used as a basis for comparison. In a nonintegrated

pension plan, the firm's payments to retirees are independent of the payments

made by the social security system. We will denote social security payments at

time t as S,. B will denote the firm's promised payments in the nonintegrated

plan, the level of which, we will assume, is currently known. Once the

individual retires, the stream of total income will be B + S    where T is the
                                                            T+i
date of retirement and I > 0.

           Our stylized integrated plan involves an offset provision: once social

security payments exceed a stipulated minimum level, further increases in those

benefits entitle the firm to reduce benefits paid via the pension fund. The

offset provisions of integrated plans thus shift a portion of the risk and

return of uncertain future social security payments from workers to employers.

   evolves stochastically over time since social security benefits are linked to

uncertain future wage or price levels and are subject to unforeseen legislative

changes.

           In practice, the offset is less than one—for—one, so that total benefits

(i.e., pension plus social security), increase with the level of social security

payments. For analytic simplicity, we first compare the polar cases of fully

integrated plans that incorporate one—for—one offset provisions with fully

nonintegrated plans. In section IV, we show how the analysis is modified to

accommodate partially integrated plans.
                                          —7—




         Fully integrated    plans guarantee workers a minimum Combined retirement

income from social security and pension payments of F dollars per period. At

the date of retirement, T, if social security payments fall short of F, the

employer is obliged to pay    retirees   F —
                                               ST
                                                    dollars in each subsequent year of

retirement. Therefore, when ST < F, every dollar increase in the initial

retirement year's social security payment, ST. reduces the employer's required

payment by an equal amount. In this regime, employers capture the entire

benefit of increases in social security. Once ST = F, however, the employer's

obligation is reduced to zero, so that workers capture the benefits of further

increases in social security. Total retirement income at T in the integrated

plan equals the nximum of the guaranteed floor or current social security

benefits, i.e., Max(F, ST).

         An important feature of integrated plans as currently implemented is

that the employer's stream of pension obligations is fixed at time T. Future

increases or decreases in social security benefits which occur after

commencement of the retirement period, do not induce offsetting changes in

employer—provided pension payments. Thus, as with a non—integrated plan, the

employee receives a fixed life annuity from his employer at retirement. Unlike

the non—integrated plan, the level of the fixed annuity payments in the

integrated plan, Max[O,F — ST]   ,   depends upon the level of the social security

payment in the year of retirement, ST. The total retirement income from social

security and private pension received by the employee in year T          of   his

retirement is given by ST      + Max[O,F —

         This   institutionally—established feature of integrated plans leads to a

simplification of the analysis by permitting the transformation of what would
                                                      —8—




appear   to be a dynamic nnltiperiod problem into a one—period problem. To see

this and prepare for the analysis to follow, we develop the valuation equations

for future social security payments and life annuities. If we denote by g the

expected (real) rate of growth of social security payments, then it follows that


                           g T—t
(1)           E (s ) — s
               t T       t


where         is the conditional expectation operator, conditional on information

available at time t. If there were a traded financial claim which paid its

owner          at time T, then its market price at time t would be

E(ST)exp[_a(T —               t)I ,   where a is the market equilibrium expected rate of

return for a security in this risk class. It follows from (1) that the pre-

sent value of the social security payment at time T can be written as


(2)                 =
                         60e_6T

where   6 E    a.   —    g.
          At retirement, the present value of the worker's lifetime social

security benefits can be written as


(3)           PV(ST) = JET(ST÷t)ea.tPr(t)dt


where Pr(t) is the probability that the retiree is alive t years after

retiring. If the mortality table remains stable over time, then from (1) we can

rewrite (3)         as

(3')                      PV(ST) =      STtI()
                                              —9—




where h(ó) does not depend on ST or time. Similarly, at retirement, the present

value of a riskiess life annuity of $A per year can be written as

                   PV(A) = Pth(r)


where h( )   is   the identical function as in (3') and r is the riskiess real rate

of interest.


         At the employee's retirement, ST will be known, and hence, the value of

employer—provided benefits at time T can be written as


(5)                PV   Max[O,F —
                                    STIh(r)

Thus, because there are no further adjustments to these payments as the result

of subsequent post—retirement changes in social security benefits, the analysis

of this type of integrated plan need only focus on a single date, T. The

multiple period framework required to analyze alternative versions of

integration is presented in Section IV.

         Armed with these basic valuation relations, we turn now to the changes

in risk—bearing caused by a change from a nonintegrated to an integrated plan.

From the perspective of the employer, the firm changes from a commitment to pay

$B a year during the retirement period to a commitment to pay $MaxtO,F —

When the worker retires, the firm knows precisely what the level of annuity

payments will be in either plan. At that time, from c)4), the value of the

liability is Bh(r) for the nonintegrated plan and Max[O,F —               for the
                                                                STIh(r)
integrated plan. However, when viewed from dates earlier than T, the level of

annuity payments for the integrated plan is uncertain because ST is unknown. A

convenient interpretation of the provisions of the integrated plan can be used
                                        —10—



to determine the value of the firm's pension liability prior to the worker's

retirement. The structure of the contingent liability payment, Max[0,F —
                                                                               ST],
is formally equivalent to a Euorpean put option of maturity date T with an

exercise price F on a stock with a price at time T given by ST. This

equivalence permits the use of established results from the put option pricing

literature to value the obligations of the employer under the provisions of the

integrated plan.2

         The employer's major policy variable under an integrated plan is the

level of guaranteed combined retirement income, F. To focus on the risk—sharing

aspects of integration, we impose the constraint that the present value or cost

of (contingent) employer payments over the life of any retiree be equal for

integrated and comparable nonintegrated plans. That is, the present value or

cost of the two plans is the same.

         In the nonintegrated plan, the worker receives from the firm a stream

of payments in retirement of B per year. From (n),     the   present value of this

liability to the firm at time T is Bh(r). If today's calendar date is

normalized to zero and we neglect pre—retirement mortality, then the current
                                 -rT
value of this liability is Bh(r)e

         In an integrated plan, the worker receives from the firm a stream of

payments of Max0,F —         per year and the corresponding present value of this
                       STI
liability to the firm at time T is Max0,F —                Neglecting pre—retiretnent
                                                ST]h(r).
mortality, the current value of this liability is P(F,S0,T)h(r) where P denotes

the current (time 0) value of a European put option that gives its "owner" (the

employee) the right to sell the social security payment at T for F, when the
                                                  —11—



social security benefit level is currently at
                                                              S0.

         Under the hypothesized condition that the current value of the pension

cost to the employer is the same for the integrated and nonintegrated plans, it

follows that F must be chosen so that


                            -rT
(6)      P(F,SQ,T) = Be


Given a valuation formula for the put, (6) can be used to solve for the level of

the floor on combined retirement income, F, that equates the present value of

the firm's obligations in the integrated and nonintegrated plans.

         From the viewpoint of the employee, the effect on risk bearing of

changing from a nonintegrated to an integrated pension plan is to provide the

employee with an implicit insurance scheme. To see this, we compare the value

of the worker's combined social security and private pension benefits at

retirement for the nonintegrated plan to the corresponding value at retirement

for the integrated plan. From (3') and (u),                  the    value at time T under the

nonintegrated plan can be written as

()       sTh(o) +   Bh(r)   =     [h(s)   —
                                              h(r)]ST
                                                        +              + B}
                                                            h(r){ST

Similarly, the value at time T under the integrated plan can be written as

(8)
         STh()+Max[0,F_ST]h(r)
                                          =    [h(s)   —
                                                           h(r)IST+h(r){STI-Max[0,F_STJ}
                                          =    [h(s)   -
                                                           h(r)]ST+h(r){Max(F,ST)}

By inspection of (i) and        (8),   the difference in benefits to the employee between

the two plans is the difference in the terms in curly brackets. For the
                                         —12—




integrated plan, the worker receives the social security payment of ST, plus

contingent lifetime annuity payments from the firm eclual to the shortfall, if

any, between ST and the guaranteed combined income, F. The worker, therefore,

receives insurance (the put option) from the employer against low levels of the

social security benefit. If 5T is below the "insured value," F, the employer.-

provided insurance policy pays off and makes up the difference.3

        As is evident from (T), the nonintegrated plan also provides a "floor"

on combined retirement income: namely, B. However, if the floor F in the

integrated plan is chosen so as to satisfy (6), then it is straightforward to

show F > B whenever B > 0 and S >   0.   Moreover, in practical cases, F >> B.

That is, the combined minimum guaranteed level of benefits in the integrated

plan will be mach higher than in the nonintegrated plan. By more formal

measures of risk such as the variance of the employee's retirement benefit, it

is straightforward to show that Var(ST + B) > Var (MaxF,STl). Thus, it is

appropriate to characterize the change from a nonintegrated to an integrated

plan as providing the employee with insurance and reducing the uncertainty about

his combined retirement income.

         The insurance provided by integration does not come to the employee for

"free." The price paid is that the employee gives up his nonintegrated plan

claim of B in return for the integrated plan's insurance on the value of 5T• By

inspection of (7) and (8), the employee will, expost, be worse off in an

integrated plan if 5T > F — B.    Thus, it cannot be claimed, as a normative

matter, that all risk—averse employees would prefer an integrated plan over a

comparable—in—value nonintegrated plan. From (6) and the well—known put option
                                                              —13—




price property that 0 <             3P/F        <             it does follow, however, that d(F—B)/dB>O.

Hence, for a fixed probability distribution for ST. the larger is B, the smaller

is the probability that the worker will experience (ex post) regret for having

chosen an integrated plan over a nonintegrated one.

         To obtain solutions for F in (6) that are amenable to

comparative—static analysis, we continue the examination of the properties of

integrated plans under the simplifying assumption that St follows a geometric

Brownian motion)4 That is, the dynamics of S are assumed to be described by

the stochastic differential equation


(9)                                 dS =       gSdt   +   S    dz


where, as previously defined, g is the expected rate of growth of social

security payments;              is the instantaneous constant variance rate for the

percentage change in S; and dz denotes a Wiener process.

         From (2) and (9), arguments along the lines presented in

Constantinides (1918) can be used to show that the put option price can be

expressed as

                                    —rT                                   -ST
(10)     P(F, S0, T) = Fe                  [1 —                 —               [1 —
                                                     N(d2)]         S0e                N(d1)I
where

                                +    (r    —        + 1/2
         d1 =      ln(S0/F)




         d2 =      d1
                        —   a


         N(    )   is the cumulative standard—normal distribution function.
                                            -l -

            Equation (10) is formally equivalent to the well—known BiLack—Scholes
(1913) put option formula on a dividend—paying stock. The "dividend

adjustment,"    ,   reflects   the difference in the expected rate of "capital gains"

on   S, g, and the total required rate of return, a,     given its risk       -




characteristics.     Some relevant comparative—static properties of P(F, 5c' T)     are
presented    in table 2.   Equation (10) can be used to determine the floor levels,
F,   that equate P(F, S0, T) and BerT.

          There is considerable controversy over the issue of whether benefits

accruing under a defined benefit plan ought to be viewed as fixed in real or

nominal terms.5 While this controversy has potentially significant implications

for the magnitude of the effects we are examining, it is essentially unrelated

to our main thrust. However, with this controversy in mind, we do present

tables of analysis which reflect the two polar extremes: (i) the case in which

employer—provided benefits are fixed in real terms (i.e., indexed to the price

level), and (2) the case in which they are fixed in nominal terms, as argued by

Bulow (1982). By analyzing the extremes we are in essence covering all the

cases in between as well.

          Table 3 presents floor levels corresponding to several possible

combinations of social security and nonintegrated benefit levels. The table

presents results for case (i), in which both employer—provided and social

security benefits are interpreted as real obligations. Column (i) of Table 3

contains hypothetical employer—provided benefits of various amounts. Column (2)

of Table 3 contains the expected real social security benefit, which we fix at
                          Table 2:

 Change in Floor Income of Integrated Plan in Response to
               Increase in Various Parameters




Variable Increasing              Response of Floor Income


        S0
                                        Increase

                                        Decrease

        T                               Indeterminate
                         Table 3: Integrated Floor—Benefit Levels

                                    (Real Contracting)




   (1)
  Employer-
                       (2)             (3)                           ()
  Provided                           Total                     Floor Benefit for
  Pension            Social       Nonintegrated          Corresponding Integrated Plan
Nonintegrated       Security        Benefit
  Benefit           Benefit        [(i) +    (2)1    a = .01       a = .025    a = .05



A. Time to retirement 15 years.

    $ 0             $10,000         $10,000                   0           0
                                                          $           $          $ 0
     100             10,000          10,100           9,880          9,205      7,955
     500             10,000          10,500          l0,I80         10,205       9,)435
   1,000             10,000          11,000          11,000*        10,900      10,400
   5,000             10,000          15,000          15,000*        15,000*     1,990
  10,000             10,000          20,000          20,000*        20,000*    20,000*


B. Time to retirement 25 years.

        0            10,000          10,000              0                0        0
       100           10,000          10,100           9,165          8,8)-to    1,260
    500              10,000          10,500          10,15o         10,005      8,930
  1,000              10,000          11,000          11,000*        10,785     10,015
  5,000              10,000          15,000          15,000*        15,000*    lb,935
 10,000              10,000          20,000          20,000*        20,000*    20,000*


C. Time to retirement 35 years.

       0             10,000          10,000                   0           0         0
    100              10,000          10,100              9,660       8,5)-5     6,125
    500              10,000          10,500          10,)4l5         9,825      8,515
  1,000              10,000          11,000          10,990         io,6o       9,675
  5,000              10,000          15,000          15,000*        15,000*    l4,855
 10,000              10,000          20,000          20,000*        20,000*    19,990




   *   In    these cases the value to the employee of receiving social security

       payments in excess of the floor, while always positive, has a present

       vaLue of less than $5.
                                              —15—



$10,000. Therefore, the different rows of Table 3 may be interpreted as

corresponding to different scenarios in which private (nonintegrated) pension

plan benefits as a fraction of social security benefits differ widely. These

comparisons are of interest because (as demonstrated in Table 1),

employer—provided pension payments for low—income individuals are small relative

to social security, while for high—income individuals, private pension benefits

exceed social security, at least under the assumption that they are real.

           The third column of Table (3) is simply the sum of private plus

expected social security benefits in the nonintegrated plan. This value is a

useful benchmark against which to compare the guaranteed floor benefit of the

integrated plan. Under certainty (o =          0),   and with no expected real growth in

social security benefits, a =   r   =   6,   and the guaranteed floor would be exactly B

+
     S0, which is in fact column (3). Of course, ST is uncertain; hence, with 6
r, column (3) is interpreted as the expected level of total combined benefits in

the nonintegrated plan.6 Column (3) and columns (It)—(6) compare the guaranteed

minimum incomes in the integrated plan with this combined expected benefit from

the nonintegrated plan.

           Columns ()4)—(6) are the minimum      real   income levels that the employer

would provide in an integrated plan with the same present value as the nonin—

tegrated plan, computed using standard deviations for the real percentage change

in
     S   of 1, 2.5, and 5 percent per year. Panel A of the table uses a time to

retirement of 15 years, while panels B and C use 25 and 35 years respectively.

           To facilitate the comparison of integrated and nonintegrated benefits,
note that the annuity levels in column (3) are equal to the guaranteed annuity

the employer would provide if the employee would assign all his rights to future

social security benefits to the employer. That is, an extreme form of risk

shifting would be that the worker transfers all of his social security benefits

to the employer in return for a guaranteed annuity. This sale causes the

employer to bear all social security risk and to receive all of its benefits.

         What level annuity would the employer offer in return for the social

security benefit? From (2) and (3'), the current value of the employee's stream

of social security benefits is given by S0h()eT. From (u), the current value

of a life annuity of $A beginning at time T is (r)eT. Under the assumed

condition of Table 3 that      r, it follows, therefore, that the level of

annuity payments, A, which the firm would exchange in return for the employee's

social security benefits is given by A =
                                           S.     Thus, under the posited

conditions, the number reported in column (3), B +
                                                        S0, is the guaranteed annuity
level associated with the market value of the combined benefits in the

nonintegrated plan.

         In actual integrated plans, of course, the worker does not transfer all

rights to social security benefits: if ST exceeds F, the worker collects the

additional amount ST — F.   In effect, the worker retains rights to the upper

tail of the social security distribution. Whereas the worker would receive a

guaranteed annuity level of payments F'    B +        in the hypothetical extreme
                                                 S0

case in which social security benefits are actually sold to the employer, in the

integrated plan, the worker receives F + max(0, ST — F) as his annuity at
                                        —11.-




retirement. Thus, unlike the hypothetical sale in which the employer receives

     in exchange for the guaranteed floor, F, the employer actually receives

Min(F,ST+B), which is always less than or equal to ST+B. For the nonintegrated

and corresponding integrated plans in Table 3 to have equal present value of

costs it must therefore be the case that the floor promised under the integrated

plan not exceed the guaranteed annuity in the case of an outright sale, i.e.,

FF'S0+B. Thus column (3) provides an upper bound on the guaranteed henef it

levels in columns (1) —   (6).   If there is no chance that ST will exceed S0+B

then F=S0+B, otherwise F will he less than 30+B.

          As Table 3 demonstrates, individuals who would receive small private

pension benefits relative to social security in nonintegrated plans, will be

offered a guaranteed combined benefit that is significantly less than the

current   combined berief it. This effect is mnre pronounced for large uncertainty
rates (high a) and for longer times to retirement. At     the   limit of zero private
pension   benefits, the floor integrated replacement benefit is zero. In this

extreme case, the employer has no obligations in the nonintegrated scenario and

thus the value of the insurance (the put) provided by the employer must also be

zero. The floor benefit guarantee with equivalent present value in the

integrated plan is zero, and the employer provides no insurance against declines

in social security benefit levels. As employer—provided nonintegrated benefits

increase, the corresponding floor benefit level rises. For private

nonintegrated pension benefit levels of $100, the employer offers a floor level

that is significantly below the current (and expected future) level for social
                                        —i8—




security of $10,000. The $100 nonintegrated benefit given up by the employee to

the employer can buy only "disaster" insurance which will pay off only if social

security falls significantly below its current level.

           For higher employer—provided pension levels, the minimum benefit

guarantee rises and indeed can exceed the current level of social security of

$10,000.     For the highest employer—provided nonintegrated benefit considered in

Table 3 ($10,000), the employer offers a corresponding benefit floor in the

integrated plan of $20,000.1 Under the posited dynamic process for social

security, there is virtually no chance that ST will exceed the $20,000 floor.

Thus, almost surely the employer will end up paying at T the floor benefit equal

to $20,000 and will receive the social security benefit, ST. In effect, the

employer has purchased the employee's social security benefit.

           The differences between the combined nonintegrated benefit levels and

the floor income thus have a straightforward interpretation. For large floors,

say greater than twice S0, the social security benefit level must double in real

terms before the employer fails to capture all the benefits from social

security. Thus, the employer will almost certainly end up receiving the

employee's social security benefit. In this regime, the employee has simply

sold his rights to social security to the employer, who will pay F —            in pen-
                                                                           ST
sion benefits at time T. In order to provide the employee with an integrated

benefit level equal to the obligation B in the nonintegrated plan, the floor

level must approximately satisfy F —        = B, or F = B +
                                       S0                     S.   Therefore, the bene-

fit guarantees in columns t)4)—(6) approach the values in column (3). As B
                                          —19—



declines relative to S0 there is a significant chance that ST will be less than

S0+B and therefore as we have seen, the guaranteed minimum benefit, F, must be

strictly less than S0+B.

           All of these conclusions assumed that employer—provided benefits are

fixed in real terms. Table        provides the same analysis as in Table 3, but

computed under the assumption suggested by Bulow (1982) that promised

employer—provided benefits are fixed in nominal terms. Thus, for the same level

of nominal benefits, B, the real level of benefits iiust be deflated by the rate

of inflation. An inflation rate of 6     percent    is assumed in Table .

           Columns (1) and (2) give the nominal and associated real employer—

provided benefit levels corresponding to column (i) of Table 3. For the same

nominal benefits, the real benefit levels will, of course, fall as one considers

longer times to retirement. Column (3) of Table t presents the sum of the

$10,000 real social security benefit plus the real employer—provided benefit,

while column () presents real floor benefits for the nonintegrated plan. (Our

analysis ignores price level risk; hence, the only source of uncertainty is

social security risk.)

          The floor benefit levels in table )4     are,   as expected, lower than those

in Table 3. This pattern results from the decreased real value of

employer—provided benefits when those benefits are nominally fixed. As is

perhaps not surprising, the difference in floor levels is most pronounced for

high   values of a   and for panel C, in which time to retirement equals 35     years.
In these cases, the floor benefits range from approximately 50 to 85         percent   of
                                  Table 14:    Integrated   Floor Levels

                                        (Nominal Contracting)



         (i)              (2)                     (3)
Employer-             Employer-
Provided              Provided           Total Real
Nominal                Real            Nonintegrated                Real Floor Benefit for
Benefit               Benefit**            Benefit             Corresponding Integrated Plan
                                                              o=.0l         a.025

A. Time to retirement 15 years.

     $     0               0                  10,000            0               0          0
         100              141                 10,0)41         9,611          8,8n        1,311
         500             203                  10,203         10,092          9,511       8,511
 1,000                   13                   l0,)401        10,31)4        10,0)40      9,200
 5,000                 2,033                  12,033         12,033*        12,026      11,806
10,000                 )4,o66                 1)4,066        1)4,066*       1)4,066*    1)4,032


B. Time to         retirement   25 years.

          0                0                  10,000            0               0          0
         100              22                  10,022          9,3114         8,12)4      6,239
         500             112                  10,112          9,199          8,90)4      1,349
 1,000                   223                  10,223         10,0)49         9,314)4     1,989
 5,000                 1,116                  11,116         11,113         10,938      10,218
10,000                 2,231                  12,231         12,231*        12,202      11,821


C.       Time to retirement 35     years.
      0                    0                10,000              0               0          0
     100                  12                10,012            9,086          1,1491      5,306
         500              61                10,061            9,501          8,251       6,321
 1,000                   122                10,122            9,13)4         8,61)4      6,905
 5,000                   612                10,612           10,533         10,0)414     8,819
10,000                 1,225                11,225           11,225*        10,918      10,089



Notes:

                * Present value of social security payments in excess of the

                  floor is less than $5.

               ** Nonstochastjc inflation rate of 6
                                                            percent    used to deflate nominal

                  quantities.
                                                      —20—




their   corresponding values in Table 3, in which the employer—provided pension

benefit is fixed in real terms.

           To perhaps provide further intuition for the comparative statics

results presented in Tables 3 and )4, we note that the key expression in curly

brackets in (8), Max (F,sT), can be rewritten as F + Max[O,S —              F].
Max[0,ST — F] is the functional form of the payoff to a call option of

maturity date T with an exercise price of F on a security whose price at time T

is given by ST. In this formulation, the employee's claim in the integrated

plan is equivalent to a risk—free payment of F plus an implicit call option to

buy back from the employer the social security benefit at time T for exercise

price F.      For large floor levels relative to the expected level of social

security benefits, the employee's call will be significantly out of the money,

and F must be near F'; since the call is unlikely to be exercised, the floor

benefit must approach the combined nonintegrated benefit.


IV.     Extensions     of the Model

           In the previous section we used contingent—claims analysis to value

guaranteed replacement rates in a simple one—period model induced by the current

institutional form of integrated plans. The contingent—claims approach, and the

insights it yields are quite flexible, however, and are easily extended to

handle both more realistic models of the current system as well as alternative

types of integrated plans. In this section we illustrate that flexibility with

a few important extensions to the basic model.

           As was described in the Introduction, the current practice for
                                           —21—




integrated plans is to provide only a partial offset for social security

payments with a maximum of an 83 1/3 percent offset. It is, however,

straightforward to modify the 100 percent offset model of the previous section

to accomodate this partial offset feature. If I denotes the fraction of offset

provided by a specific plan, then the level of life annuity payments provided by

the employer is given by Max[0,F —            Thus, as with the full—offset plan,
                                      ISTI.
the structure of the firm's liability in a partial—offset plan is equivalent to

a put option. Therefore, the same formal analysis which led to the

determination of the minimum guaranteed combined income, F, for the full offset

plan can be applied to determine the floor for the partial offset one. If F(I

denotes the floor for a plan with a        offset, then from (6), F(I), will satisfy


(ii)               P(F(I),1S0,T) = Be_rT

Because the value of a put option is an increasing function of its exercise

price and a decreasing function of the price of its underlying security, it

follows from (11) that dF(I)/di > 0.       Therefore, a partial offset plan (i < 1)

will have a lower guaranteed retirement income level, F(I), than a full offset

plan (y =   1).   A general property of put option prices is that they are first—

degree homogeneous in these two variables. That is, P(F(y),yS0,T)         =

                     It follows from (11) that the value of the put in all corn—
IP(F(I)/I,S0,T).
parable integrated plans mast equal Be_rT; therefore 1(F(I)3 T)                BerT
P(F(1), S0. T).      Because the value of a put is an increasing function of its
                                                                        F(I)
exercise price, for y < 1 this equality can be maintained only if

or F(I)     IF(l). Hence, although the partial offset plan has a lower income

floor than a full—offset plan, it is less than proportionately lower.
                                        —22—




         In summary, we can bound the guaranteed retirement income in a partial

offset plan in terms of the floor level in a corresponding full offset plan by


(12)            YF(l) < F(1) <   F(l)   ,   i i<



         In the previous section, we also assumed that the employer—provided

benefit is riskiess and that the only source of uncertainty is the level of

social security payments received in retirement. A more realistic model wduld

take into account that the employer—provided benefit (in either the nonin—

tegrated or integrated plan) is also uncertain. However, because the payoff

structure to the employee in an integrated plan is still given by Max F,ST1 ,   the
same basic methodolo,r of Section III can he used to extend the model to this

more general case. Fischer (i98) has derived a valuation formula for the price

of a contingent claim whose terminal value is Max[F,S] when both F and ST are

stochastic. Hence, by replacing P(F,S0,T) in equation (6) by this more general

valuation formula and reinterpreting Be_rT in (6) as the present value of the

uncertain benefit provided in the corresponding nonintegrated plan, one could

proceed to analyze the impact on risk—bearing of integration when both private

and social security benefits are uncertain.

         As a third illustration of the flexibility of the approach presented

here, consider the case of an integrated plac in which the employer—provided

benefit is not fixed after retirement hut is adjusted each period to reflect

post—retirement changes in social security benefits. Despite the fact that

integrated plans in the U.S. do not currently work this way, this case is of
                                         —23—


interest for at least two reasons.

         First, many employers do provide post—retirement benefit increases even

though they are not contractually bound to do so. These increases are

typically made on an ad hoc basis, and employers explain their rationale as

stemming from a concern for maintaining a floor beneath the retirement income of

their former employees. Indeed, some researchers view these ad hoc increases as

part of an implicit contract between employer and employees. Given their

expressed purpose, there can be little doubt that the magnitude and frequency of

these ad hoc increases depend on the magnitude and frequency of changes in

social security benefits. The second reason for examining this case is that

while formal integration may not work this way right now, it is possible that it

might at some point in the future or in some other national setting. This is

especially relevant since the normative implications of integrated plans have

not yet received a full review.

         In this version of an integrated plan, the firm's obligation at each

date t during the retirement period equals Max(O, F —        so that the present
                                                        S)
value of contingent payments as of time 0 equals



(13)     J       Pr(t)   P(F, S0, t)dt
             T

         Given mortality tables for Pr(t), and a formula for P, we can compute
                                                      -rT
the level of F by equating the value in (13) to Bh(r)e        in an analogous

fashion to (6) in the previous section. By way of example, however, we compute

the firm's reservation level for F, given B, for a particularly simple pattern

for Pr(t). Suppose, for example, as described in Merton (1983b), that the
probability of dying at t is determined by a Poisson—distributed random

variable with characteristic parameter A. Under this assumption, Pr(t) =                   Aet;
the expected time until death is 1/A and h(r) =        l/(r   +   A).      Expression (13) can
be written as



              {Fe + A)t[1     - N(d0)] -          +
(i)
          T                                S0e        X)t11   -
                                                                  N(d1)]}dt

where d1 and d2 were defined in (10). The integral can be approximated

numerically by setting the upper limit of integration equal to a large positive

value. One then can search over F for the benefit—floor guarantee that
                 - rT
equates (1)4) to e   B/(r +   A).
         Guaranteed combined benefit rates corresponding to combined income

rates in the nonintegrated plan were computed using (1)4). For values of A =

.0661, and a = .025, and times to retirement of 15 and 35 years, we found that

benefit floors were virtually identical to those in Table 3.9

         Another issue surrounding integrated plans that requires further study

and clarification is the procedure for aggregating the worker's total private

pension benefits when he has worked for more than one employer. For

nonintegrated plans, the worker's tota' private pension annuity benefit, B', is
                                                                  n
the sum of the annuity benefits earned from all plans,                B.   ,   where B. is the
                                                                  1

annuity benefit from employer i, i =   1,... n.   As noted in the Introduction,

the typical nonintegrated plan determines the retirement benefit in terms of the

number of years of service to the firm and some type of average salary during
                                         —25—



that service. Hence, as has been widely discussed in the pension literatare,

for the same wage profile, the total private retirement benefit received by a

worker who participates in more than one nonintegrated plan will in general be

different than if he had participated in only one plan for his entire work life.

         With integrated plans, the issue of aggregating benefits is con-

siderably more complex. In addition to the effect on the level of benefits

found in nonintegrated plans, the same aggregation procedure when applied to

integrated plans has a substantial impact on the risk characteristics of the

worker's total retirement income.

         To illustrate this point, consider two workers both who earn the same

constant wage throughout their work life. Worker 1 has a single employer and

worker 2 works an equal number of years for each of n firms.       Under these

specialized conditions, worker 1 and worker 2 would have the same total

retirement income if the plans were nonintegrated. That is, worker 1 would

receive B' and worker 2 would receive B. =      B'/n   from each firm i, i

If however, each of the firms' plans is integrated with social security, then

the private pension benefits to the two workers will be quite different.

         Worker 1 with a single lifetime employer fits the assumed conditions

of our model in Section III. His private pension annuity is given by

Max[O,F —         where F is determined from the solution of equation (6) with B =
            STI

B'.   This implicit put option insures him against low levels of social security

payments by compensating him dollar for dollar for payments below F. Hence, he

has a total retirement income floor of F. If the minimum guaranteed income

floor for each plan i, F., is determined separately according to (6) with
                                                   —26—




B = B. =       B'/n, (i =   l,...,n),    then the aggregate private pension benefit for

worker 2 is given by E Max[O,F. —              = n Max[O,F' —       where F'              F.
                                       1   STI                STI                          1
                               1
(i 1,...,n)
      =               is the common solution to (6) with B. = B'/n.
                                                                1
               In   effect, worker 2 has been given a put option on his social security

benefit by each of his employers and therefore, has an aggregate of n put

options on his single social security benefit. Thus, unlike worker l's single

put option, once worker 2's options are "in—the—money" (i.e., S T< F'), he

receives n dollars in private annuity benefits for each dollar decline in
                                                                                               ST
below F'. He will, therefore, receive a larger total retirement income if

ST < F' than if ST           F' (which corresponds to his minimum retirement income).

               Worker 2, of course, pays for this "extra" benefit received for very

low levels of social security. By analysis similar to that used to derive (12),

F/n       F'     F where, in general, F'<< F for n ) 2.         Hence, worker 2 has no

protection against declines in the level of social security payments for

F' 6T          F whereas worker 1 is "fully insured" in this regime. Thus, even for

a worker with a large total nonintegrated private pension benefit B, the amount

of "useful" insurance provided by integrated plans may be rather modest if the

worker has had many employers and            each F<< F.
               In summary, for a single—employer worker under an integrated plan, the

schedule of total first—year retirement income as a function of the social

security benefit, Max[F,STI ,           exhibits   the standard insurance pattern of a

"protective put" strategy. In contrast, the corresponding schedule of total

income for an n—employer worker, Max[nF' — (n —                           is a piecewise linear
                                                             l)Srn,STI,
function of 3T which is decreasing with slope —(n — 1) for ST <                 F';   reaches a
                                           -21-


minimum at ST =    F';   and is increasing with slope 1 for ST >   F'.
            It is difficult to believe that this "vee—shaped" schedule of retire-

ment   income for rrmiltiple—employer workers is   an intended consequence of

integrated    pension    plans. Although the normative aspects of integrated plans is

not the focus of this paper, our brief analysis here surely suggests that a

widespread change from nonintegrated to integrated plans under current aggrega-

tion rules could have a significant and largely unintended effect on worker

mobility.


V.      Summary, Conclusions, and Agenda for Future Research


            Our most robust finding in the previous section can be stated simply as

follows. For extremely low values of B/S, that is, the ratio of employer

benefits to social security in the nonintegrated scenario, the value of F in

the integrated scenario is very low, indicating that integration would not in

that situation provide mach insurance. At the other extreme, for high ratios of

employer—provided benefits to social security benefits in the nonintegrated

scenario, integration results in virtually complete elimination of social

security risk through employer insurance.

            One's position on whether accruing benefits under a defined benefit

plan are real or nominal thus has a significant impact on the degree of risk—

shedding achieved through integration. If the benefit is real, then all but

those with virtually no private benefit in the nonintegrated scenario will by

switching to an integrated plan in effect sell all their rights to social
                                      —28—



security. If the benefit is nominal then a greater proportion of individuals

will retain a claim to at least some meaningful part of the distribution of

social security benefits after integration.

         Our analysis does not address the issue of whether or not integration

under the offset plan examined here is desirable. Indeed, under the usual

assumption of continuously—differentiable preference functions, one would not

expect that a 'kinked" schedule of income (e.g., Max[F,STI) would be an

unconstrained optimum. Such schedules can, however, be optimal if there are

constraints such as that the worker cannot sell his human capital. For example,

under just this constraint, Diamond and Mirrlees (forthcoming) have examined the

role of transferable private pensions in improving the risk—sharing

opportunities for workers when they are mobile. As shown in Merton

(forthcoming), under certain conditions, the Diamond—Mirrlees optimal

transferable pension schedule is formally identical in structure to the one

derived here for an integrated pension plan. Hence, neglecting the problems

associated with worker mobility, a normative study may well find that integrated

pension plans like those analyzed in sections III and IV do have optimal

risk—bearing properties. If however, worker mobility is taken into account,

then based on the analysis in Section IV, we conjecture that the optimal pension

policy will be to integrate all pension plans, both private and public.

         Thus, while the focus here has been to highlight what we believe to be

some of the unintended consequences of integration in its current setting, the

analysis also provides a footlight on the tradeoffs that are likely to be
                                      —29—



encountered in a normative evaluation of integration.

         One, presumably, unintended consequence of integration is that it

allows for a de facto sale of social security benefits by participants in even

moderately generous private pension plans. Our tables suggest that for typical

profiles this sale is effectively complete despite the de jure prohibition

against such assignment embodied elsewhere in the law. A related consequence is

that the risk—shedding available to those with low employer—provided benefits is

inferior to that of more generously provided—for retirees. Since low income

individuals generally also have the lowest pension benefits relative to social

security, this risk—sharing pattern would appear to be somewhat regressive.

Finally, we note our finding that integrated plans have unintended consequences

for worker mobility beyond those already identified for nonintegrated plans.

        The analysis in this paper is our first step in exploring the issue of

integration of employer—provided pensions as a means of insuring workers against

retirement income risk. In addition to the normative analysis already noted,

there are a number of extensions of the analysis which are on our agenda for

future research.

        First of these is to perform a study similar to the one presented here

for excess plans, and in particular for defined contribution excess plans.

Second, we plan to examine in greater depth the nature of social security risk

and how it affects the value of the insurance provided through plan integration.

For example, uncertainty regarding social security benefits, which are deter-

mined in large part through the political process, is not likely to be the same
                                      —30—



across all income levels.

         As described briefly in Section IV, a third obvious extension is to

deal explicitly with other sources of retirement income risk in addition to

social security and to see how they interact under plan integration. One major

factor is inflation risk. Since the employer—provided benefit is usually fixed

in nominal terms at least after retirement, its real value is risky because of

price—level uncertainty. The latter risk can be reduced and indeed entirely

eliminated through indexation, and a considerable literature on this issue

already exists.1° We therefore have chosen to ignore this issue in this paper,

focusing exclusively on social security risk and integration. However, there

clearly is an interaction between inflation risk and social security risk and

any full analysis of the issues of integration and indexation would have to

consider the interaction between the two.

        Fourth, we have considered only social security benefits and the risk

associated with them and have ignored social security taxes or contributions.

Clearly, changes in social security benefits in the future imply changes in

social security contributions under the pay—as—you—go funding system currently

in place. In that sense our model is partial eciuilibrium in its analysis of the

changes in risk—sharing between employer and worker. Future research will take

account of the feedback between benefit changes and contribution changes in the

future in assessing the risk profiles resulting from integration.

         Finally, our model and the option pricing methodolo which we have

applied have clear implications for the actuarial methods used to cost
                                      —31—



integrated pension plans. To our knowledge the actuarial profession does not

currently employ this methodolor, and we plan to explore the implications of its

use in a more detailed setting than the one used in this paper.
                                            —32—




                                        Footnotes

           1. See    Schulz arid Leavitt (1983), p. 26. According to the 1980
BankersTrust Survey as many as 81 percent of private defined benefit plans with
pay—related formulas were integrated.
           2. For an explanation of     options    and how they work, see the seminal
paper   by Black and Scholes (1913). For a survey of the options literature and

its application to nontraded assets, see Mason and Merton (198).           Because

social security benefits change over time, while employer—provided benefits in

integrated     plans are linked to the level of social security at the time of
retirement and are not thereafter adjusted, employees might engage in strategic

retirement behavior. For example, it might pay to retire immediately prior to a

large increase in social security benefits, so as to obtain larger private

pension   benefits. This gaming    issue   is   absent from our analysis, because we set

the retirement date exogenously. However, strategic behavior could easily be

incorporated into the    analysis. If   retirement dates are chosen by optimizing

employees, then the implicit option conferred to employees is simply American

rather than European. While closed—form solutions for the values of these

options are generally unavailable, the exercise decision is        well understood and
several   numerical valuation algorithms are available to value such options.

          3.    For a further discussion of the analor between put options and
insurance schemes, see Merton, Scholes, and Gladstein (1982).
          .     The quantitative properties of integrated plans can be sensitive to

the particular stochastic process assumed for S. However, the important
                                           —33—




qualitative     properties of integration are independent of the particular process

postulated. Geometric Brownian motion is the prototype process examined in the

finance literature, and has the benefits of familiarity and simplicity.

          5.     For   a full presentation of the view of defined benefit pension

accruals as a nominal asset see Bulow (1982). For a good discussion of why they

might   best be viewed as real see Cohn and Modigliani (1983).

          6.     If   the uncertainty surrounding the real value of future social

security payments is diversifiable, then a also equals r, and the actual

expected growth rate g is zero. If a exceeds r because of a risk premium

associated with social security uncertainty, then g         a    r > 0 and column (3)

is   interpreted as the "risk—corrected" or "certainty—equivalent"     expected level

of total benefits.
         7. The entries in column () are accurate to $5. Floor levels equal
to column (3) thus result from rounding error. Actual floor levels must be
somewhat less than the corresponding entry in column (3).

          8.     See for example Clark, Allen and Sumner (1983).

           9.    We set the upper limit of the integral in (1)-i) equal to    years.

The value of the sum of the integrand using yearly increments for dt was no

longer increasing noticeably at this point.

          10. See for example Feldstein (1983), Summers (1983), and Bodie and

Pesando (1983).
                                         -3 -



                                      References


          Black, Fischer and Scholes, Myron. 1983. "The Pricing of Options and

Corporate Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy 8i: 637—65)4. May—June.

          Bodie, Zvi and Pesando, James. 1983. "Retirement Annuity design in an

Inflationary    Climate," Chapter 11 in Bodie and Shoven, eds., Financial Aspects
of   the United States Pension System, University of Chicago Press.

          Bulow, Jereor. 1982. "The Effect of Inflation on the Private Pension

System," in Hall, Robert E., ed., Inflation: Causes and Effects,     University   of

Chicago Press, Chapter 5, pp. 123—138.

          Clark,   R.L., Allen, S.G. and Sumner, D.A. 1983. Inflation    and   Pension

Benefits, mimeo,    North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.
          Cohn, Richard A. and Modigliani,    Franco. 1983. "Inflation and
Corporate    Financial Management," Paper presented at the Conference on Recent

Advances in Corporate Finance: Implications for Corporate Financial Management

Practice. NYU Graduate School of Business Administration.

          Constantinides, George. 19T8.      "Market Risk Adjustment in Project
Valuation,"    Journal of Finance 33: 603—616. May.

          Diamond, P. and J. Mirrlees. forthcoming. ITlnsurance Aspects of
Pensions,"    in D.A. Wise (ed.) Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
          Feldstein,   Martin. 1983. "Should Private Pensions Be Indexed?"

Chapter 8 in    Bodie and Shoven, eds., op. cit.
                                        -35-



         Fischer, Stanley. 1918. "Call Option Pricing When the Exercise Price

is Uncertain and the Valuation of Index Bonds," Journal of Finance 33: 169—116.

March.

         Mason, S. and Merton, R.C. 198)4. "The Role of Contingent Claims

Analysis in Corporate Finance," Harvard Business School Working Paper

(February).

         Merton, Robert C. forthcoming. "Implicit Labor Contracts Viewed as

Options: A Discussion of 'Insurance Aspects of Pensions'", in D.A. Wise (ed.)

Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


         _________________   1983a.   "On the Role of Social Security as a Means for

Efficient Risk Sharing in an Econon Where Human Capital Is Not Tradable,"

Chapter 12 in Bodie and Shoven, eds., op. cit.

         ______________      1983b.   "On Consumption Indexed Public Pension

Plans," Chapter 10 in Bodie and Shoven, eds., op. cit.

         Merton, Robert C., Scholes, M. and Gladstein, M. 1982. "The Returns

and Risks of Alternative Put Option Portfolio Investment Strategies," Journal

of Business 55: 1—55.

         Schulz, James H. and Leavit, Thomas D. 1983. Pension Integration:

Concepts,_Issues and_Proposals. Employee Benefit Research Institute,

Washington, D.C.

         Summers, Lawrence. 1983. "Observations on the Indexation of Old Age

Pensions," Chapter 9 in Bodie and Shoven, eds., op. cit.
