                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             IMPACT OF FIRST OCCUPATION ON HEALTH AT OLDER AGES

                                         Jody L. Sindelar
                                          Jason Fletcher
                                           Tracy Falba
                                         Patricia Keenan
                                         William T. Gallo

                                       Working Paper 13715
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13715


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2007




The authors gratefully acknowledge research support from the National Institute on Aging. (Grant
No. R01 AG027045 to Yale). We would like to acknowledge suggestions from seminar participants
at Yale University, CUNY/ NBER/Columbia and Cornell. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jody L. Sindelar, Jason Fletcher, Tracy Falba, Patricia Keenan, and William T. Gallo. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impact of First Occupation on Health at Older Ages
Jody L. Sindelar, Jason Fletcher, Tracy Falba, Patricia Keenan, and William T. Gallo
NBER Working Paper No. 13715
December 2007
JEL No. I1,I12,J14

                                              ABSTRACT

Occupation is discussed as a social determinant of health. Occupation has received little attention in
this light in the economics literature. We examine occupation in a life-course framework and use measures
of first-occupation, initial health, and mother’s education. We contend that first occupation is a choice
made relatively early in life that affects health outcomes at later ages. We examine first-occupation
for two reasons: 1) there is growing evidence that early determinants affect later health and occupation
has received little attention in this regard and 2) first occupation is predetermined in analysis of later
health, which helps to address the issue of potential simultaneity.

Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) we estimate the impact of initial occupation
on two measures of health later in life: respondent-reported fair/poor health and ever suffering a heart
attack. The PSID offers the opportunity to examine a lifecycle perspective as we can examine the impact
of early occupation on later health while controlling for several predetermined conditions such as mother’s
education and health in youth. Estimates suggest that first-occupation has a durable impact on later
health, ceteris paribus, but that the impact varies by health measure and the set of control variables
in regression specifications.

Early choice of occupation could be a critical factor in successful aging and this information may pave
the way to developing more effective workplace and public policies to improve health in older ages.

Jody L. Sindelar                                     Patricia Keenan
Yale School of Public Health                         Yale University School of Medicine
Yale University School of Medicine                   Department of Epidemiology and Public Health
60 College Street, P.O. Box 208034                   Division of Health Policy and Administration
New Haven, CT 06520-8034                             60 College Street, #300C
and NBER                                             New Haven CT 06520
jody.sindelar@yale.edu                               and NBER
                                                     patricia.keenan@yale.edu
Jason Fletcher
Yale University                                      William T. Gallo
School of Public Health                              Epidemiology & Public Health
60 College Street, #303                              P.O. Box 208034, 60 College St.
New Haven, CT 06510                                  New Haven, CT 06520-8034
jason.fletcher@yale.edu                              william.gallo@yale.edu

Tracy Falba
Department of Economics
  and Center for Health Policy
302 Towerview Road
Rubenstein Hall, Box 90253
Durham, NC 27708
tracy.falba@duke.edu
Introduction

        Much of life is spent working. Not only do individuals work many years over their life­
time, they also work many hours per year. Based on the sheer volume of one’s time spent
working, many aspects of an individual’s job have the potential to impact health. The impact of
occupation might be most evident for older individuals, both because of the cumulative effect of
an individual’s occupational commitment over time and because the decline in health occurs
largely at older ages. In an analogous way, education is determined early in life and has been
shown to be a very significant social determinant of health. However, there is evidence that the
impact of education, while still important for older individuals, diminishes over time (Cutler and
Lleras­Muney 2006). This suggests the potential for an increasing role of additional social
determinants of health, such as occupation, as people age.


        We focus on occupation as a key dimension of work since it defines many aspects of
work, and also focus on initial occupational choice as it helps to address issues of simultaneity
between health and occupational choice. Since an individual’s initial occupation is pre­
determined in analysis of later health, the direction of causality is more clearly delineated. A
focus on initial occupation is also warranted as there is increased interest in early determinants
of later health. It is notable that occupation has received little attention in this regard, given that
it is a choice made quite early in life and one with the potential for significant impact on lifetime
health. First­occupation could set in motion a trajectory of interacting labor market and health
outcomes over time that could affect health for years to come. If one’s first occupation is as a
laborer, this could result in accumulated physical deterioration at later ages even given the
possibility for later changes in occupation. Also, initial job characteristics such as a lack of
health insurance when young could have affects on health later. On the other hand, early
occupation as a professional could encourage protective health habits through the influence of
peers in the occupation and might be associated with more generous health insurance
coverage. Even considering the possibility of occupational mobility over time, first occupation
may establish a trajectory that affects health in older ages.


        Using a sample from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) we estimate the
impact of broad categories of occupation on two measures of health: reported fair/poor health
and ever suffering a heart attack. The first is a more comprehensive measure while the second
is a more specific, less subjective measure. The two complement each other. We analyze the
impact of initial occupation on health at older ages while controlling for early conditions.


                                                                                                          3
        Our findings suggest that first­occupation may be an important determinant of later
health, yet one that has received less attention than other socioeconomic measures such as
education and income. The impact of first­occupation varies depending on the health measure
and the covariates used in the specification. Occupation may be a useful construct to examine
as a social determinant of health as it may lead to effective and feasible policy interventions.


Related Literature

        Our study draws on and adds to two lines of research. The first is a growing literature
that traces how conditions early in life affect future health and the other focuses on the role of
social determinants of health. With regard to the first, for instance, the fetal origins literature
posits that fetal conditions can affect the propensity for future health conditions such as heart
disease and diabetes (Barker 1990). Another interesting study of fetal conditions uses the 1918
influenza pandemic as a natural experiment. Those who were in utero during the epidemic had
lower educational attainment, income, and SES and higher rates of physical disability compared
to others (Almond 2006). Moving past fetal origins, other research suggests a relationship
between poor childhood conditions and later health (Wadsworth and Kuh 1997; Currie and
Stabile 2003; Almond 2006).


        The second related literature focuses on the role of social determinants of health such
as education and income, whether determined at birth or otherwise. Economists have explored
education as a key contributor in the production of health since the seminal work by Grossman
(Grossman 1972). A substantial body of research documents a theoretical and empirical
relationship between higher educational attainment and better health (for example, (Grossman
1972; Elo and Preston 1996; Grossman 2005; Lleras­Muney 2005; Cutler and Lleras­Muney
2006; MacInnis 2006). Mechanisms for this effect would be that higher education is correlated
with better health habits (Kenkel 1991), and other production factors. Education is typically
determined relatively early in life, yet has a long­term impact on health. However, as noted
earlier, while the importance of education is durable, its effects diminish for older adults (Smith
1999; Cutler and Lleras­Muney 2006). Other social determinants may play an increasingly
important role as the impact of education declines. We suggest that occupation may be a
determinant whose impact increases over the life span due to its cumulative impact.




                                                                                                      4
        Many studies have also demonstrated a strong positive association between income and
health. A line of study examines the cumulative stress (allostatic load) of low income among
other factors and its impact on health (Seeman, McEwen et al. 2001; Seeman, Singer et al.
2002). Economists are increasingly interested not only the duration over which income affects
health, but also in whether health affects income, or both (Smith 1999; Cutler and Lleras­Muney
2006). In addition, lower socioeconomic status, generally measured as a composite of income
and education, has also been found to result in lower health (Kitagawa and Hauser 1973;
Williams 1998; Rogers, Hummer et al. 2000; Ferrie 2003). Some of the effect of income and
education has been found to occur through their impact on worse health habits, greater stress
and less ability to handle stress (Lantz, House et al. 1998; Gallo, Bradley et al. 2004; Lantz,
House et al. 2005).


        Within the economics field, studies focusing on the role of education and/or income on
health have often ignored occupation or have sometimes controlled for occupation in
regressions of health, but do not study occupation per se.1 One notable exception is a study by
Case and Deaton which finds that people in manual occupations have lower self reported health
status and a greater rate of decline in health status over time (Case and Deaton 2003). Another
article using historical data from the mid­nineteenth century, in contrast, finds a limited effect
using broad occupational characteristics (Ferrie 2001).


        Outside of the economics literature, an influential set of longitudinal studies of British civil
servants examine how occupation affects health (Marmot 1983; Marmot and Smith 1997;
Marmot and Bobak 2000; Marmot 2001). The key finding is that lower occupational status is
associated with worse health, controlling demographics, health habits and income among other
factors. These papers focus on social position, occupational stress, and job control as
mechanisms for this relationship. This set of studies examines various dimensions of health,
including coronary heart disease, self­reported health, morbidity and health related behaviors
(Bosma, Marmot et al. 1997; Kubzansky, Kawachi et al. 1997; Marmot, Bosma et al. 1997;
Stansfeld, Fuhrer et al. 2002; Ferrie, Martikainen et al. 2005). These conclusions were
confirmed in studies of French as well as Japanese government workers (Morikawa,
Martikainen et al. 2004; Sekine, Chandola et al. 2006). This research was conducted primarily in
countries with universal health insurance, thus demonstrating that occupation matters for

1
 For example, in their examination of the relationship between education and health, Cutler and Lleras­Muney
control for occupation in one specification, but do not show the occupation coefficients.


                                                                                                               5
reasons beyond health insurance. That a gradient would be found even among a set of British
(or other) government workers with relatively secure jobs, health insurance coverage and a
relatively narrow set of job types is perhaps surprising, yet reinforces the value of using
occupation as an informative determinant of health.

       A series of studies use PSID data on United States workers and their jobs from 1968 to
1991 to examine the role of job stress and control on subsequent mortality. They find that
cumulative exposure to low control jobs and passive work significantly increases mortality.
These studies extend previous analysis by examining cumulative exposure to job characteristics
and they point to the importance of considering health determinants from a life span approach
(Karasek, Theorell et al. 1988; Amick and Celentano 1991; Karasek 1996; Theorell and Karasek 1996;
Amick, Kawachi et al. 1998).


       This study adds to the literature by focusing on occupation as a social determinant of
health and by focusing on initial occupation. Initial occupation is conceptualized as a choice or
condition that can establish a health trajectory. We take several approaches that begin to
address occupation from a life­span perspective. These include not only focus on first­
occupation, but also controlling for mother’s education and own health status in youth. In
addition, focusing on first­occupation helps to alleviate concerns about the potential for reverse
causality of current health affecting current occupation in older ages.


Conceptual Framework


       Occupation defines much of work. It sums up a variety of characteristics that could affect
health. Direct effects may occur through job characteristics like physical nature of the job (e.g.
manual labor) or adverse physical conditions such as heat and noise. A large literature in
occupational medicine has examined the effects of specific conditions (Rosenstock and Cullen
2005). Similarly, job stress and control may vary systematically with occupation and have been
found to affect health (Amick and Celentano 1991). Occupation may affect health indirectly
through factors such as wages, (which ultimately will be translated into income) that are
correlated with occupation. The existence and generosity of health insurance coverage
associated with the occupation may also affect health. One’s occupation may also define a set
of peers; individuals are often affiliated with other members of their occupation (e.g. through
professional associations or unions), and the health habits and other health related behavior of



                                                                                                     6
peers might affect ones own health habits. Poor health habits, such as smoking, drinking
alcohol, over eating/consumption of high fat and calorie foods, and lack of exercise may be
initiated or exacerbated due to peers’ influence in the occupation. Health habits have important
impacts on health. In addition, occupation confers prestige and relates to socioeconomic status,
which is thought to affect health e.g. (Marmot, Bosma et al. 1997).


       While there are many reasons to believe that occupation may affect health, there may be
a spurious correlation between health and occupation and/or reverse causality. Occupation and
health may both be explained by other factors. For instance, own education, mother’s
education and health while young may all affect both health and occupational choice. Other
factors such as gender and race may also affect both health and occupation. Alternatively,
health may affect occupation and there may be an ongoing feedback mechanism between
health and occupational mobility.


       A life­course perspective on the relationship between occupation and health is useful in
addressing causality. As there are typically fewer health problems for younger adults who are
initially entering the labor force, there may be relatively few cases in which poor health affects
initial occupational choice. Controlling for health before entering the labor market can help
address the potential for reverse causality. As individuals age and their health deteriorates, they
may respond to worsening health by changing jobs or occupations, or by full or partial
withdrawal from the labor market. Health is most likely to affect job selection, occupation and
labor supply in older ages when declines in health may limit abilities and productivity on the job.


We conceptualize initial occupation as a choice or condition can establish a health trajectory
rather early in adulthood yet is relatively free from the impact of health on occupation. Further,
our interest is in the extent to which first occupation has an impact later in life when allowing
later changes to be fully absorbed by first occupation. That is, we are less concerned with the
array of factors that may have been caused by first occupation and are focused instead on the
cumulative impact on future health.


Data and Methods


       PSID. We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), which is a
longitudinal study of a representative sample of U.S. individuals and their families. The PSID


                                                                                                     7
emphasizes the dynamic aspects of economic and demographic behavior, and it contains a
wide range of information, including occupation and health.2


        Starting with a national sample of approximately 4,800 U.S. households in 1968, the
PSID re­interviewed individuals from these households every year until 1997, and every other
year since that time. New households were added as the children of the panel families grew
older and formed their own family units. At the conclusion of the 2001 data collection, the PSID
had collected information spanning as many as 34 years of the lives of some observations.
While the initial response rate in 1968 was somewhat low (76 percent), annual response rates
for follow­up were exceedingly high. These ranged from 88.5 percent in 1969 to between 96.9
and 98.5 percent following. Given the cumulative effect of even small yearly dropout rates,
attention to potential selection bias is always warranted. However, a National Science
Foundation commissioned study found that only a negligible portion of attrition in the PSID is
explained by systematic attrition.


        Sample. Of the 11,481 individuals who were either a head of household or a wife of a
head of household in 2001, we restrict the sample to those who had valid responses to the
health­related questions in 2001, yielding 11,321 individuals. The respondent answered
questions for him/herself and the spouse, and so we control for whether or not the individual
answered the questionnaire. Then, since our focus in on health outcomes that occur after initial
occupation selection, we drop individuals younger than 30 years old, leaving 9,389
observations. Valid racial information is missing for 500 individuals and valid information for first
occupation is missing for 700 individuals, leaving approximately 8,000 observations available for
analysis.


        Variables Table 1 lists the dependent and independent variables that we use in our
analyses. The definitions and derivations of key variables are described below. More
explanation is provided for those variables that are unique to this study and less to the standard
socioeconomic and demographic measures.


                                                Insert Table 1


2
 The PSID is conducted by the Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan,
and has been primarily funded by the National Science Foundation and the National Institute on Aging.



                                                                                                                8
           Health measures. We use two health measures that complement each other so that we
can assess whether the results are robust across different kinds of measures. Poor or fair self­
reported health status (a binary outcome) in 2001 is the primary health outcome. Self­rated
health is frequently used in population based studies and has been found to be a valid indicator
of overall health (Idler and Benyamini 1997; Idler, Russell et al. 2000). Although it is a subjective
measure, it is considered to be quite comprehensive, encompassing multiple domains of health.
Approximately 16% of the analytic sample reported their health to be fair or poor on a standard
five­category scale.


           The second health measure used is ever having a heart attack, (as reported by
individuals in 2001). Heart attacks are likely to have been confirmed by a physician and are
serious events, so the issue of recall is not likely to be problematic. Only 4% of the sample
reports ever having a heart attack. This more specific measure contrasts to the broader
indicator of self­rated overall health.


        First­occupation. We take advantage of the longitudinal nature of the PSID data on
occupation in determining whether early occupation affects later health. In 2001, respondents
answered the question, “Thinking of your first full­time regular job, what kind of work did you
do?” The responses by individuals to this question were categorized into the 1970 Census 3­
digit occupational codes. Partly in order to have a sufficient number of sampled individuals
within each occupational category to perform statistical analysis, we aggregate the occupational
codes into nine broad categories and homemaker. These are listed and explained in Tables 1­
3.3 Those who reported their occupation as homemaker were categorized as such. Those who
reported that they were never employed were eliminated from the sample. These ten broad
occupational categories, including homemaker, are chosen to correspond with basic
occupational categories of interest and to correspond to the categories often found in the labor
literature. Note that in all the regressions, professional is the omitted (referent) occupational
category.


           We calculated a measure of occupational mobility because it is of interest on its own and
to control for the effect of changes in occupation over time. The occupations are listed in Table
1 in order of ‘prestige’ from higher to lower occupational status based on average educational

3
    An appendix table provides further description and examples of occupations within our broad categories.


                                                                                                              9
attainment in the occupation for our sample. In Table 2 we provide information on average
educational attainment by occupation and ranking of occupations based on this measure of
education. The ranking is used in the analysis in calculating occupational mobility. The ranking
is also used in to assess the degree to which there is a health gradient by occupational ranking.
However, we provide the coefficients on occupation so that the reader can use alternative
orderings of occupation in the interpretation. To provide input into alternative rankings, we
provide information on the ranking of occupations by average income of the occupation and a
ranking with income and education equally weighted (both income and education are used in
standard SES measures). The rank of the top five occupations to not change across alternative
ranking criteria and there are only small variations in the rest of the occupations. We calculated
a measure of occupational mobility by comparing the occupational ranking of an individual’s first
job with the occupational ranking of the individual’s last job. Specifically, we calculate the linear
difference between the ranking of an individual’s first occupation and the individual’s last
occupation. If people move down the occupational rankings over time, their mobility measure
would be negative. No­change is the omitted category.


                                               Insert Table 2


       Control variables. Controls for key socioeconomic and demographic variables as well
as, importantly, health early in life and mother’s education are included in the regressions. The
standard demographic variables that we control for are educational attainment, race, marital
status (unmarried), age, age squared, gender, and household size. Indicators regarding whether
the individual is a household head and separately the respondent (as opposed to having the
spouse answer for the individual) are included as well.


       We are able to control for self­reported health before age 16 for each individual (’initial
health’) as well as mother’s education; these are predetermined from the temporal perspective
of current health. Controlling for initial health allows us to control to some extent for the
potential selection into first occupation by health status. In contrast, examination of current
health and current occupation could be simultaneously determined. Similarly use of mother’s
educational attainment helps to control for early conditions.


       Also included are some control variables that can be considered to be determined in part
by occupational characteristics. Health insurance coverage, for instance, can be provided as a



                                                                                                     10
fringe benefit to employees and as such is a job characteristic. The provision and generosity of
health insurance coverage may vary systematically by occupation. But it is also determined in
part by the employee choices regarding uptake and plan selection4. Income can be considered
a job characteristic to some degree. Instead of using a single year measure of income, we take
an average of reported income between 1991 and 1999 to further minimize potential feedback
from health to income. Occupational mobility might also be part job characteristic and part
personal choices and abilities. We also control for smoking, drinking and BMI (the result of
eating and exercise) which have been found to be key determinants of health. These may be
determined in part by occupational characteristics, e.g. habits of peers or working conditions
such as outside or inside work affecting smoking and sedentary or physical work affecting BMI.


          Empirical occupational differences


           Occupations differ with respect to health, as can be seen in Table 3. The percentage of
the occupational category in fair/poor health is lowest in those occupations with higher
education. There appears to be evidence of an educational gradient by SES for self­rated
health; lower education is associated with lower self­rated health. The only exception to the
ranking is that those in the services have a slightly higher percentage in poor health (19) as
compared to laborers (17). There are relatively large percentage (but small absolute)
differences in the percentage of individuals within an occupation that have ever had a heart
attack. These range from a low of 2 for professional to a high of 6 for laborers operatives and
farmers.


       These comparisons in health measures across occupation are based on means from raw
data. As such, it would be misleading to attribute all the difference to occupation. As can be
seen in Table 3, there are differences by first­occupation in socioeconomic and demographic
variables as well. For example, only 15% of clerical workers are male, while 88% and 78% of
farmers and laborers are male. Income and education obviously vary by occupation. While the
mean age for the sample is almost 49 years old, average for farmers is 57 and it is 59 for
homemakers. The systematic differences by occupation in these measures demonstrate the
need to control for a variety of characteristics in regressions in order to obtain a cleaner
estimate of the impact of occupation on health.


4
    A worker may decide to get insurance on his spouse’s employer’s plan instead of his own.


                                                                                                  11
                                                   Insert Table 3


        Estimation Method


        In order to examine the long­term association between first occupation and health at
older ages, we specify the following regression.
                                            K
         healthit = bX i + fYi 0 + qZ it + å d k Occi 0 + e it                                   (1)
                                            k =1




where health of individual i at time t is assumed to be a function of a vector of individual time
invariant characteristics ( X ) such as race, gender and age and early conditions (Y) which are
predetermined at later ages. The latter include education attainment, mother’s education and
early health endowment of person which is measured as the self­reported health status from
birth to age 16. Z it represents those characteristics that are determined in part by occupation

and in part by personal behavior and can vary over time, e.g. income, health insurance, health
habits and occupational mobility. The set of dummy variables indicating each individual’s first
occupation (occupation at time zero­ Occi 0 ) are the focus of this study5.


        As indicated above, the two health outcomes, both binary, are: an indicator of fair or
poor reported health status and a variable indicating whether an individual has ever had a heart
attack. Because our outcome variables are binary, we use logistic regression analysis. Logit
regression odds ratios are presented. We use robust standard errors clustered at the household
level as we have observations of husband/wife pairs from the same household. This allows the
errors to be arbitrarily correlated within households.


Results


    Regression results


    Results from regressions are reported separately for each fair/poor health and heart attack.
Our approach for each set of regressions is to first display the results including only a set of


5
  As noted above, the occupational categories are created by aggregating 1970 Census 3­digit occupational codes
into ten (nine occupations plus homemaker) mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories.


                                                                                                                  12
basic socio­economic and demographic variables (Column 1). The following specification,
(Column 2), adds mother’s education and early health in order to isolate their impact on first
occupation. Although it is more typically used in studies of children’s health, mother’s education
has been shown to have an important impact on children in a number of ways (Case, Lubotsky
et al. 2002), many of which may also affect future health. Initial health is entered with mother’s
education as another key measure of childhood (predetermined) conditions. Column 2 is our
preferred specification.
   In the third column, results are displayed for regressions including time­varying measures
representing factors that may be related to job characteristics. This specification controls for
some key current characteristics that may link to health. However, it may over control since it is
first occupation that sets in motion a set of future outcomes and choices. Our intent is to capture
the cumulative impact of initial occupation. Income, health insurance and occupational mobility
are plausibly determined in part by occupation. Health habits may be determined in part by
peers in the occupation as well as by job conditions, (e.g. physical work and BMI or smoking
and outdoor work). Examination of the coefficients on first occupation across specifications
indicates how sensitive the coefficients on occupation are to inclusion of covariates, some of
which represent factors that are in part determined by occupation. Of particular interest is the
second column is it provides an estimate of the full impact of occupation (direct and indirect)
when controlling for key predetermined and exogenous variables.


       Fair/poor self­rated health


       In the basic regressions that include only dummies on first occupation and demographic
controls, all of the occupational dummies are significant at the 1% level or higher with the
exception of managerial which is significant at the 10% level. (See Table 4 column 1). All of the
occupations are significantly more likely to be in fair/poor health than the professional category,
the omitted category. There is some evidence of an occupation gradient, with lower average
educational attainment occupations being more likely to be in poor/fair health. Homemakers are
the exception; their health is better than would be expected by the average education of the
occupation. The coefficients on the occupational dummies range from 1.57 for managers to 3.46
for farmers when controlling for basic demographics, but not education. The signs of the
coefficients on age, age squared, white and unmarried are significant and of the expected sign.
Somewhat surprisingly, male is not significant. Head of household and household size are also
insignificant. Whether health is reported by the respondent or by the spouse is significant with



                                                                                                   13
interviewees having somewhat worse health. Note the coefficients and levels of significance of
these control variables are fairly stable across the three specifications for these variables.


         The inclusion of own education, mother’s education and initial health reduces the
magnitude of the occupation coefficients as well as the significance levels (Table 4, column 2).
The coefficients on all of the white­collar (manager, sales, clerical) jobs become insignificant.
Craft, service, laborer, operative and farmer remain significant (but a few are reduced in
significance level) with the magnitude of the coefficients reduced in size. Own education,
mother’s education and initial health are all highly significant and of the expected sign. This
suggests that part of the differences in health across occupations, especially for white­collar
jobs, are explained by systematic differences in own education and initial conditions (mother’s
education and initial health) by occupation. This specification is the focus of this paper as it
controls for relevant time­invariant factors and produces an estimate of the full effect of first
occupation on later health.


                                                  Insert Table 4


         We control for additional time­varying factors that could affect health. These are included
as an alternative specification, to contrast with the cumulative impact estimated in the second
specification. When variables that are in part job conditions (e.g. income, health insurance) and
also health habits are included in regressions, only laborer, operative and farmer have
significant coefficients. The magnitude and the significance of both of these are reduced in this
third specification (column 3). There is little evidence in this specification of an education/health
gradient. Income, mobility, and heath habits of those in the occupation are all significant
covariates. Health insurance coverage is not significant nor are the two mobility measures. The
variable that indicates that the last occupation is unknown is significant and is associated with
an increase in the likelihood of being in poor health.6 Health habits are all significant and of the
predicted direction.


         Heart attacks.


         6
           It may be that those for whom we cannot identify last occupation may be more likely to have health
problems and disabilities that have drawn them out of the labor force for a long time, but we cannot determine the
cause of this significant effect.



                                                                                                                     14
       Occupation displays a somewhat different pattern in its impact on ever having a heart
attack as compared to self­rated overall health. In regressions of heart attacks, fewer
occupations are significant in the basic specification. In column 1 of Table 5, five occupations
are significantly different from professional (sales, clerical, crafts, service, laborer and
operatives). The coefficients on these variables do not line up in support of a gradient. In
column 2, the magnitude and significance of the coefficients on the five occupations decline and
only services, laborer and operatives are significant at standard levels and there is no evidence
of a gradient. In the last column including the full set of controls, only service remains
significantly different from professional in the impact of first occupation on heart attack.


                                            Insert Table 5


       There are some differences in the significance and magnitude of control variables in the
regressions of heart attacks as compared to the self­rated health results. In estimates with heart
attack as the outcome, male gender and being a family head are significant but were
insignificant in self­rated health. White and ‘respondent’ are not significant as they were in self­
rated health fair/poor health. Perhaps surprisingly, mother’s education and initial health are also
not significantly associated with heart attacks, although they are all significant predictors of
fair/poor reported health. Also, the magnitude of the coefficient on age is larger in heart attack
regressions. Health insurance is significant and appears to increase the risk of heart attack. It
may be more likely that those who have suffered a heart attack in the past have then signed up
for health insurance coverage, suggesting why column 2 is our preferred specification.
       Because heart attacks tend to occur at older ages, we conduct sensitivity analyses and
estimate the same set of regressions using heart attack as the dependent variable but use the
sample of those over 50 years old. This reduces the sample size to 3,120 observations. Results
are almost the same across the two samples and almost the only difference is that now all of the
occupational coefficients that were significant in column 2 retain their significance at standard
levels in column 3 as well, but at lower levels as compared to column 2. The magnitudes of the
coefficients on the occupational dummies are similar across the two age samples.


                                            Insert Table 6


       Strengths and Limitations




                                                                                                     15
        The life course perspective on occupation and health is the strength of this paper. We
approach occupation as an early choice that sets in motion a trajectory that affects later health.
Focusing on initial occupation allows us to estimate the significance of this decision for later
health. Also, we control for initial health, an important factor rarely available in data sets for
older workers. Inclusion of mother’s education also helps to control for childhood socioeconomic
status. Importantly, we are able to address the problems that would be associated with
estimating the impact of occupation on health had both occupation and health been measured
concurrently.


        As in any study, there are, however, limitations. One issue is the choice of occupational
categories. The set of occupations used in our analyses corresponds to the basic categories in
government documents, extant literature, and common usage. A rather small set of occupations
is needed for practical purposes and conforms to our broad conceptualization of occupation.
However, there is likely heterogeneity within occupation. The optimal number and size of the
categories to assess the relationship between occupation and health have not been established.
Self­selection into occupation and the simultaneous determination of health and occupation
could also be of potential concern. However, we have been able to at least partially address this
by focusing on first occupation and later health and by controlling for childhood health. By
controlling for childhood health, we are able to account for health status at the time individuals
make initial occupational decisions.


        There are also a number of limitations that are typical in estimating health production
functions using a large population based data set. These include the potential for omitted
variables and concerns about the use of self­reported health data. However, we include a rich
set of covariates including information on childhood conditions as well as characteristics in
adulthood that help to address concern about omitted variables. With regard to self­rated health,
it has been shown to be a reliable, valid measure of health that has been associated with both
functional decline and mortality (Idler and Benyamini 1997; Idler, Russell et al. 2000). The
seriousness of heart attacks is further insurance against biased reporting. Furthermore, the
PSID is a highly regarded for the quality of its data collection effort.




                                                                                                     16
Discussion


       We find that first­occupation has a significant impact on health later in life. This holds for
both health measures studied, although to varying degrees. The finding and focus on the
durable impact of first­occupation on health in older ages is the first that we know of in the
literature. While the impact of first­occupation is reduced in magnitude and significance when
controlling for a variety of factors, a number of occupations remain significantly associated with
the two health measures even after including controls demographic and potential occupation
related factors. This lasting impact is in consort with a growing body of literature documenting
the importance of early conditions and choices on health later in life. Initial health and mother’s
education are also significant in self­rated health suggesting that these childhood circumstances
too have a durable impact on health. It is worth noting however, that these two variables are
insignificant in estimates of heart attack.


       This study contributes evidence to the literature on an education and SES (education
and income) gradient in health. Use of first­occupation extends the concept of a gradient to the
influence of early outcomes or choices on later health. When examining fair/poor health, we find
this gradient using raw means, indicating that occupations with the lowest average educational
attainment have the worst health. However, when controlling for other factors, the gradient
becomes less obvious and devolves to more of a white­collar jobs versus blue­collar distinction
as most white­collar jobs are insignificantly different from the category of professional. There is
less (little to modest) evidence of such a gradient for heart attacks and first–occupation,
although a greater risk of heart attack occurs among several blue collar occupations (service,
laborer operative) as compared to professionals, especially when using the full set of controls.


         That early occupation affects later health suggests that the roots of successful aging
might rest in part in a good first occupation. This information may pave the way to developing
more effective workplace and public policies to improve health. The advice to simply select a
good job is neither helpful nor realistic (although it is a good idea). Government currently
subsidizes higher education and this is one route to improving occupational outcomes.
Investment in education would be warranted not only due to the direct improvement in health
and occupation, but also through its indirect effect on health via initial occupation. Government
could develop other mechanisms based on the importance of early occupation, e.g. provide
data on health aspects of occupations. Such information could help young people who may be


                                                                                                   17
setting on a path of health as well as an income trajectory by choosing the amount of education
they pursue and their first occupation. Information on income differences are wide­spread while
in contrast, there is little to no information on the impact of one’s first job on future health.
Information on the intertwining dynamics of occupation and health over the life span could be
generated and disseminated. This information could also be useful to employers, unions and
professional organizations interested in designing programs to improve the health of their long­
term workers or members. Occupations, or firms, that score well on health impact might seek to
provide this information as a method of attracting workers interested in maintaining their own
health. Those that do not score well could seek ways to improve.


        Occupation may be a useful construct as a determinant of health and the workplace
might be a powerful instrument for change as most individuals work. Remediation may be
pertinent to particular occupations and occupational associations e.g., unions and professional
organizations, and thus may serve as a vehicle for promoting or improving health. Occupational
affinity could be used to increase good health habits of peers in occupations. Many firms and
unions currently initiate these activities, e.g., EAPs are designed to improve health and health
habits and the National Business Group on Health shares wellness information and
implementation strategies to employers (Center for Prevention and Health Services, (
http://www.businessgrouphealth.org/services/4_Part_Guide.pdf).   Policies implemented in the workplace
may also have reflection effects on non­workers (e.g. spouses and children of workers), and
establish standards of behavior that influence other workers (Falba and Sindelar 2007).


        In summary, early choice of occupation could be a critical factor in successful aging and
this information may pave the way to developing more effective workplace and public policies to
improve health in older ages. We focus on occupation in a life­course framework and use
measures of first­occupation, initial health, mother’s education and occupational mobility from
first to last occupation to help to specify aspects of life course determinants of health. Our life­
cycle view of occupation gives a different perspective on the importance of occupation as a
determinate of health. This focus paves the way for further scrutiny of occupation and health
over the life­course and also for innovative policies to improve health later in life.




                                                                                                         18
References


Almond, D. (2006). "Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long­Term Effects of In Utero
        Influenza Exposure in the Post­1940 U.S. Population" Journal of Political Economy
        114(4): 672­712.
Almond, D. (2006). "Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long­term Effects of In Utero
        Influenza Exposure in the Post­1940 U.S. Population." Journal of Political Economy
        114(4): 672­712.
Amick, B. C., 3rd and D. D. Celentano (1991). "Structural determinants of the psychosocial
        work environment: introducing technology in the work stress framework." Ergonomics
        34(5): 625­46.
Amick, B. C., 3rd, I. Kawachi, et al. (1998). "Relationship of job strain and iso­strain to health
        status in a cohort of women in the United States." Scand J Work Environ Health 24(1):
        54­61.
Barker, D. J. (1990). "The fetal and infant origins of adult disease." BMJ 301(6761): 1111.
Bosma, H., M. G. Marmot, et al. (1997). "Low job control and risk of coronary heart disease in
        Whitehall II (prospective cohort) study." Bmj 314(7080): 558­65.
Case, A. and A. Deaton (2003). "Broken Down by Work and Sex: How Our Health Declines."
        NBER Working Paper: No. 9821.
Case, A., D. Lubotsky, et al. (2002). "Economic status and health in childhood: The origins of
        the gradient." American Economic Review 92(5): 1308­1334.
Currie, J. and M. Stabile (2003). "Socioeconomic status and child health: Why is the relationship
        stronger for older children?" American Economic Review 93(5): 1813­1823.
Cutler, D. M. and A. Lleras­Muney (2006). "Education and Health: Evaluating Theories and
        Evidence." NBER Working Paper No. 12352.
Elo, I. T. and S. H. Preston (1996). "Educational differentials in mortality: United States, 1979­
        85." Soc Sci Med 42(1): 47­57.
Falba, T. A. and J. L. Sindelar (2007). "Spousal Concordance in Health Behavior Change."
        Health Services Research online early edition.
Ferrie, J. E., P. Martikainen, et al. (2005). "Self­reported economic difficulties and coronary
        events in men: evidence from the Whitehall II study." International Journal of
        Epidemiology 34(3): 640­8.
Ferrie, J. P. (2001). The Poor and the Dead: Socioeconomic Status and Mortality in the US,
        1850­1860, NBER.
Ferrie, J. P. (2003). The rich and the dead: Socioeconomic status and mortality in the United
        States, 1850­1860. Health and labor force participation over the life cycle : evidence from
        the past D. L. Costa, University of Chicago Press.
Gallo, W. T., E. H. Bradley, et al. (2004). "Involuntary job loss as a risk factor for subsequent
        myocardial infarction and stroke: findings from the Health and Retirement Survey." Am J
        Ind Med 45(5): 408­16.
Grossman, M. (1972). "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health." Journal
        of Political Economy 80(2): 223­255.
Grossman, M. (2005). "Education and Nonmarket Outcomes." NBER Working Paper No. 11582
        August 2005.



                                                                                                19
Idler, E. L. and Y. Benyamini (1997). "Self­rated health and mortality: a review of twenty­seven
        community studies." J Health Soc Behav 38(1): 21­37.
Idler, E. L., L. B. Russell, et al. (2000). "Survival, functional limitations, and self­rated health in
        the NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow­up Study, 1992. First National Health and
        Nutrition Examination Survey." Am J Epidemiol 152(9): 874­83.
Karasek, R. (1996). "Job strain and the prevalence and outcome of coronary artery disease."
        Circulation 94(5): 1140­1.
Karasek, R. A., T. Theorell, et al. (1988). "Job characteristics in relation to the prevalence of
        myocardial infarction in the US Health Examination Survey (HES) and the Health and
        Nutrition Examination Survey (HANES)." Am J Public Health 78(8): 910­8.
Kenkel, D. S. (1991). "Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling." Journal of Political
        Economy 99(2): 287­305.
Kitagawa, E. M. and P. M. Hauser (1973). Differential mortality in the United States : a study in
        socioeconomic epidemiology / Evelyn M. Kitagawa and Philip M. Hauser, Harvard
        University Press.
Kubzansky, L. D., I. Kawachi, et al. (1997). "Is worrying bad for your heart? A prospective
        study of worry and coronary heart disease in the Normative Aging Study." Circulation
        95(4): 818­24.
Lantz, P. M., J. S. House, et al. (1998). "Socioeconomic factors, health behaviors, and mortality:
        results from a nationally representative prospective study of US adults." Jama 279(21):
        1703­8.
Lantz, P. M., J. S. House, et al. (2005). "Stress, life events, and socioeconomic disparities in
        health: results from the Americans' Changing Lives Study." Journal of Health & Social
        Behavior 46(3): 274­88.
Lleras­Muney, A. (2005). "The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the
        United States." Review of Economic Studies 72(1): 189­221.
MacInnis, B. (2006). Does College Education Impact Health? Evidence From the Pre­Lottery
        Vietnam Draft, Mimeo, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, UC
        Berkeley.
Marmot, M. (2001). "Income Inequality, Social Environment, and Inequalities in Health."
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 20(1): 156­59.
Marmot, M. and M. Bobak (2000). Psychosocial and Biological Mechanisms behind the Recent
        Mortality Crisis in Central and Eastern Europe. The mortality crisis in transitional
        economies. G. A. Cornia and R. Paniccia. UNU/WIDER Studies in Development
        Economics. Oxford and New York, Oxford University Press: 127­48.
Marmot, M. G. (1983). "Stress, Social and Cultural Variations in Heart Disease."
Marmot, M. G., H. Bosma, et al. (1997). "Contribution of job control and other risk factors to
        social variations in coronary heart disease incidence." Lancet 350(9073): 235­9.
Marmot, M. G. and G. D. Smith (1997). "Socio­Economic Differentials in Health: The
        Contribution of the Whitehall Studies." Journal of Health Psychology 2(3): 283­296.
Morikawa, Y., P. Martikainen, et al. (2004). "A comparison of socio­economic differences in
        long­term sickness absence in a Japanese cohort and a British cohort of employed men."
        Eur J Public Health 14(4): 413­6.
Rogers, R. G., R. A. Hummer, et al. (2000). Living and dying in the USA : behavioral, health,
        and social differentials of adult mortality / Richard G. Rogers, Robert A. Hummer,
        Charles B. Nam, Academic Press.



                                                                                                     20
Rosenstock, L. and M. R. Cullen (2005). Textbook of clinical occupational and environmental
       medicine Saunders.
Seeman, T. E., B. S. McEwen, et al. (2001). "Allostatic load as a marker of cumulative biological
       risk: MacArthur studies of successful aging." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98(8): 4770­5.
Seeman, T. E., B. H. Singer, et al. (2002). "Social relationships, gender, and allostatic load
       across two age cohorts." Psychosom Med 64(3): 395­406.
Sekine, M., T. Chandola, et al. (2006). "Socioeconomic inequalities in physical and mental
       functioning of Japanese civil servants: explanations from work and family
       characteristics." Soc Sci Med 63(2): 430­45.
Smith, J. P. (1999). "Health Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between Health and
       Economics Status." Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2): 145­66.
Stansfeld, S. A., R. Fuhrer, et al. (2002). "Psychological distress as a risk factor for coronary
       heart disease in the Whitehall II Study." Int J Epidemiol 31(1): 248­55.
Theorell, T. and R. A. Karasek (1996). "Current issues relating to psychosocial job strain and
       cardiovascular disease research." J Occup Health Psychol 1(1): 9­26.
Wadsworth, M. E. J. and D. J. L. Kuh (1997). "Childhood influences on adult health: A review
       of recent work from the British 1946 national birth cohort study, the MRC National
       Survey of Health and Development." Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 11(1): 2­20.
Williams, R. B. (1998). "Lower socioeconomic status and increased mortality: early childhood
       roots and the potential for successful interventions." JAMA 279(21): 1745­6.




                                                                                              21
Table 1: Means, standard deviations and range of dependent and independent variables

                                                             Std.
       Variable                               Obs    Mean    Dev     Min   Max
       Independent variables
         Heart Attack (Ever) (0/1)            7990    0.04    0.20     0     1
         Fair/Poor Health Status (0/1)        7990    0.16    0.36     0     1
       Dependent variables
         Professional (First Occupation)      7990    0.14    0.35     0     1
         Manager (First Occupation)           7990    0.03    0.17     0     1
         Sales (First Occupation)             7990    0.06    0.25     0     1
         Clerical (First Occupation)          7990    0.21    0.41     0     1
         Craftsman (First Occupation)         7990    0.10    0.30     0     1
         Services (First Occupation)          7990    0.17    0.38     0     1
         Laborer (First Occupation)           7990    0.08    0.27     0     1
         Operative (First Occupation)         7990    0.16    0.37     0     1
         Farmer (First Occupation)            7990    0.03    0.18     0     1
         Homemaker (First Occupation)         7990    0.01    0.10     0     1
         Missing Parental Information         7990    0.13    0.34     0     1
         Missing Education                    7990    0.08    0.28     0     1
         Income ($10,000s­ ave. of 5 waves)   7990    5.08    4.24     0    67
         Health Insurance (0/1)               7990    0.95    0.22     0     1
         Upward Mobility                      7990    0.42    0.49     0     1
         Downward Mobility                    7990    0.19    0.39     0     1
         Last occupation unknown              7990    0.09    0.29     0     1
         Smoke Now                            7990    0.21    0.41     0     1
         Ever Smoke                           7990    0.26    0.44     0     1
         Drink Alcohol                        7990    0.58    0.49     0     1
         Obese                                7990    0.24    0.42     0     1




                                                                                       22
Table 2: Occupations ranked by mean education of each occupation *

                                                           Combined
                  Education   Rank     Income    Rank        Rank
   Professional     15.71      1         7.66     1            1
   Manager          14.31      2         7.04     2            2
   Sales            13.83      3         5.93     3            3
   Clerical         13.45      4         5.31     4            4
   Craftsman        13.03      5         5.07     5            5
   Service          12.68      6         3.91     9            7.5
   Laborer          12.64      7         4.50     6            6.5
   Operative        12.22      8         3.98     9            8.5
   Farmer           11.36      9         4.12     7            8
   Homemaker        10.50      10        2.06     10          10

    * For comparison, alternative rankings provided by income (averaged
      over five waves) and by income and education equally weighted.




                                                                          23
                                          Table 3: Means by occupation and for all

                                Profes­                                                                                   Home­
Variable                All     sional      Manager    Sales   Clerical   Crafts   Service   Labor   Operative   Farmer   maker
Poor Health (%)          0.16       0.08        0.10    0.10      0.14      0.14      0.19    0.17        0.22     0.29     0.33
Heart Attack (%)         0.04       0.02        0.03    0.03      0.03      0.05      0.04    0.06        0.06     0.06     0.05
Males (%)                0.48       0.43        0.61    0.44      0.15      0.91      0.32    0.90        0.58     0.80     0.05
Age (yrs.)              48.81      49.47       47.08   47.10     48.92     49.10     46.27   47.34       50.18    57.18    59.02
White (%)                0.70       0.86        0.85    0.79      0.71      0.77      0.54    0.69        0.62     0.67     0.35
Non­Whites (%)           0.30       0.14        0.15    0.21      0.29      0.23      0.46    0.31        0.38     0.33     0.65
Unmarried (%)            0.29       0.20        0.22    0.24      0.34      0.19      0.38    0.25        0.31     0.28     0.66
Household Size           2.91       2.91        3.10    2.86      2.84      2.92      3.04    2.97        2.87     2.68     2.60
Head of Household
(%)                      0.64       0.62        0.58    0.63      0.69      0.58      0.71    0.59        0.64     0.58     0.80
Education (yrs.)        13.27      15.71       14.34   13.83     13.44     13.00     12.66   12.62       12.18    11.37    10.64
Initial Health Status    4.25       4.41        4.46    4.34      4.27      4.32      4.11    4.25        4.16     4.22     3.97
Maternal Education      11.77      12.91       12.56   12.27     11.91     11.67     11.47   11.58       11.02    10.61    10.37
Missing Parental
Information              0.13       0.13        0.06    0.10      0.10      0.13      0.13    0.13        0.15     0.19     0.28
Missing Education        0.08       0.05        0.09    0.05      0.05      0.07      0.07    0.07        0.07     0.04     0.01
Income ($1,000s)         5.08       7.58        7.08    5.90      5.28      5.03      3.87    4.46        3.92     4.07     2.13
Health Insurance         0.95       0.99        0.98    0.97      0.97      0.94      0.92    0.93        0.93     0.94     0.84
Upward                   0.42       0.00        0.15    0.40      0.36      0.40      0.47    0.64        0.57     0.59     0.47
Downward                 0.19       0.33        0.35    0.34      0.16      0.21      0.13    0.18        0.02     0.01     0.00
Last occupation
unknown                  0.09       0.13        0.14    0.12      0.17      0.11      0.16    0.12        0.19     0.26     0.49
Smoke (%)                0.21       0.09        0.15    0.17      0.19      0.24      0.26    0.31        0.25     0.20     0.18
Ever Smoked (%)          0.26       0.24        0.24    0.28      0.23      0.31      0.25    0.28        0.29     0.30     0.22
Drink (%)                0.58       0.68        0.67    0.63      0.56      0.67      0.52    0.62        0.52     0.47     0.24
Obese                    0.24       0.13        0.13    0.21      0.22      0.26      0.30    0.26        0.31     0.28     0.41




                                                                                                                              24
   Table 4: Odds ratios from Logit regressions of fair/poor
         health on occupation and control variables

                           Poor                        Poor
Outcome                   Health     Poor Health      Health
 Method                   Logit         Logit         Logit
 Sample                  Age>30        Age>30        Age>30
Manager                   1.566*        1.250         1.253
                         (0.380)       (0.298)       (0.306)
Sales                    1.619***       1.125         1.003
                         (0.298)       (0.211)       (0.190)
Clerical                 1.698***       1.193         1.128
                         (0.240)       (0.171)       (0.166)
Crafts                   2.325***       1.358*        1.198
                         (0.366)       (0.224)       (0.207)
Service                  2.672***      1.480***       1.268
                         (0.375)       (0.215)       (0.194)
Laborer                  2.949***      1.605***       1.356*
                         (0.521)       (0.276)       (0.249)
Operatives               3.250***      1.683***      1.438**
                         (0.492)       (0.257)       (0.235)
Farmer                   3.461***      1.618**       1.591**
                         (0.693)       (0.331)       (0.342)
Homemaker                2.436***       1.078         0.871
                         (0.764)       (0.347)       (0.284)
Male                      0.883         0.985         1.056
                         (0.115)       (0.123)       (0.131)
Age                      1.090***      1.090***      1.111***
                         (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.021)
Age Squared              1.000**       1.000**       0.999***
                         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
White                    0.475***      0.580***      0.689***
                         (0.038)       (0.048)       (0.059)
Unmarried                1.295**        1.246*        1.066
                         (0.163)       (0.157)       (0.137)
Household Size            0.962         0.972         0.958
                         (0.031)       (0.033)       (0.032)
Head of Household         0.829         0.842         0.794*
                         (0.115)       (0.117)       (0.111)
Interview Respondent     0.875**        0.944         0.876*
                         (0.055)       (0.063)       (0.061)
Education Level                        0.869***      0.934***
                                       (0.018)       (0.019)
Maternal Education                     0.940***      0.957***
                                       (0.014)       (0.015)
Initial Health Level                   0.666***      0.686***
                                       (0.030)       (0.035)
Missing Parent
Information                            1.255**       1.269**
                                       (0.118)       (0.119)



                                                                25
                                  Poor                    Poor
Outcome                          Health   Poor Health    Health
Missing Education                           1.343**      1.250*
                                            (0.157)     (0.148)
Income Level                                            0.912***
                                                        (0.019)
Health Insurance                                         1.125
                                                        (0.183)
Upward Mobility                                          1.024
                                                        (0.098)
Downward Mobility                                        1.165
                                                        (0.123)
Last occupation unknown                                 2.019***
                                                        (0.240)
Smoke Now                                               1.811***
                                                        (0.170)
Ever Smoke                                              1.638***
                                                        (0.134)
Drink                                                   0.647***
                                                        (0.051)
Obese                                                   2.193***
                                                        (0.184)
Observations                     7990        7990         7990
Robust p values in parentheses
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%




                                                                   26
Table 5: Odds ratios from Logit regressions of ever have a
    heart attack on occupation and control variables

                           Heart      Heart      Heart
       Outcome             Attack     Attack     Attack
  Method                   Logit      Logit      Logit
  Sample                  Age>30     Age>30     Age>30
 Manager                   1.507      1.371      1.412
                          (0.681)    (0.619)    (0.672)
 Sales                     1.868*     1.517      1.354
                          (0.643)    (0.540)    (0.497)
 Clerical                 1.888**     1.551      1.433
                          (0.546)    (0.461)    (0.443)
 Crafts                   2.068**     1.534      1.410
                          (0.588)    (0.460)    (0.440)
 Service                  3.143***   2.266***   1.989**
                          (0.860)    (0.649)    (0.612)
 Laborer                  2.810***   1.949**     1.696
                          (0.840)    (0.620)    (0.593)
 Operatives               2.882***   1.949**     1.690
                          (0.790)    (0.584)    (0.562)
 Farmer                    1.495      0.944      0.894
                          (0.586)    (0.394)    (0.412)
 Homemaker                 1.562      1.006      0.904
                          (0.927)    (0.607)    (0.548)
 Male                     1.916***   2.028***   2.010***
                          (0.438)    (0.464)    (0.440)
 Age                      1.405***   1.394***   1.384***
                          (0.064)    (0.063)    (0.064)
 Age Squared              0.998***   0.998***   0.998***
                          (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 White                     0.964      1.089      1.146
                          (0.138)    (0.167)    (0.174)
 Unmarried                 0.963      0.928      0.885
                          (0.179)    (0.173)    (0.167)
 Household Size            1.091*     1.094*     1.090*
                          (0.054)    (0.055)    (0.055)
 Head of Household         1.553      1.575      1.553
                          (0.456)    (0.463)    (0.451)
 Interview Respondent      1.129      1.177      1.136
                          (0.145)    (0.153)    (0.150)
 Education Level                     0.925***    0.948*
                                     (0.025)    (0.027)
 Maternal Education                   0.958      0.966
                                     (0.025)    (0.025)
 Initial Health Level                 0.918      0.937
                                     (0.065)    (0.066)
 Missing Parent
 Information                          1.040      1.054
                                     (0.181)    (0.186)



                                                             27
                                 Heart     Heart     Heart
        Outcome                  Attack   Attack     Attack
Missing Education                          0.791     0.754
                                          (0.216)   (0.213)
Income Level                                         0.991
                                                    (0.026)
Health Insurance                                     2.014*
                                                    (0.775)
Upward Mobility                                      1.210
                                                    (0.219)
Downward Mobility                                    1.212
                                                    (0.239)
Last occupation unknown                             1.776***
                                                    (0.357)
Smoke Now                                           1.649***
                                                    (0.299)
Ever Smoke                                          1.459***
                                                    (0.203)
Drink                                                0.784*
                                                    (0.101)
Obese                                               1.725***
                                                    (0.227)
Observations                     7990      7990       7990
Robust p values in parentheses
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%




                                                               28
Table 6: Odds ratios from Logit regressions of ever have a heart attack on occupation
          and control variables for the sample over 50 years old and older
                            (odds ratios and t statistics)

                                         Heart                     Heart
                   Outcome               Attack    Heart Attack    Attack
            Method                       Logit        Logit        Logit
            Sample                      Age>50       Age>50       Age>50
           Manager                       1.547        1.451        1.524
                                        (0.761)      (0.715)      (0.787)
           Sales                         1.926*       1.580        1.456
                                        (0.721)      (0.611)      (0.577)
           Clerical                     1.961**       1.640        1.560
                                        (0.599)      (0.517)      (0.507)
           Crafts                        1.834*       1.406        1.334
                                        (0.581)      (0.472)      (0.463)
           Service                      3.099***     2.304***     2.095**
                                        (0.930)      (0.721)      (0.695)
           Laborer                      3.068***     2.192**       1.987*
                                        (1.016)      (0.775)      (0.766)
           Operatives                   2.855***     1.998**       1.816*
                                        (0.858)      (0.659)      (0.650)
           Farmer                        1.485        0.977        0.981
                                        (0.621)      (0.440)      (0.482)
           Homemaker                     1.270        0.853        0.774
                                        (0.847)      (0.570)      (0.526)
           Male                         2.192***     2.303***     2.290***
                                        (0.502)      (0.529)      (0.520)
           Age                          1.517***     1.478***     1.482***
                                        (0.130)      (0.127)      (0.130)
           Age Squared                  0.997***     0.998***     0.997***
                                        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
           White                         1.021        1.133        1.180
                                        (0.166)      (0.195)      (0.201)
           Unmarried                     1.051        1.011        0.948
                                        (0.202)      (0.196)      (0.187)
           Household Size                1.052        1.053        1.048
                                        (0.066)      (0.067)      (0.068)
           Head of Household             1.475        1.491        1.479
                                        (0.445)      (0.454)      (0.452)
           Interview Respondent          1.129        1.175        1.156
                                        (0.158)      (0.166)      (0.166)
           Education Level                           0.931**       0.956
                                                     (0.027)      (0.029)
           Maternal Education                         0.965        0.974
                                                     (0.028)      (0.028)
           Initial Health Level                       0.939        0.962
                                                     (0.075)      (0.075)
           Missing Parent Information                 0.994        0.997
                                                     (0.186)      (0.190)



                                                                                        29
                                 Heart                    Heart
         Outcome                 Attack   Heart Attack    Attack
Missing Education                            0.752        0.703
                                            (0.234)      (0.230)
Income Level                                              1.001
                                                         (0.024)
Health Insurance                                          1.575
                                                         (0.684)
Upward Mobility                                           1.201
                                                         (0.246)
Downward Mobility                                         1.270
                                                         (0.290)
Last Occupation Unknown                                  1.767***
                                                         (0.370)
Smoke Now                                                1.891***
                                                         (0.375)
Ever Smoke                                               1.377**
                                                         (0.205)
Drink                                                    0.703**
                                                         (0.098)
Obese                                                    1.612***
                                                         (0.243)
Observations                     3120        3120          3120
Robust p values in parentheses
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%




                                                                    30
