                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DOES MOVIE VIOLENCE INCREASE VIOLENT CRIME?

                                           Gordon Dahl
                                        Stefano DellaVigna

                                       Working Paper 13718
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13718


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2008




Eli Berman, Sofia Berto Villas-Boas, Saurabh Bhargava, David Card, Christopher Carpenter, Ing-Haw
Cheng, Julie Cullen, Liran Einav, Matthew Gentzkow, Jay Hamilton, Ethan Kaplan, Lawrence F. Katz,
Lars Lefgren, Ulrike Malmendier, Julie Mortimer, Ted O'Donoghue, Anne Piehl, Mikael Priks, Uri
Simonsohn, and audiences at London School of Economics, Ohio State, Queens University, Rutgers
New Brunswick, UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, University of Tennessee Knoxville, University of Western
Ontario, University of Zurich, Wharton, the Munich 2006 Conference on Economics and Psychology,
the NBER 2006 Summer Institute (Labor Studies), the 2006 SITE in Psychology and Economics, the
IZA Conference on Personnel and Behavioral Economics, the IZA/SOLE Transatlantic Meeting of
Labor Economists, and at the Trento 2006 Summer School in Behavioral Economics provided useful
comments. We would like to thank kids-in-mind.com for generously providing their movie violence
ratings. Scott Baker and Thomas Barrios provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gordon Dahl and Stefano DellaVigna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does Movie Violence Increase Violent Crime?
Gordon Dahl and Stefano DellaVigna
NBER Working Paper No. 13718
January 2008
JEL No. A12,C91,C93,J08

                                              ABSTRACT

Laboratory experiments in psychology find that media violence increases aggression in the short run.
We analyze whether media violence affects violent crime in the field. We exploit variation in the violence
of blockbuster movies from 1995 to 2004, and study the effect on same-day assaults. We find that
violent crime decreases on days with larger theater audiences for violent movies. The effect is partly
due to voluntary incapacitation: between 6PM and 12AM, a one million increase in the audience for
violent movies reduces violent crime by 1.1 to 1.3 percent. After exposure to the movie, between 12AM
and 6AM, violent crime is reduced by an even larger percent. This finding is explained by the self-selection
of violent individuals into violent movie attendance, leading to a substitution away from more volatile
activities. In particular, movie attendance appears to reduce alcohol consumption. Like the laboratory
experiments, we find indirect evidence that movie violence increases violent crime; however, this
effect is dominated by the reduction in crime induced by a substitution away from more dangerous
activities. Overall, our estimates suggest that in the short-run violent movies deter almost 1,000 assaults
on an average weekend. While our design does not allow us to estimate long-run effects, we find no
evidence of medium-run effects up to three weeks after initial exposure.


Gordon Dahl
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
gdahl@ucsd.edu

Stefano DellaVigna
UC, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
Does media violence trigger violent crime? This question is important for both policy and
scientific research. In 2000, the Federal Trade Commission issued a report at the request
of the President and of Congress, surveying the scientific evidence and warning of negative
consequences. In the same year, the American Medical Association, together with five other
public-health organizations, issued a joint statement on the risks of exposure to media violence
(Joint Statement, 2000).
    The evidence cited in these reports, surveyed by Anderson and Buschman (2001) and
Anderson et al. (2003), however, does not establish a causal link between media violence
and violent crime. The experimental literature exposes subjects in the laboratory (typically
children or college students) to short, violent video clips. These experiments find a sharp
increase in aggressive behavior immediately after the media exposure, compared to a control
group exposed to non-violent clips. This literature provides causal evidence on the short-run
impact of media violence on aggressiveness, but not whether this translates into higher levels
of violent crime in the field. A second literature (e.g., Johnson et al., 2002) shows that survey
respondents who watch more violent media are substantially more likely to be involved in self-
reported violence and crime. This second type of evidence, while indeed linking media violence
and crime, is plagued by problems of endogeneity and reverse causation.
    In this paper, we provide causal evidence on the short-run effect of media violence on violent
crime. We exploit the natural experiment induced by time-series variation in the violence of
movies shown in the theater. As in the psychology experiments, we estimate the short-run
effect of exposure to violence, but unlike in the experiments, the outcome variable is violent
crime rather than aggressiveness. Importantly, the laboratory and field setups also differ due
to self-selection and to the context of violent media exposure.
    Using a violence rating system from kids-in-mind.com and daily revenue data, we generate
a daily measure of national-level box office audience for strongly violent (e.g., “Hannibal”),
mildly violent (e.g., “Spider-Man”), and non-violent movies (e.g., “Runaway Bride”). Since
blockbuster movies differ significantly in violence rating, and movie sales are concentrated in
the initial weekends after release, there is substantial variation in exposure to movie violence
over time. The audience for strongly violent and mildly violent movies, respectively, is as
high as 12 million and 25 million people on some weekends, and is close to zero on others
(see Figures 1a-1b). We use crime data from the National Incident Based Reporting System
(NIBRS) and measure violent crime on a given day as the sum of reported assaults (simple or
aggravated) and intimidation.
    We find no evidence that exposure to media violence increases violent behavior in the short-
run. After controlling flexibly for seasonality, we find that, on days with a high audience for
violent movies, violent crime is lower. To rule out unobserved factors that contemporaneously


                                                1
increase movie attendance and decrease violence, such as rainy weather, we use two strategies.
First, we add controls for weather and days with high TV viewership. Second, we instrument
for movie audience using the predicted movie audience based on the following weekend’s au-
dience. This instrumental variable strategy exploits the predictability of the weekly decrease
in attendance. Adding in controls and instrumenting, the correlation between movie violence
and violent crime becomes more negative and remains statistically significant.
    The estimated effect of exposure to violent movies is small in the morning or afternoon
hours (6AM-6PM), when movie attendance is minimal. In the evening hours (6PM-12AM),
instead, we detect a significant negative effect on crime. For each million people watching a
strongly or mildly violent movie, respectively, violent crimes decrease by 1.3 and 1.1 percent.
The effect is smaller and statistically insignificant for non-violent movies. In the nighttime
hours following the movie showing (12AM-6AM), the delayed effect of exposure to movie
violence is even more negative. For each million people watching a strongly or mildly violent
movie, respectively, violent crime decreases by 1.9 and 2.1 percent. Non-violent movies have
no statistically significant impact. Unlike in the psychology experiments, therefore, media
violence appears to decrease violent behavior in the immediate aftermath of exposure, with
large aggregate effects. The total net effect of violent movies is to decrease assaults by roughly
1,000 occurrences per weekend, for an annual total of about 52,000 weekend assaults prevented.
    We also examine the delayed impact of exposure to movie violence on violent crime. While
our research design (like the laboratory designs) cannot test for a long-run impact, we can
examine the medium-run impact in the days and weeks following exposure. We find no impact
on violent crime on Monday and Tuesday following weekend movie exposure. We also find no
impact one, two, and three weeks after initial exposure, controlling for current exposure. This
implies that the same-day decrease in crime is unlikely to be due to intertemporal substitution
of crime from the following days.
   To test the robustness of our results, we disaggregate the effects by individual violence levels
ranging from 0 to 10, and by one-hour time blocks. We explore other specifications (including
Poisson regression), alternative instrument sets, and an alternative measure of movie violence.
The results are all consistent with the baseline analysis. Additionally, we generate a placebo
data set to test for uncontrolled seasonal factors in movie releases, and find no effect with the
placebo treatment. A final set of results exploits the variation in movie violence from rentals
of DVDs and VHSs. These estimates are broadly consistent with our main estimates using the
box office data, although the standard errors are larger.
   In order to interpret the results, we develop a simple model where utility maximizing
consumers choose between violent movies, non-violent movies, and an alternative activity.
These options generate violent crime at different rates. The model provides three main insights.
First, in the reduced form implied by the model, the estimates of exposure to violent movies
capture the impact for the self-selected population that chooses to attend violent movies, and


                                                2
not the population at large. In particular, the violent sub-population is likely to self-select
more into more violent movies, magnifying any effects of exposure. Second, the reduced-form
estimates capture the net effect of watching a violent movie and not participating in the next-
best alternative activity. A blockbuster violent movie has a direct effect on crime as more
individuals are exposed to screen violence. But there is also an indirect effect as people are
drawn away from the alternative activity (such as drinking at a bar) and its associated level of
violence. Third, it is in principle possible to identify the direct effect of strongly violent movies
if one can account for self-selection.
    We interpret the first empirical result, that exposure to violent movies lowers same-day
violent crime in the evening (6PM to 12AM), as voluntary incapacitation. On evenings with
high attendance at violent movies, potential criminals choose to be in the movie theater, and
hence are incapacitated from committing crimes. The incapacitation effect is increasing in
the violence of the movie because potential criminals self-select into violent, rather than non-
violent, movies. To document whether the degree of self-selection required is plausible, we use
data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey time diaries. We find that demographic groups
with higher crime rates, such as young men, select disproportionately into watching violent
movies, suggesting that the observed finding is indeed consistent with incapacitation.
    The second result is that violent movies lower violent crime in the night after exposure
(12AM to 6AM). As the model illustrates, the estimates capture a net effect: they reflect the
difference between the direct effect of movie violence on aggression, compared to the violence
level associated with an alternative activity. Hence, the reduction in crime associated with
violent movies is best understood as movie attendance displacing more volatile alternative
activities both during and after movie attendance. Since alcohol is a prominent factor that has
been linked to violent crime (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2007), and alcohol is not served in movie
theaters, one potential mechanism is a reduction in alcohol consumption associated with movie
attendance. Consistent with this mechanism, we find larger decreases for assaults involving
alcohol or drugs. We also find a large displacement of assaults taking place in bars and night
clubs, although these estimates are imprecise given the relative rarity of such assaults.
    This second finding appears to contradict the evidence from laboratory experiments, which
find that violent movies increase aggression through an arousal effect. However, the two
methodologies estimate different effects. The laboratory experiments estimate the impact of
violent movies in partial equilibrium, holding the alternative activities constant. Our natural
experiment instead allows individuals to decide in equilibrium between a movie and an alter-
native activity. Exposure to movie violence can lower violent behavior relative to the foregone
alternative activity (the field findings), even if it increases violent behavior relative to expo-
sure to non-violent movies (the laboratory findings). Indeed, the pattern of effects for mildly
violent and strongly violent movies provides indirect evidence of arousal effects for strongly
violent movies. This arousal effect, however, is of limited magnitude—on net, violent movies


                                                 3
still induce substantially less violent behavior than the alternative activity. We also discuss
other differences between the laboratory experiments and the field evidence, including the pol-
icy implications of each. As such, this paper contributes to the literature on the relationship
between laboratory and field evidence in psychology and economics (Levitt and List, 2007).
    A common theme to the findings above is the importance of self-selection of potential
criminals into more violent movies. We provide separate evidence that selection helps explain
other results on the impact of movies. We use the Internet Movie Database ratings by young
males to categorize movies highly liked by young males. We find evidence that, even after
controlling for movie violence, exposure to movies that attract young men significantly lowers
violent crime. In addition, using data which rates movies on other dimensions including sexual
content and profanity, we show that the types of movies that do not attract young people do
not lower crime substantially.
     Our paper is related to a growing literature in economics on the effect of the media. Among
others, Besley and Burgess (2002), Green and Gerber (2004), Stromberg (2004), Gentzkow
(2006), and DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) provide evidence that media exposure affects po-
litical outcomes. More related, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2008) show that the introduction of
television did not have adverse effects on educational outcomes. As in this paper, media expo-
sure did not have a negative impact, though Gentzkow and Shapiro estimate long-term, rather
than short-run, elasticities. Finally, Card and Dahl (2007) show that on days of NFL football
games, domestic violence spikes, particularly for upset losses involving a local team.
    Our paper also complements the evidence on incapacitation, from the effect of school at-
tendance (Jacob and Lefgren, 2003) to the effect of imprisonment (DiIulio and Piehl, 1991;
Levitt, 1996; Spelman, 1993). Our paper differs from this literature because the incapacitation
is optimally chosen by the consumers, rather than being imposed. Finally, this paper is related
to the literature on the impact of emotions such as arousal (Loewenstein and Lerner, 2003;
Ariely and Loewenstein, 2005) on economic decisions.
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a simple model of
movie attendance choice and its effect on violence. Section 3 describes the data. In Section
4, we present the main empirical results. Sections 5 and 6 provide interpretations, additional
evidence, and a comparison to the psychology experiments. Section 7 concludes.


2    Framework
Utility. In this section we model the choice to view a violent movie and the resulting impact
on the level of aggregate violence following exposure. We begin by assuming individuals choose
among a set of mutually exclusive activities, where for simplicity, we consider four options:
watch a strongly violent movie av , watch a mildly violent movie am , watch a non-violent movie
an , or participate in an alternative social activity as .


                                               4
    Individuals choose to watch a violent movie if it yields more utility than the other options.
Holding the violence level of a movie fixed, the utility of a movie increases with its quality.
While we could assume a standard multinomial choice model, any choice model implies prob-
abilistic demand functions for each of the activities, leading to demand for movies P (av ),
P (am ), P (an ), and demand for the alternative activity 1 − P (av ) − P (am ) − P (an ). A higher-
quality movie of type j increases the consumption probability P aj . We do not make further
                                                                       

assumptions about utility since the existence of probabilistic demand functions are sufficient
for the derivations in this section.1
   We allow for a simple form of heterogeneity in the taste for movies. For ease of exposition,
we denote the group with high taste for violent movies as young y and the other group as old
o. The fraction of the relevant population choosing activity j is denoted as P (aji ) for i = y, o
and j = v, m, n, s. We assume that the young like violent movies relatively more than the
old: P (avy )/P (avo ) > P (am       m         n       n
                             y )/P (ao ) > P (ay )/P (ao ). The aggregate demand functions for the
young and old are simply these probabilities multiplied by group size Ni , that is, Ni P (aji ).
    Violence. We model the production function of violence as follows. Violence, which
does not enter individuals’ utility functions, depends on the type of movies viewed, as well as
participation in the alternative social activity. The level of aggregate log violence, ln V , is a
linear function of the group audience size for the different movies and the group size of the
alternative social activity, aggregated over young and old:

                                         αij Ni P (aji ) + σi Ni (1 − P (avi ) − P (am
                          X        X
                                                                                               n
                ln V =         [                                                     i ) − P (ai ))].               (1)
                         i=y,o j=v,m,n

The key parameters in the production function are αiv , αim , αin , and σi , which are all (weakly)
positive. We illustrate the parameters for the young (i = y); a similar interpretation holds for
the old. The parameter αyv indicates that increasing the young audience size of violent movie
by 1, ceteris paribus, will result in roughly a αyv percent increase in violence (for small αyv ).
The parameter αyv thus will be larger if movie violence triggers violence, and smaller if movie
violence has a cathartic effect. A similar interpretation holds for αym and αyn , as applied,
respectively, to mildly violent and non-violent movies. Finally, σy indicates that increasing the
number of young people undertaking the alternative activity by 1 will result in a σy percent
increase in violence. The parameter σy is likely to be large if the alternative social activity,
such as drinking at a bar, brings potential criminals together or otherwise triggers violence.
   1
      For example, if each consumer can participate in only one activity, it is natural to assume that utility
depends on the quality of that activity and the quantity of other goods consumed. Normalizing the price of
other goods to be $1, assuming additive separability for the error term, and using a linear utility function we
can write the utility of the alternatives as U j = δ(I − pj ) + θq j + ej for j = v, m, n, s where pj , q j , and ej are
the price, quality, and error term associated with the activities and I is income. Assuming an extreme value
distribution for the error terms, the structural parameters δ and θ could be estimated using a multinomial logit,
as could the probabilities of each choice, P r(aj ) = exp(δ(I − pj ) + θq j )/ k=v,m,n,s exp(δ(I − pk ) + θq k ) for
                                                                                P

j = v, m, n, s. This is just an example; we do not impose the multinomial logit setup in our empirical work.


                                                           5
   Since individual-level consumption data for movie attendance for each movie is not readily
available, aggregate data must be used. (In the empirical section, we discuss ways to estimate
audience share by consumer type with auxiliary data.) Given this limitation, we rewrite
equation (1) in terms of aggregate movie attendance by type of movie. Letting Aj denote
aggregate movie attendance (for young and old combined) and letting xj denote the young
audience share for movie j, log violence can be expressed as
                                                 X       h                                       i
               ln V = (σy Ny + σo No ) +                     xj (αyj − σy ) + (1 − xj )(αoj − σo ) Aj             (2)
                                               j=v,m,n

where Aj = Ny P (ajy )+No P (ajo ) and xj = Ny P (ajy )/(Ny P (ajy )+No P (ajo )). Equation (2) makes
clear that the effect of total audience size on log violence is a weighted average of the effects
for the young and old subgroups.
  Empirical strategy. Equation (2) motivates the approach we take in our empirical work.
The estimating equation which follows directly from equation (2) is

                                  ln V = β0 + β v Av + β m Am + β n An + ε.                                       (3)

where ε is an additively separable error term. This equation closely parallels the one used in
Section 4, which differs only in that there we introduce time subscripts and include control
variables.2 Comparing equation (3) and equation (2), we can write the coefficients as

                         β j = xj (αyj − σy ) + (1 − xj )(αoj − σo ) for j = v, m, n.                             (4)

    Notice the parameter β j is constant only if the young audience share xj is constant in
response to changes in movie quality. In what follows, we assume that this is approximately
the case, i.e., that when movie quality changes, demand by young and old roughly rises and
falls proportionately with each other.3
    Expression (4) illustrates two important points. First, the impact of a violent movie β v is
the sum of two effects: a direct effect, captured by αiv , and an indirect effect, captured by σi .
The direct effect is the impact of violent movies on violence for group i. This impact can be
large, in the case of arousal or imitation, as suggested by the experiments, or small, if exposure
to media violence has a cathartic effect. The indirect effect is due to the fact that the violent
movie displaces alternative social activities; to the extent these activities, such as drinking at
   2
      This formulation is very similar to that of a Poisson count model. We have opted for the current formu-
lation, treating violence as a continuous variable, as the daily violent crime counts are large (and never zero).
Empirically, the Poisson and the log-linear OLS regressions give very similar marginal effects.
    3
      This is true for the example given in footnote 1 when utility is modified to account for age differences. Adding
age-specific constants for violent and nonviolent movies to the utility functions, and assuming probabilistic
demand for any single movie is relatively small (i.e., aggregate demand is less than 10% of the population), the
multinomial logit setup yields an approximately constant ratio of young to old demand within each movie type.



                                                             6
bars, trigger crime (σi > 0), this can make the net effect β v negative. Second, heavy movie-
goers contribute most to the identification of β v . To the extent the young like violent movies
more than the old, they will be over-represented in the audience for violent movies, and hence
xv will be larger than Ny /(Ny + No ). These two points apply also to the exposure to mildly
violent movies (β m ) and to non-violent movies (β n ).
   To illustrate the interpretation of expression (4) further, consider a simplified example.
Assume the old do not commit violent acts under any circumstance (αov = αom = αon = σo = 0).
Then the coefficient for exposure to movies with violence level j, β̂ j , is xj (αyj − σy ).
    To start, suppose also that the direct effect of movie exposure is the same for all types of
movies (αn = αm = αv = α). In this case, the qualitative impact of exposure to any type of
movie is the same, and it depends on the sign of αy − σy , which can be positive or negative.
To the extent that the aftermath of movie attendance is more dangerous that the alternative
activity (αy − σy > 0), then movie attendance increases crime: β j > 0 for all j. This is the
case, for example, if movies provide a meeting point for potential criminals. To the extent,
instead, that movie attendance is less dangerous than the alternative activity (αy − σy < 0),
movie-going decreases crime: β j < 0 for all j. This is the case, for example, if movie attendance
leads to earlier bed times and lower alcohol consumption, compared to, say, bar attendance.
    Even in the absence of a differential direct effect of violent movies, the level of violence
in a movie can affect crime. This is because more violent movies are more likely to attract
the violent sub-population (i.e., xv > xm > xn ). (We provide empirical support for this type
of selection below.) Selection into violent movies implies the effect of exposure to movies is
increasing in the violence level of the movie: |β v | > |β m | > |β n |. The two solid lines in Figure
2 illustrate the two cases where movies are more (β j > 0) and less (β j < 0) conducive to crime
than the alternative activity. To match the level of detail in our data, in the figure we allow
the violence level of a movie to vary from 0 to 10. We have graphed the case where the share
of violent people watching a movie increases linearly in the violence level; more generally, all
that is required is that the share of violent people increases in the violence level.
    Now consider what happens when there can be a differential direct impact of violent movies
relative to non-violent movies. We distinguish two cases. The first case is that violent movies
trigger additional violence through imitation or arousal (αyv > αym > αyn ), as the psychology
experiments suggest. The two dotted lines in Figure 2 display the effects in this case, assuming
arousal effects do not start until violence level 5. Imitation and arousal effects cause the net
effect of movie exposure to become more positive as violent content increases. We point out
that it may be difficult to detect this effect if movies are more dangerous than the alternative
activity (β j > 0), since the arousal effect is hard to distinguish from stronger selection (much
higher xv relative to xn ). It is easier, instead, to detect arousal or imitation when movies are
less dangerous than the alternative activity (β j < 0), as the arousal effect works in the opposite
direction of selection. The second case is that exposure to violent movies has a cathartic effect


                                                  7
and hence lowers the incidence of violence (αyv < αym < αyn ). This case, captured by the dashed
lines in Figure 2, is symmetric to the arousal case. It is easier to detect if movies are more
dangerous than the alternative activity (β j > 0).
    This discussion and Figure 2 make clear that, while an estimate of β v answers the important
question of how violent crime responds to movie exposure, it is not simple to separate the
direct effect operating through αyv from the indirect effect operating through σy . We can,
however, attempt to compare the direct impact of violent movies αyv relative to the impact
of mildly violent αyn and non-violent movies αyn . We also point out a difference between the
effect of movies in the aftermath of exposure (the delayed effect), as we have discussed so
far, versus during the movie showing (the contemporaneous effect). When interpreting the
contemporaneous effect, the direct effect equals zero for all levels of movie violence (insofar as
there are mechanically no crimes while in the movie theater). Hence, qualitatively the effect
of exposure while physically in the movie theater should roughly equal β j = −xj σy , which is
captured by the solid lines in Figure 2.
   Before continuing, a brief comparison to the psychology experiments is in order. In the
experiments, exposure to violent and non-violent movies is manipulated as part of the treat-
ment. The subjects do not optimally choose relative to a comparison activity as . Within our
empirical specification, the estimate of β v in the laboratory experiment would yield

                             v         Ny               Ny
                            βlab =          αv + (1 −        )αv .
                                     Ny + No y        Ny + No o

    Comparing this estimate to the estimate on field data (4), two differences are apparent.
First, the impact of media violence does not include the indirect effect of σ which oper-
ates through the alternative activity. By virtue of experimental control, the indirect effect
is ‘shut down.’ Second, the weights on the young and old coefficients are different (compare
Ny / (Ny + No ) to xv ). The laboratory experiments capture the reaction to media violence of
a representative sample, while the field evidence assigns more weight to the parameter of the
individuals that sort into the violent movies (the ‘young’). Hence, the laboratory setting is not
representative of exposure to movie violence in most field settings, where consumers choose
what media to watch. However, it is representative of instances of unexpected exposure, as in
the case of a violent advertisement or a trailer placed within family programming.


3    Data
In this section we introduce our various data sets, provide summary statistics, and describe
general patterns of movie attendance and violent crime.
   Movie data. The data on box-office revenue is from www.the-numbers.com, which uses
the studios and Exhibitor Relations as data sources. Information on weekend (Friday through

                                                8
Sunday) box-office sales is available for the top 50 movies consistently from January 1995 on.
Daily revenue is available for the top 10 movies from mid-August 1997 on. In our analysis, we
focus on daily data for Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. We do this because movie attendance,
and therefore the identifying variation used in our analysis, is concentrated on weekends (see
Table 1). To estimate the number of people in the movie theater audience, we deflate both the
weekend and the daily box office sales by the average price of a ticket.
    For the period January 1995 to mid-August 1997 and for all movies that do not make the
daily top 10 list, we impute daily box office revenue using the weekend sales for the same movie
in the previous weekend. The imputation procedure, described in detail in Appendix A, takes
advantage of the regularity in the within-week pattern of sales. Ticket sales peak on Saturday,
Friday, and Sunday (in decreasing order) and are lowest on Tuesday through Thursday (Table
1). The accuracy of the imputation is high. In the sub-sample for which both the daily and
the weekend data are available, a regression of predicted daily revenue on actual daily revenue
yields a slope coefficient of 0.9559 and has an R2 of 0.9590.
   We match the box office data to violence ratings from www.kids-in-mind.com, a site rec-
ognized by Time Magazine in 2006 as one of the “Fifty Coolest Websites.” Since 1992, this
non-profit organization has assigned a 0 to 10 point violence rating to almost all movies with
substantial sales. The ratings are performed by trained volunteers who, after watching a
movie, follow guidelines to assign a violence rating. In Appendix Table 1, we illustrate the rat-
ing system by listing the three movies with the highest weekend audiences within each rating
category. For most of the analysis, we group movies into three categories: strongly violent,
mildly violent, and non-violent. Movies with ratings between 0 and 4 such as “Toy Story”and
“Runaway Bride” have very little violence; their MPAA ratings range from G to R (for sexual
content or profanity). Movies with ratings between 5 and 7 contain a fair amount of violence,
with some variability across titles (“Spider Man” versus “Mummy Returns”). These movies
are typically rated PG-13 or R. Movies with a rating of 8 and above are violent and almost
uniformly rated R. Examples are “Hannibal” and “Saving Private Ryan”. Compared to other
movies, violent movies are disproportionately more likely to be in the “Action/Adventure” and
“Horror” genres and are very unlikely to be in the “Comedy” genre. For a very small number
of movies, typically with limited audiences, a rating is not available.4
    Movie violence measures. We define the number of people (in millions) exposed to
movies of violence level k on day t as Akt = j∈J djk aj,t , where aj,t is the audience of movie
                                               P

j on day t, djk is an indicator for film j belonging to violence level k, and J is the set of all
movies. The violence level varies between 0 and 10. To deal with the small number of movies
with missing violence ratings, we assume ratings are missing at random with respect to the
level of violence in a movie, and inflate each day’s exposure variables Akt accordingly. The
   4
   The re-releases of Star Wars V and VI in 1997 were not rated because the original movie pre-dates kids-in-
mind. We assigned them the violence rating 5, the same rating as for the other Star Wars movies.


                                                     9
average share of missing ratings is 4.1 percent across days.
    We define three summary measures of exposure to movies with differing levels of violence.
The measure of exposure to strongly violent movies on day t is the audience for movies with
violence levels between 8 and 10, Avt = 10        k                                         m
                                          P
                                            k=8 At . Similarly, exposure to mildly violent At
and non-violent Ant movies on day t are defined as the aggregated audiences for movies with a
violence level between 5-7 and 0-4, respectively.
    Figure 1a plots the measure of strong movie violence, Avt , over the sample period 1995 to
2004. To improve readability, we plot the weekend audience (the sum from Friday to Sunday)
instead of the daily audience. In the graph, we label the top 10 weekends with the name of
the movie responsible for the spike. The series exhibits sharp fluctuations. Several weekends
have close to zero violent movie audience. On other weekends, over 12 million people watch
violent movies. The spikes in the violent movie series are distributed fairly uniformly across
the years, and decay within 2-3 weeks of the release of a violent blockbuster.
    Figure 1b plots the corresponding information for the measure of mild movie violence,
Am
 t . Since more movies are included in this category, the average weekend audience for mildly
violent movies is higher than for strongly violent movies, with peaks of up to 25 million people.
There is some seasonality in the release of violent movies, with generally lower exposure to
movie violence between February and May. This seasonality is less pronounced for the strongly
violent movies compared to the mildly violent movies.
    To put audience size into perspective, note that blockbuster movies are viewed by a sizeable
fraction of the U.S. population. Over a weekend, strongly violent and mildly violent block-
busters attract up to 4% and 8%, respectively, of the U.S. population (roughly 300 million).
This extensive exposure provides the identifying variation of our setup.
    Violent crime data. Our source for violent crime data is the National Incident Based
Reporting System (NIBRS). This data set is uniquely suited for the present study along two
important dimensions. First, it reports violent acts known to police, such as verbal intimidation
or fistfights, which do not necessarily result in an arrest. Second, it reports the date and time
of the crime, allowing us to match movie attendance and violent crime at the daily level.
Alternative large-scale data sets on crime do not contain this same type of information. For
example, the Uniform Crime Report only includes data for arrests and is aggregated at the
monthly level. The National Crime Victimization Survey, while incident-based like the NIBRS,
is subject to recall bias and also aggregates at the monthly level.
    The NIBRS data collection effort is a part of the Uniform Crime Reporting Program which
is a Federal law enforcement program. Currently, submission of NIBRS data is still voluntary
at the city, county, and state level. Between 1995 (the first year of NIBRS data) and 2004,
the number of reporting agencies has increased substantially. In 1995, only 4% of the U.S.
population was covered by a NIBRS reporting agency. As of August 2005, there were 29 states
certified to report NIBRS data to the FBI, for a coverage rate of 22% of the U.S. population

                                               10
(reporting is not always 100% within a state). This 22% coverage represents 17% of the nation’s
reported crime, which reflects the fact that NIBRS coverage is more heavily weighted towards
smaller cities and counties (where crime rates are lower).
     We use data from 1995 to 2004 for NIBRS city and county reporting agencies, which includes
local police forces and county sheriff offices. Since not all agencies report consistently, we limit
our sample each year to agencies which do not have large reporting gaps. More specifically,
in each year we exclude agencies which have missing data on crime (not just assaults) for
more than seven consecutive days, where a report of 0 counts as non-missing data. This filter
eliminates 12.5 percent of reported assaults. If no crime is reported on a given day after this
filter, we set that day’s assault count to zero. Our main violence measure is the total number
of assaults, defined as the sum of aggravated assault, simple assault, and intimidation.5 , across
all agencies on day t, Vt . In some specifications, we separate assaults into 4 time blocks: 6AM-
12PM, 12PM-6PM, 6PM-12AM, and 12AM-6AM. We assign assaults occurring in the night
hours (12AM-6AM) to the previous calendar day to match them to movies played on day t.
   Figure 1c plots the log of weekend assaults Vt over time. The number of assaults increases
over time as a result of increased coverage in NIBRS. The series is also highly seasonal, with
troughs in assaults in the winter and peaks in the summer. The figure also reports the top 10
weekends for strongly violent movies and the top 10 weekends for mildly violent movies. No
obvious relationship between the assaults series and the violent movies series is apparent.
    The seasonality in the assault series may well mask important variation in the data. For
this reason, in the regressions below, we include an extensive set of indicator variables for
year, month, day-of-week, day-of-year, and holidays; in addition, we also control for weather
and TV audience. To illustrate what variation is left after controlling for these variables, we
generate the residual of a regression of ln(violence) on the full set of controls (excluding the
movie audience measures). Figure 1d plots this residual, aggregated to the weekend level (i.e.,
the average of the Friday through Sunday residuals) to enhance readability. Unlike the original
series, this residual behaves approximately like white noise. Only 44 weekends differ from the
mean by more than 0.05 log points, and just one differs by more than 0.10 log points.
    Figure 1d also labels the top 10 weekends for the audience of strongly violent and mildly
violent movies. Interestingly, not only does the figure offer no indication of a positive relation-
ship between violent movies and crime, but it offers an indication of a negative relationship.
For both mildly violent and strongly violent movies, 7 out of the top 10 weekends have residuals
below the median for ln(assaults). (One of the positive residuals is for “Passion of the Christ”,
an atypical violent movie, both for its target audience and its potential effect on crime.) In
   5
    Aggravated assault is an unlawful attack by one person upon another wherein the offender uses a weapon
or displays it in a threatening manner, or the victim suffers obvious severe or aggravated injury. Simple
assault is also an unlawful attack, but does not involve a weapon or obvious severe or aggravated bodily injury.
Intimidation is placing a person in reasonable fear of bodily harm without a weapon or physical attack.



                                                      11
addition, out of 20 weekends with a residual more negative than -0.05 log points, 2 are among
the top 10 weekends for strongly violent movies, and 2 are among the top 10 weekends for
mildly violent movies. This evidence, hence, suggests a negative relationship between violent
movies and violent crime. We examine this relationship in detail in the next section.
    Summary statistics. After matching the assaults and the movie violence data, the re-
sulting data set includes 1,563 weekend (Friday through Sunday) observations, covering the
time period from January 1995 to December 2004. The data set covers a total of 2,272,999
assaults and a total of 1,781 reporting agencies. Table 1 reports summary statistics. The av-
erage number of assaults on any given weekend day in our sample is 1,454. The assaults occur
mostly in the evening (6PM-12AM), but are also common in the afternoon (12PM-6PM) and
in the night (12AM-6AM). Assaults are highest on Friday and Saturday, and lower on Sundays
and other weekdays. Across demographic characteristics, assaults are three times larger for
males than for females, and are decreasing in the age of the offender (for ages above 18). The
share of assaults where the offender is suspected of using alcohol or drugs is 17.0 percent over
the whole day, and assaults taking place at a bar involving alcohol or drug are 1.4 percent.
The incidence of alcohol-related assaults is several times larger in the night hours.
    Table 1 also reports summary statistics for the movie audience. The average daily movie
audience on a weekend day is 6.29 million people, with a peak on Saturday. The audience for
strongly and mildly violent movies is respectively 0.87 million and 2.43 million. The table also
presents information on movie rentals and movies rated by sexual content, profanity, and an
alternative classification system for violence, which we discuss below in Sections 4 and 5.


4       Empirical Results
4.1     Theater Audience – Daily
To test for the short-run effects of exposure to violent movies, we focus on same-day exposure,6
a short time horizon similar to the one considered in the psychology experiments. The outcome
variable of interest is Vt , the number of assaults on day t. While the number of assaults
Vt is a count variable, specifying explicitly the count process (as in a Poisson regression) is
not key since the number of daily assaults is sufficiently large. Hence, we adopt an OLS
specification, which allows us to more easily instrument for movie exposure later in the paper.
The benchmark specification which follows from the model developed in Section 2 is

                             ln Vt = β v Avt + β m Am    n n
                                                    t + β At + ΓXt + εt .                                (5)

    The number of assaults depends on the exposure to strongly violent movies Avt , mildly
    6
    We define day t to run from 6AM of day t to 6AM of day t + 1. This assigns hours following movie exposure
to the same day.


                                                     12
violent movies Am                                n                   v
                  t , and non-violent movies At . The coefficient β can be interpreted as the
percent increase in assaults for each million people watching strongly violent movies on day
t, and similarly for coefficients β m and β n . Identification of the parameters relies on time-
series variation in the violence content of movies at the theater (see Figures 1a and 1b). By
comparing the estimates of β v and β m to the estimate of β n , one can obtain a difference-in-
difference estimate of the effect of violent movies versus non-violent movies.
    The variables Xt are a set of seasonal control variables: indicators for year, month, day-of-
week, day-of-year, holidays, weather, and TV audience. Since new movie releases and movie
attendance are concentrated on weekends, we restrict the sample to Friday, Saturday, and
Sunday. All standard errors are robust and clustered by week, to allow for arbitrary correlation
of errors across the three observations on the same weekend.
    In column 1 of Table 2 we begin by estimating equation (5) with only year controls included.
The year controls are necessary since the cities and counties in the sample vary year-to-year.
In this specification, exposure to media violence appears to increase crime. However, we also
obtain the puzzling result that exposure to non-violent movies increases crime significantly,
suggesting that at least part of this correlation is due to omitted variables. Einav (2007)
documents seasonality in movie release dates and underlying demand, with the biggest ticket
sales in the beginning of the summer and during holidays. Since assaults are also elevated
during summers and holidays, it is important to control for seasonal factors. In columns 2 and
3, we include indicators for month-of-year and for day-of-week. While introducing these coarse
seasonal variables increases the R2 substantially, from 0.9344 to 0.9846, these variables do not
control for additional effects such as the Christmas season in the second half of December or
for holidays such as Independence Day. We therefore add 365 day-of-year indicators (column
4) and holiday indicators (column 5), raising the R2 further to 0.9912.7 (The full set of holiday
indicators is described in Appendix A.) As we add these variables, the coefficients β v and β m
on the violent movie measures flip sign and become negative, significantly so in column 5. This
suggests that the seasonality in movie releases and in crime biases the estimates upward.
    This negative correlation, however, may still be due to an unobserved variable that con-
temporaneously increases violent movie attendance and decreases violence εt . For example,
on rainy days assaults are lower, but movie attendance is higher.8 To address this possibility,
we use two strategies. First, we add a set of weather controls to account for hot and cold
temperatures, humidity, high winds, snow, and rain. We also control for distractors that could
affect both crime and movie attendance by controlling for the day of the Superbowl and for the
other days with TV shows having an audience in excess of 15 million households according to
Nielsen Media Research. (These controls are described in Appendix A.) Adding these controls
makes the estimates more negative (Column 6).
  7
      To guarantee the 365 day-of-year dummies are comparable across years, we drop February 29 in leap years.
  8
      Some of these variables imply an opposite bias: on hot days assaults and movie attendance are both high.


                                                      13
    Second, we instrument for movie audience on day t using information on the following
weekend’s audience for the same movie. This instrumental variable strategy exploits the pre-
dictability of the weekly decrease in attendance. At the same time, it removes the effect of any
shocks that affect violence and attendance in week w(t), but are not present in week w (t) + 1.
Examples include one-time TV events or transient weather shocks that are not already cap-
tured in our TV and weather controls. This procedure, detailed in Appendix B, generates
predictors for the audience of strongly violent, mildly violent, and non-violent movies on day
t. Panel B in Table 3 shows that these predictors are strongly correlated with the actual
audience numbers they are instrumenting for. In the first stage for the audience of strongly
violent movies (column 1), the coefficient on the predicted audience for strongly violent movies
is highly significant and close to one (0.9145), as predicted. The other two coefficients in this
regression are close to zero, though also significant. We obtain similar first stages for the
audience of mildly violent movies (column 2) and non-violent movies (column 3).
    Column 7 in Table 2 presents the IV estimates, where we have instrumented for the movie
audience variables with their predicted values. Instrumenting makes the correlation between
movie violence and violent crime become more negative. An increase of one million in the
audience for violent movies decreases violent crime by 1.06 percent (strongly violent movies)
and 1.02 percent (mildly violent movies), substantial effects on violence. Non-violent movies
have a smaller (marginally significant) negative effect on assaults. The IV estimates do not
noticeably change if the weather controls are excluded (not reported), suggesting that the
instruments are taking care of temporary shocks, such as those due to weather.

4.2   Theater Audience – Time of Day
After controlling flexibly for seasonal patterns and for weather, and after instrumenting for
movie attendance, exposure to violent movies appears to diminish crime in the short-run. To
clarify this potentially puzzling result (relative to the findings in the laboratory experiments),
we separately examine the effect of violent movies on violent crime by time of day. In these
and all subsequent specifications, we include the full set of controls Xt and instrument for the
actual audiences Avt , Am         n
                         t , and At using the predicted audiences.
    In Table 3, we present our baseline estimates by time of day: assaults committed in the
morning (6AM-12PM), afternoon (12PM-6PM), evening (6PM-12AM), and nighttime (12AM-
6AM). Since movie audiences are unlikely to watch movies in the morning and in the afternoon,
and especially so for violent movies, we expect to find little or no effect of exposure to violent
movies in the first two time blocks. There are small negative effects for assaults in the morning
hours which are not very significant. This appears to be due to a spillover from the previous
day’s movie exposure (which is highly correlated with today’s movie exposure). Exposure to
violent movies has no differential impact on assaults in the afternoon (column 2). Since we



                                               14
consistently find similar effects for these two time periods (small negative effects in the early
morning and no effect in the afternoon), we pool them in subsequent tables to save space.
    During the evening hours (column 3), we find, instead, a significant negative effect of
exposure to violent movies. An increase in the audience of mildly violent movies of one million
decreases violent crime by 1.09 percent. Exposure to strongly violent movies has a slightly
larger effect. Exposure of one million additional people reduces assaults by 1.30 percent.
Exposure to non-violent movies is negatively correlated with violent crime, but the point
estimate is smaller than for violent movies, and not significant. Over the night hours following
exposure to a movie (column 4), violent movies have an even stronger negative impact on violent
crime. Exposure to strongly violent movies for one million people decreases violent crimes by
1.92 percent. Exposure of one million people to mildly violent movies reduces assaults by 2.05
percent. In this specification as well, the impact of non-violent movies is also negative but
substantially smaller and not significantly different from zero.
   To put these estimates into perspective, consider that on a cold day (20-32 degrees Fahren-
heit), assaults go down by 11 percent in the evening hours and 8 percent in the night hours.
(These are coefficients from the baseline IV regression, which includes the other weather, holi-
day, and seasonality controls. The omitted temperature group is 33-79 degrees Fahrenheit.) In
comparison, the blockbuster strongly violent movie “Hannibal” (with an audience size of 10.1
million on opening weekend) is predicted to account for a 4.4 percent reduction in assaults in
the evening hours and a 6.5 percent reduction in the night hours (see footnote 26 for details
on this calculation). In Section 5, we provide interpretations of these findings.

4.3   Theater Audience – Timing of Effects
So far, we have estimated the impact of exposure to movie violence on same-day violent crimes.
We now estimate whether there is a delayed impact at various time intervals. If violent movies
increase violent crime in the medium-run, or if violent movies simply lead to intertemporal
substitution of crime (as in the case of weather shocks in Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti, 2007),
violent crime is likely to be higher in the period following movie exposure.
    Monday and Tuesday. In columns 1-2 of Table 4, we estimate the impact of average
weekend movie audience on violent crime for the Tuesday and Monday following the weekend.
Since the movie audience on these weekdays is limited, to a first approximation this specifica-
tion captures the delayed effect of movie exposure one to three days later. We find no evidence
of an increase in violent crime due to either imitation or intertemporal substitution. Most
coefficients are close to zero, and the only marginally significant coefficient indicates a delayed
negative impact of mildly violent movies.
    One Week, Two Weeks, and Three Weeks Later. In the next specifications, we
estimate the impact one, two, and three weeks after the original exposure, controlling for con-


                                                15
temporaneous exposure. Separate identification is made possible by new releases occurring
after the initial exposure. Lagged movie attendance is instrumented using a similar methodol-
ogy as for the other movie attendance variables, except for the one-week lag (Columns 3-4). In
this specification, we report the OLS results, since the instrument for lagged exposure would be
essentially collinear with contemporaneous exposure. Across the three specifications (Columns
3-8), we find no evidence of a delayed effect of movie exposure. Of eighteen coefficients for
lagged exposure, only one is significant (negative) at the 5 percent level. At the same time,
we find strong evidence of a negative impact of contemporaneous exposure to violent movies,
as in our benchmark specifications.9 These results suggest there is no medium-run effect of
exposure to movie violence due to either imitation or intertemporal substitution.

4.4    Theater Audience – Robustness
Unlike the psychology experiments, media violence does not induce more violent behavior in
the immediate aftermath of exposure; to the contrary, it appears to decrease it. Before we
discuss interpretations of this result, we assess the robustness of our baseline estimates.
    Alternative Instruments, Specifications, and Samples. In Appendix Table 2, we
first document the robustness of our findings to the use of different instruments. For space
reasons, we pool the morning and afternoon periods (Panel A), and then present results for the
evening (Panel B) and night (Panel C). The benchmark instruments form a predictor of the
audience in week w (t) using the information on the audience in week w (t) + 1 and allowing
for different weekly decay rates for different types of movies (see Appendix B). A coarser, but
simpler approach is to use as instruments the audience in week w (t) + 1 of all movies in a
category (strongly, mildly, and non-violent). The results (Column 2) are very similar to the
results with the benchmark instrument (reproduced in Column 1), though the standard errors
are 10 to 20 percent higher, reflecting some loss in precision due to the neglect of movie-type
specific decay rates.
    An alternative instrument uses information on the production budget and the number
of theaters in which a movie is playing in week w (t), instead of information on audience
size (see Appendix B for details.) Production budgets are decided far in advance, while the
number of screens is finalized one or two weeks in advance (Moretti, 2007). These instruments,
like our baseline instruments, should purge the estimates of short-term shocks affecting both
theater attendance and crime. However, these instruments do not predict well the overall
movie audience, since the total number of theaters is essentially fixed in any given week and
production budgets do not provide much identifying variation.10 Hence, we supplement these
   9
     The estimates for contemporaneous exposure in Columns 3-4 should be compared with the OLS estimates
in Column (7) of Appendix Table 2.
  10
     The joint F-tests for the first stages of this instrument set range from 280 to 378, with most of the power
coming from the variables for the number of theaters.


                                                      16
instruments with an additional instrument for total movie audience size based on our standard
procedure. The results (column 3) are remarkably similar to the benchmark results.
    To clarify the identifying variation behind the benchmark results, we use the standard
instrument, but include the audience only for movies in their first week of release (column 4).
We get similar point estimates (somewhat lower in the night hours) and comparable standard
errors, indicating that new releases contribute substantially to identification.
    Next, we estimate the results using our standard instrument, but including in the sample
all seven days of the week instead of just the weekend (column 5). The point estimates for
the effect of movie violence in the evening and night (Panels B and C) become more negative,
but so does the estimate for non-violent movies, which is now significant.11 The latter finding
may reflect an impact of non-violent movies, for example by incapacitating potential criminals.
An alternative possibility, however, is that the instrument, which is based on next weekend’s
audience, does not completely remove the impact of short-term shocks for weekdays (especially
Wednesdays and Thursdays, which fall immediately before next weekend).
   We next explore the role of the controls. One may worry the model is over-specified by
the inclusion of 365 indicators for each day-of-year. In column 6, we replace these controls
with indicators for the 52 weeks of the year, leaving all other controls in place. The results are
similar, indicating that the benchmark model does not appear to be over-specified.
    Finally, we estimate two specifications that do not instrument for movie audience: an
OLS specification (column 7) and a Poisson regression (column 8). In these specifications,
exposure to all types of movies in the morning and afternoon has a negative (significant)
effect on violent crime, unlike in the benchmark specification. The effect in the evening and
night hours is similar to the effect in the benchmark specification, although with smaller point
estimates. The results for the morning and afternoon are likely due to omitted variables that
are correlated with overall movie audience and crime. Indeed, if one considers the differential
impact of violent versus non-violent movies, the results mirror the IV results: no differential
effect in the morning and afternoon, and large negative effects in the evening and night.
    Individual Movie Violence Level. We also present more disaggregated evidence on the
effect of movies using different violence categories. We estimate the regression
                                                10
                                                X
                                      ln Vt =         β k Akt + ΓXt + εt ,
                                                k=0

using the same sample, control variables, and IV approach as in the benchmark specification.
That is, we estimate separately the effect on assaults of exposure to movies of violence level
k, with k = 0, 1, ..., 10. In Figure 3, we plot the coefficients β k for evening assaults and for
nighttime assaults. Over the evening hours (6PM-12AM), the decrease in assaults is fairly
  11
    The standard errors are only slightly smaller relative to the benchmark sample, despite a more than doubling
of the number of observations. This reflects the fact that the movie audience on non-weekends is limited.


                                                        17
monotonic in the violence level of the movie. The impact of movie exposure on violent crime
is close to zero for non-violent movies, becomes more negative for more violent movies, and
peaks at movie violence 9. Over the night hours (12AM-6AM), the effect of exposure to movie
violence becomes more negative with violence until violence level 5, and then remains about
flat. In both time periods, no single violence group appears to be driving the results.
    One-Hour Time Blocks. To provide additional evidence on the timing of the effect of
violent movies, we re-run specification (5) separately by one-hour time blocks (Figure 4). The
time stamp is supposed to indicate the time of the assault, but it might also reflect the time of
the police report. As such, the crime is likely to have occurred in the indicated time block or in
the previous one-hour block. We plot the coefficients for strongly violent, mildly violent, and
non-violent movies. The size of the points is inversely proportional to the estimated variance of
the coefficient estimates. The horizontal lines within each 6-hour time block are the weighted
average of the estimated coefficients within a violence category, where the weights are the
inverse of the estimated variances.
    In the morning hours (6AM-12PM), we find some negative impact of exposure to violent
movies, especially for the early hours, though the estimates are noisy due to the small number
of crimes in the morning. This negative impact likely reflects a carry-over from exposure in
the previous night. In the afternoon hours (12PM-6PM) we find no impact on assaults. In the
evening hours (6PM-12AM), the impact of movie exposure is negative from 7PM on, and more
so for violent movies. The timing of these effects lines up with the timing of movie attendance.
In the nighttime hours (12AM-6AM), we find even stronger negative impacts, especially for
the hours of 4AM and 5AM; however, these coefficients are very imprecisely estimated.
    Alternative Movie Violence Measure. We next cross-validate our results using an al-
ternative measure of movie violence. In addition to rating movies (“R”, “PG”, etc.), the MPAA
summarizes in one sentence the reason for the rating, including the violence of the movie. We
characterize as mildly violent movies those for which the MPAA rating contains the word “Vi-
olence” or “Violent”, with two exceptions. If the reference to violence is qualified by “Brief”,
“Mild”, or “Some”, we classify the movie as non-violent. If the word violence is qualified as
either “Bloody”, “Brutal”, “Disturbing”, “Graphic”, “Grisly”, “Gruesome”, or “Strong”, we
classify the movie as strongly violent. We then construct a daily measure of mild and strong
movie violence along similar lines to the procedure used for the benchmark measures.12 The
MPAA-based mild violence measure averages 2.19 million in audience, compared to 2.43 mil-
lion for the kids-in-mind-based mild violence measure (Table 1), with a correlation of 0.68
between the two measures. The MPAA-based measure of strong violence is more restrictive
than the kids-in-mind-based measure, averaging an audience of 0.48 million, compared to 0.87
  12
   In the first weeks of 1995, the MPAA rating is missing for a number of movies; we set the MPAA violence
measure missing for the 10 weeks in which the rating is available for less than 70 percent of the movie audience.




                                                       18
million. The correlation between these two measures is 0.66.13 The correlation is also apparent
in Appendix Table 1, which lists the MPAA violence rating for blockbuster movies.
    In columns 1-2 of Appendix Table 3 we replicate the regressions of Table 3 using the
MPAA-based measure of movie violence, and find similar results. In both the evening (6PM-
12PM) and in the night (12AM-6AM), exposure to movie violence lowers the incidence of
violent crime, with similar magnitudes. When we include both measures of violence (columns
3-4), however, we find that the effects on assaults load almost exclusively on the kids-in-mind
measures. Overall, while the MPAA measure of movie violence produces comparable results
to the kids-in-mind measure, the latter measure appears to be more accurate. This is not
surprising given that the kids-in-mind raters refine the MPAA rating into a 0-10 scale.

4.5    Theater Audience – Placebo Tests
Although we have included an exhaustive set of seasonal control variables, it is still possible that
the remaining seasonality in movie releases and assaults could bias our estimates. We estimate
placebo treatments to test whether our findings are due to unobserved seasonal factors.
    Day-Of-Year / Day-Of-Week Placebo. We generate a placebo data set by re-assigning
the movie audience variables to the other date in the sample that falls on both the same day-
of-year and the same day-of-week (if such date exists).14 To the extent that the negative
correlation between movie violence and assaults is due to unobserved seasonality, we would
expect a negative correlation also in this placebo data set. If, instead, the effect is a causal one
due to violent movie attendance, we should not find an effect in the placebo treatment. This
correspondence is complicated slightly by leap years. For example, all dates between January
1 and February 28 of 1996 are matched to the corresponding date in 2001 (and vice versa). All
dates between March 1 and December 31 in 1996, instead, are matched to the corresponding
date in 2002 (and vice versa). This data set includes 1,200 observations (out of 1,563).
   In columns 1-3 of Table 5, then, we estimate equation (5), with movie audiences from the
placebo-matched year as additional controls. We find a significant impact of the real audience
of violent movies, as in the benchmark specification, and no evidence of an impact of the
placebo movie audience. Out of 9 placebo variables, none is significant.
   Lead Placebo. While the placebo specification in columns 1-2 tests for the impact of
seasonality, it does not test for the possibility that the estimated effect of violent movies may
be due to slow-moving omitted variables that affect both movie attendance and violent crime.
While our instrumental strategy is designed to address this issue, in columns 4-9 we provide
additional evidence by examining the effect of movie exposure two or three weeks into the
  13
     These are the correlations of the residuals from OLS regressions on the standard set of control variables
appearing in column (6) of Table 2, excluding the movies violence measures.
  14
     This procedure takes into account that the amount of violence on, for example, July 4 varies substantially
depending on whether it falls on a Friday, Saturday, or Sunday.


                                                      19
future, controlling for current exposure. To the extent that our estimates capture an omitted
variable that is relatively long-lasting, we expect to find similar (negative) impacts of exposure
to future movie attendance. If, instead, our estimates are due to a causal effect, future movie
attendance should have no impact.
    We estimate this placebo test using movie attendance two weeks ahead (columns 4-6) and
three weeks later (columns 7-9).15 In both specifications, we find the expected effect of contem-
poraneous exposure, but no significant pattern of future exposure. Of eighteen coefficients on
placebo exposure, two are significant at the 5 percent level, and two more at the ten percent
level. While this is somewhat more than one would expect to occur by chance, we find no
pattern in such coefficients, two of which are positive and two negative.

4.6    DVD and VHS Rental Audience
While this paper mostly focuses on the effect of movies shown in theaters, a similar design
exploits the releases of movie rentals on VHS and DVD. Given the differences between the
home and theater settings, estimating the impact of rentals is of independent interest. These
releases occur several months after the theatrical release, and rentals of newly released VHSs
and DVDs peak in the first week of release and decay quickly in the following weeks. Moreover,
the top 1-2 movies capture a substantial share of the rental revenue.
    We use data on weekly DVD and VHS rental revenue from Video Store Magazine covering
the top 25 movies over the period January 1995-December 2004.16 The average number of
rentals on a weekend day is 3.92 million (Table 1), with peaks on Saturday and Friday. Weekly
rentals of strongly violent (mildly violent) movies are 0.64 (1.56) million. While rentals are 30
to 40 percent smaller than the theater attendance, these numbers underestimate the audience
reached since multiple people often view a single rented movie. The audience reached by DVD
and VHS rentals, therefore, is roughly comparable to the audience reached at the theaters.
The violent audience size for DVD and VHS rentals are positively correlated to the box office
measure in the corresponding week: the conditional correlation between the two measures of
strong (mild) violence is 0.15 (0.39) (see footnote 13).
    In columns 1-3 of Table 6, we estimate specification (5) using DVD and VHS rentals instead
of box office audience. We include the full set of controls and instrument using the predictor
based on next week’s rental. We find, as might be expected, no effect of exposure to violent
movies in the morning and afternoon hours (column 1). In the evening hours (column 2),
  15
     We do not report the results for one-week later, since our standard instrument is based on next week’s
movie attendance. Using an OLS specification for the one-week lead, we find no effect of the placebo variables.
  16
     To convert revenue data into an estimated number of rentals, we deflate rental revenue by the average price
of a rental estimated using the Consumer Expenditure Survey. We impute daily rentals using the within-week
distribution of rentals in the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Finally, as with the box office data, we focus on
weekend rentals. Data are missing for 20 weeks in which the magazine did not publish the relevant numbers.



                                                      20
we find a large negative impact of exposure to mildly violent movies (a 1.48 percent decrease
in assaults per million rental), and a smaller, insignificant impact of strongly violent movies.
In the night hours (column 3), we find large negative effects of exposure to rentals of violent
movies, but also a significant negative effect of the rental audience of non-violent movies. These
estimates are less precise than the estimates for box-office releases, with standard errors about
30 percent larger. When we also control for box office movie audience in the regressions, the
results are similar although with larger standard errors (columns 4-6).
    The results on DVD and VHS releases are consistent with a negative impact of violent
movies on violent crime, especially over the evening hours. The similarity with the results from
theater releases is interesting in the light of differences in setting (e.g., alcohol consumption
is possible at home but not at the theater) and in the activities displaced. However, the
DVD/VHS results are less precisely estimated compared to the effect of box office releases.


5     Interpretation and Additional Evidence
We can summarize the findings so far as follows: (i) exposure to violent movies lowers same-day
violent crime in the evening; (ii) violent movies lower violent crime in the night after exposure;
(iii) strongly violent movies have somewhat larger negative effects compared to mildly violent
movies in the evening, but not after exposure; (iv) nighttime hours have larger negative effects
compared to evening hours; (v) there is no lagged effect of exposure in the weeks following
movie attendance. We now provide interpretations and additional evidence for the first four
of these findings (the fifth finding is straightforward to interpret).

5.1   Lower Crime in the Evening - Voluntary Incapacitation and Sorting
We interpret the first finding, that violent movie exposure lowers crime in the evening hours, as
voluntary incapacitation. When people choose to attend the movie theater, they are removing
themselves from other activities and situations more conducive to crime. Since it is virtually
impossible to commit an assault while in the theater, as movie attendance rises, violent acts
fall relative to the counterfactual. Interestingly, as simple as this explanation is, incapacita-
tion has largely been ignored in discussions on the effect of movie violence. This voluntary
incapacitation differs from the standard incapacitation in the literature because it is optimally
chosen by the consumers, rather than being imposed, as in the case of school closings (Jacob
and Lefgren, 2003) or incarceration (DiIulio and Piehl, 1991; Levitt, 1996; Spelman, 1993).
    While the qualitative findings are consistent with incapacitation, are the magnitudes also
consistent with this interpretation? Suppose watching a movie (including time spent buying
tickets, waiting in the lobby, and traveling to and from the theater) occupies roughly one half of
the 6PM-12AM time period and fully incapacitates individuals. For the rest of the time block,


                                               21
for simplicity, assume that crime rates are the same as for the alternative activity.17 Using
the framework of Section 2, these assumptions imply β j = −0.5xj σy . If criminals were equally
represented in the audience of a movie with 1 million viewers, about 1/300th (i.e., 1 million
out of a total population of 300 million) of the criminals would be incapacitated, leading to
  v
βequal = −0.5 ∗ (1/300) ≈ −0.0017, compared to the observed values β̂ v = −0.0130 and β̂ m =
−0.0109. This implies violent individuals are over-represented by about 0.0130/0.0017 = 7.6
times in strongly violent movies and 0.0109/0.0017 = 6.4 times in mildly violent movies.
    While this is a substantial amount of selection, it is not implausibly large. To provide
evidence on the sorting of more violent individuals into more violent movies, we turn to data
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). We take advantage of the fact that the CEX
diaries record all expenditures of surveyed households day-by-day for a period of one or two
weeks, including also demographic information about the households that purchase movie
tickets, which our primary movie attendance data set does not.
   For each day t in the years 1995-2004, we compute the share of interviewed households
that watch a movie at the theater, shareCEX
                                          t     .18 We regress this share on shares of population
attending movies of different violence levels according to our primary movie attendance data19 :
                                              Avt       Am       An
                     shareCEX
                          t   = α + βv             + β m t + β n t + ΓXt + εt                                 (6)
                                             P opt      P opt   P opt

where P opt is the U.S. population in year t (Table 7). Since shareCEX  t    and Ajt /P opt are both
measures of the share of the population attending a movie on day t, we expect the regression
coefficients β j to be close to 1 when we include all demographic groups (column 1). Indeed, the
estimated coefficients (0.9469, 0.7736, 0.7614) are all statistically indistinguishable from 1 (but
significantly different from zero). Our measures of movie audience, therefore, are validated by
the corresponding measures constructed using the CEX data.
    In columns 2-5 we examine sorting by demographics into violent and non-violent movies.
While different types of movies should have the same impact — and hence similar βs —
on overall attendance (column 1), we expect different patterns when we split the data by
demographics. For demographic groups that attend the movies more regularly, we should find
larger coefficients. More importantly, for those demographic groups with a higher taste for
movie violence, we should see a larger effect for violent movies — larger β v and β m compared
to β n — and the opposite for groups with a lower taste.
  17
     If, for the rest of the time block, crime rates were as in the night (12AM-6AM), the amount of selection
needed to explain our results would be lower, since the net effect of violent movies β v is negative in the night.
  18
     We obtain similar results when using an individual-level measure obtained by dividing the total number of
movie visits by the total number of individuals in the households, where the total number of movie visits is
imputed as the amount spent on movies divided by the average price of a ticket.
  19
     The regressions include Friday, Saturday, and Sunday and are weighted by the number of households
reporting consumption expenditures for day t, which averages 157.88. We include the standard set of controls
Xt . We obtain similar, but less precisely estimated, results if we instrument for movie attendance.


                                                       22
    In columns 2-4 we separate households by the age of the household head. Younger house-
holds (heads aged 18 to 29) have larger estimated coefficients, indicating that they attend the
movies more often than older people. More interestingly, younger households select dispro-
portionately into violent movies: they are 2.094/0.9469 = 2.2 times over-sampled in strongly
violent movies and 1.4642/0.7736 = 1.9 times over-sampled in mildly violent movies, while they
are only 1.0786/0.7614 = 1.4 times over-sampled in non-violent movies. Middle-aged house-
holds (heads aged 30 to 44) and especially older households (heads over 45) attend the movie
theater less and display a flatter attendance pattern with respect to the violence content of
movies. The age groups with higher crime rates (Table 1), therefore, select disproportionately
into watching violent movies, a result consistent with selective incapacitation.
    Since men also have higher assault rates compared to women (Table 1), it would be useful to
differentiate by gender. While this is generally problematic in the CEX data (which only reports
purchases at the household level), we can consider singles aged 18-29. In this group (column
5), we find even greater evidence of selection. Single young males are 2.7751/0.9469 = 2.9
times over-sampled in strongly violent movies and 2.7825/0.7736 = 3.6 times over-sampled in
mildly violent movies. While the estimates for this small group should be taken with caution
given the large standard errors, they indicate substantial sorting into violent movies.20
    Overall, we find substantial sorting even using relatively poor correlates of criminal behav-
ior, age and gender. In addition to between-group sorting, we expect substantial within-group
sorting.21 The combination of between- and within-group sorting can plausibly generate over-
representation of potential criminals by a factor of 6 or 7, as implied by the effect on assaults.

5.2    Lower Crime after Exposure - Sobriety
The second result is that exposure to movie violence lowers violent crime also in the night hours.
To interpret this result, we compare the observed patterns in Figure 3 to the possible patterns
predicted by the model in Figure 2. In the night hours, since movie theaters are closed, the
net effect on crime captures the difference between the direct impact on aggression of exposure
to movies (αv ), compared to the counterfactual scenario (σ). The negative estimates for non-
violent, mildly violent, and strongly violent movies all imply that an evening spent at the
movies leads to less dangerous activities in the night hours following exposure. This pattern
corresponds to the bottom set of lines in Figure 2. Apparently, by the time a potential criminal
exits the movie theater, the situational opportunities to engage in violent crime are diminished.
  20
     When we split households by income (results not shown), we find strong evidence of selection into more
violent movies by lower-income households, a selection pattern consistent with research that documents the
poor are more likely to be victims of aggravated assaults.
  21
     For example, in a laboratory setting Bushman (1995) offers subjects (college students) the choice whether to
watch a violent or non-violent movie, and observes that subjects that rank high in self-reported aggressiveness
are more likely to choose a violent movie.



                                                       23
This could be because a visit to the movie theater involves less alcohol consumption, disrupts
and alters an evening’s activities, or places potential criminals in relatively safer environments
once the movie is over. This is not a trivial finding, since attendance at movie theaters could
have provided a meeting point for potential criminals, leading to an increase in crime.
    Alcohol is one prominent factor that has been linked to violent crimes, and assaults in
particular (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2007). In the U.S., alcohol is banned in almost all movie
theaters, so the mechanism for reduced crime in the night-time could well be due to a reduction
in alcohol consumption. To test the importance of sobriety as part of the explanation, we
examine whether the displacement of violent crimes is larger for crimes involving alcohol or
drug consumption (columns 1 and 2 of Table 8) than for crimes not involving such consumption
(columns 3 and 4). Indeed, while the negative impact of movie violence on assaults is present
in both samples, the estimates are on average 1.5 times larger for assaults involving alcohol
or drugs, consistent with sobriety playing an important role. To further test the impact of
alcohol, in columns 5 and 6 we estimate the impact on assaults in bars and night clubs, where
consumption of alcohol is very likely. We find large displacement in the night hours, although
these estimates are imprecise given the relative rarity of these assaults. Additionally, in column
7 we estimate the impact of violent movies on arrests for drunkenness (i.e., arrests for drunk
and disorderly conduct or intoxication). We find a large negative, and marginally significant,
effect for strongly violent movies, but no effect for mild and non-violent movies.22
   To provide direct evidence that movie attendance lowers alcohol consumption, we use data
from the CEX time diaries (see Table 8). We examine whether exposure to violent movies
reduces the share of respondents consuming alcohol away from home. We find suggestive
evidence that violent movies (and particularly strongly violent ones) may have reduced alcohol
consumption, though the estimates are not significantly different from zero.
    To further evaluate the channels of the substitution effect, we estimate the impact for dif-
ferent types of crimes in Appendix Table 4. We find a similar impact for assaults at home
(Columns 1-2) and for assaults away from home (Columns 3-4), suggesting that movie atten-
dance substitutes for violent behavior in both locations. The impact in the night hours is three
times larger for assaults of a person known to the offender (Columns 5-6) than for assaults of a
stranger (Columns 7-8), suggesting that the alternative activity displaced by movie attendance
likely also involved friends or family. Finally, exposure to movie violence has less of an im-
pact on non-violent crimes such as theft and burglary (Columns 9-10). This is consistent with
Carpenter and Dobkin (2007), who find that alcohol consumption leads to larger increases in
violent crimes than in non-violent crimes.
   Overall, these findings provide suggestive evidence that a decrease in alcohol consumption
plays a role in explaining the decrease in violent behavior after movie attendance.
  22
    Although not shown, we find no effect for driving under the influence arrests. We also note the arrest data
does not contain information on time of day, and hence does not allowed for as precise a test.


                                                      24
5.3   Non-monotonicity in Violent Content - Arousal
The third finding is that the negative effect in the night hours is not monotonic: the effect of
strongly violent movies is slightly smaller than the effect of mildly violent movies (β̂ v = −0.0192
versus β̂ m = −0.0205). This at first seems puzzling, since strongly violent movies attract more
of the potential criminals, and the additional selection should render the effect more negative.
As Figure 2 illustrates, however, violent movies can also have catharsis or arousal effects.
Consider the case in which violent movies induce crime through arousal or imitation (that is,
αv > αm ). In Figure 2, this case is captured by the dotted downward sloping line. Since the
arousal effect counteracts the selection effect (rendering the effect less negative), the overall
effect of movie exposure can be non-monotonic in movie violence. Indeed, the observed patterns
in Figure 3 for the night hours closely resemble the arousal case portrayed in Figure 2.
    This pattern could also be observed in the absence of arousal if the sorting of potential
criminals into movies was about the same for mildly violent and strongly violent movies. To
establish more convincingly that arousal is the explanation for Figure 3, we document the
sorting of more violent individuals into more violent movies. The CEX data used in Table 7
indicates substantial selection: young households (with a head age 18-29) select into strongly
violent movies at a rate which is 43 percent higher compared to mildly violent movies.
    To produce additional evidence on sorting, we turn to an auxiliary source of data, the
Internet Movie Database (IMDB). IMDB maintains a popular website for movie-goers which
invites its users to rate movies. A typical blockbuster movie is rated by tens of thousands of
viewers. IMDB displays, for each movie, statistics on the rating for each combination of gender
(male, female) and four age groups (under 18, 18 to 29, 30 to 44, and over 45). As a measure
of the attractiveness of a movie to potential criminals, we use the share of raters that are male
and are aged 18 to 29, a group disproportionately likely to commit crimes (see Table 1).
    Figure 5 shows that the share of young male reviewers is remarkably linear in the 0 to 10
violence ratings for movies from kids-in-mind. The extent of selection is substantial: while only
36 percent of movies with a violence rating of 0 are rated by young men, this number increases
to 54 percent for the most violent movies with a rating of 10. This strong and linear pattern of
selection suggests that, in the absence of catharsis or arousal effects, the effect of movies should
also be trending downward in the violence content of movies (see Figure 2). The observed non-
monotonicity, hence, supports the interpretation that violent movies increase crime by arousal
or imitation. This finding also provides evidence against a cathartic effect of violent movies,
which would have made the effect of strongly violent movies even more negative.

5.4   Larger Nighttime Estimates - Compositional Effects
The fourth finding is that, in the night hours following the movie exposure (12AM-6AM), the
impact of movie violence on assaults is higher than in the evening hours (6PM-12AM). This


                                                25
finding is at first puzzling, since the highest decrease in crime should occur when potential
criminals are in the movie theater, when committing crimes is nearly impossible.
   However, the composition of crimes in the two time periods is different, making a direct
comparison of the size of the effects tricky. For example, assaults involving alcohol or drugs are
much more common in the night hours (29 percent) than in the evening hours (18.5 percent)
(Table 1). As previously noted, alcohol-related assaults respond more to violent movie exposure
(Table 8). We find a similar pattern for assaults taking place at bars. Hence, the decrease in
alcohol consumption, a primary mechanism for the effects, is likely to prevent a higher fraction
of violent crimes in the night (when inebriation would have the most impact) compared to
the evening. In the model, this implies a larger parameter σ at night; that is, the activities
prevented by movie attendance in the night hours are more dangerous than the activities
prevented in the evening hours. This is consistent with a larger effect for crimes at night.
    Broadly speaking, we obtain similar compositional differences in the pattern of assaults by
demographics. In Table 9 we present estimates by gender and age of the offender. The impact
of exposure to violent movies is larger (i.e., more negative) for male offenders than for female
offenders, especially in the night hours when the difference is very large (Panel A). Since male
offenders also commit a higher share of the assaults at night than in the evening hours (Table
1), this contributes to explaining the finding. When we separate the offenders by age group, we
find a relatively monotonic decrease of the effect sizes by age, with the exception of the 45-54
age group (Panel B). This compositional pattern also contributes to explaining the findings,
since the younger age group also contributes disproportionately to assaults (Table 1).

5.5   Additional Evidence on Selection
In both the evening hours and the night hours, the effect of violent movies on crime is more
negative than the effect of non-violent movies. Our explanation of these facts relies on selection:
violent movies are more likely to attract potential criminals. We now provide separate evidence
that this form of sorting helps explain other results on the impact of movies. In particular,
we test whether (i) movies that attract young men tend to decrease violent crime, even if
the movies are not violent; (ii) movies that do not attract young people do not lower crime
substantially. We present one example in the first category—movies with high IMDB ratings
by young males, and three examples in the second category—violent movies using the MPAA
movie rating, high-sexual-content movies, and high-profanity movies.
   IMDB Data. We divide movies into thirds based on the fraction of young men rating a
movie in IMDB (see Figure 5). We denote the bottom third as not liked by young males, the
middle third of movies as liked by young males, and the top third as highly liked by young
males. Table 10 reports information on the blockbusters within the three categories, holding
constant the kids-in-mind violence rating. Among the non-violent movies, “Runaway Bride”


                                                26
is in the category not liked by young makes, while “Austin Powers in Goldmember” is in the
category of movies highly liked by young males. Within the mildly violent movies, “Save The
Last Dance” and “Spiderman” are best-sellers respectively in the not-liked category and in the
highly-liked category. Within the strongly violent movies, there are essentially no blockbuster
movies that are not liked by young males, since movie violence and liking by young males are
highly correlated. However, the IMDB information distinguishes between movies in the middle
group such as “Passion of the Christ” and movies in the top group such as “Hannibal.”
    To estimate the impact of movie attendance on violence within each of the nine cells, we
estimate ln Vt = 9j=1 β j Ajt + ΓXt + εt , where j = 1, ..., 9 denotes the nine cells. We adopt the
                   P

full set of controls and use the baseline instrument. Table 10 reports within each cell j the
coefficients β j for the evening time block and for the night time block. Moving down within a
column shows that more violent movies are generally associated with lower crime, even holding
constant the liking by young males (except for movies not liked by young males, where the
violent movie category is very sparse and hence the estimates very noisy). For example, among
the movies highly liked by young males, the estimated parameters β̂ j are -0.0090 (non-violent),
-0.0111 (mild violence), and -0.0140 (strong violence) for the evening hours, and -0.0079 (non-
violent), -0.0179 (mild violence), and -0.0150 (strong violence) for the night hours. These
patterns are broadly consistent with the interpretations discussed in Sections 5.1 to 5.4.
    More importantly for a test of selection, moving along a row the coefficients also generally
become more negative. In 9 out of 12 pairwise comparisons, the estimates become more
negative as the liking by males increases (7 out of 10 if we exclude the bottom-left group, which
is very sparse). For example, among the mildly violent movies, the estimated parameters β̂ j
are 0.0049 (not liked by young males), -0.0099 (liked), and -0.0111 (strongly liked) for the
evening hours, and -0.0268 (not liked), -0.0177 (liked), and -0.0179 (strongly liked) for the
night hours. Movies that attract more young males, therefore, appear to lower the incidence
of violent crimes more, even holding constant the level of violence in a movie.
    MPAA Violence. In Column (5) of Appendix Table 3 we document the selection of young
people into movies with varying MPAA ratings of violence using the CEX diaries. Young
respondents are somewhat more likely to sort into mildly violent movies, and much more likely
to sort into strongly violent movies—a sorting pattern consistent with the negative impact of
violent movies on crime (columns 1 and 2). When we include in the sorting specification both
the MPAA and the kids-in-mind measures of violence (column 6), the kids-in-mind violence
variables are strongly predictive of attendance by young households, while the MPAA measures
are not any more (if anything predicting sorting the other way). These patterns are strikingly
in line with the finding that, when we include both sets of movie violence measures, only
exposure to the kids-in-mind measures lowers the incidence of violence (Columns 3 and 4).
   Sex and Profanity. Finally, we examine the impact of high-sexual content movies and
high-profanity movies. Kids-in-mind, in addition to rating movies on violent content, rates


                                                27
them also on sexual content and on profanity, both using a 0 to 10 scale. We report these
ratings for the movies listed in Appendix Table 1. “Scary Movie” is an example of a movie high
in sexual content, while “Erin Brockovich” and “Bad Boys 2” are movies high in profanity.
We use the same scale as for violence to define measures of mild sexual content and profanity
(5-7) and strong sexual content and profanity (8-10). The audience for movies high in sexual
content is much lower than for the corresponding category of violence, while movies high in
profanity reach about the same share of the audience as violent movies (Table 1).
    The impact of these types of movies has been debated, in particular the impact of high
sexual content movies on sexual assaults (Ariely and Loewenstein, 2005; Kendall, 2007). The
selection explanation suggests the most important dimension is the extent to which these
movies attract potential criminals. In columns 1-3 of Table 11 we examine the extent to
which movies high in sexual content or profanity attract a more violent demographic, young
people, using the CEX data. We find that the young audiences sort disproportionately into
movies with mild and high sexual content (column 1) and some evidence that they select into
movies with higher profanity (column 2). However, after controlling for the audience of violent
movies (column 3), there is no remaining evidence of selection on profanity, weaker evidence
of selection on sexual content, and strong evidence of selection on movie violence.
    We then consider the impact on assaults. When we consider the impact separately (columns
4-7), we find that movies with mild sexual content and with strong sexual content both lower
the incidence of assaults, with smaller effects for movies with no sexual content (columns 4-
5). We find similar results, with smaller magnitudes, for the impact of movies with mild or
strong profanity (columns 6-7). When we control for the audience of movies of different violent
content (columns 8-9), however, the impact of either profanity or sexual content is no longer
significant, while the impact of movie violence is similar to the impact in the benchmark
specification. These findings are fully consistent with the selection patterns documented in
columns 1-3. When considered on their own, sexual content and profanity attract young
audiences, but this is no longer true once one controls for movie violence.
   The results for the IMDB measures, for MPAA violence, and for sexual content and pro-
fanity underscore the importance of selection. Exposure to movies that attract more violent
groups (along observable lines) is associated with lower rates of violent crime.


6        Laboratory and Field Findings
We now compare our findings to the experimental evidence from the psychology literature.23
Table 12 summarizes the results of representative experiments. The first experiments (Lovaas,
    23
     In sociology there is a small literature that uses natural experiments in media programming. The most
relevant studies consider the impact of television boxing prizefights on homicides and the effect of suicide
episodes in soap operas on suicides (Phillips, 1982 and 1983).


                                                    28
1961; Bandura, Ross, and Ross, 1963), dating to the 1960s, were run mostly on small samples
of children, while the more recent studies (Bushman, 1995; Josephson, 1997) are run with
larger samples and on more varied populations. The treatment usually consists in exposure
to a 5 to 15 minute video of violent scenes from a violent movie. The control group usually
watches a video of comparable length with non-violent scenes. The measures of violence vary
from aggressive play with dolls for the children (Lovaas, 1961; Bandura, Ross, and Ross, 1963)
to the imposition of electric shocks or noxious noises on other subjects (Geen and O’Neill, 1969;
Bushman, 1995), and to aggressive play during a hockey game (Josephson, 1987). In all cases
except for Leyens (1975), the violence proxies are measured within an hour of the treatment.
The effect of the exposure to movie violence is large. In four out of first five experiments of
Table 12, exposure to the violent movie doubles the incidence of violence.24
    Leyens et al. (1975) stands out because it studies aggression and violence in a more realistic
context. Young people in a juvenile detention facility in Belgium are exposed to 5 consecutive
days of commercial violent movies (the treatment) or commercial non-violent movies (the con-
trol). Therefore, unlike in the other experiments, subjects are exposed to full-length movies.
The violence measure is a record of the percent of subjects that engage in acts of physical
aggression in a monitoring period. Interestingly, exposure to violent movies significantly in-
creases aggression in the evening, right after the movies are shown, but not at noon, after a
night’s sleep. The effects of media violence, though large, appear to be short-lived.25
   In contrast to the experimental studies, we find a significant negative short-run effect of
exposure to media violence on violent behavior. Reconciling these findings is important not
only to better understand the effect of media violence on violence, but also more generally to
understand the relationship between experimental and field evidence (Levitt and List, 2007).
    We discuss three factors that differ between the laboratory experiments and the field evi-
dence. The first and most important is the comparison group. In the laboratory, the control
group is exposed to a non-violent movie; hence, the treatment effects are estimated as the dif-
ference between the effect of violent versus non-violent movies (in the model, αv − αn ). In the
field, the implicit control group instead chooses the next-best alternative activity, for example,
going to a bar. Hence, the effect of exposure is measured as the difference between the effect
of movie violence and the effect of the alternative activity (in the model, αv − σ). In light of
  24
      This summary masks some heterogeneity. In the Geen and O’Neal (1969) study, for example, the effect of
the violent movie is significant only for the group that was exposed to a frustration manipulation (2 minutes of
loud white noise). (In fact, most of the experiments embed a frustration manipulation.)
   25
      A second set of evidence in Psychology comes from cross-sectional or longitudinal surveys. In these studies,
self-reported measures of media exposure are correlated with measures of aggressiveness and violence. Johnson
et al. (2002), for example, finds that the share of people committing assaults that can cause injury at age 16-22
is four times larger for people that (at age 14) watched at least 3 hours of television a day, as opposed to less
than an hour. These studies, which generally imply very large effects of the media, are plagued by problems of
endogeneity and reverse causation.



                                                       29
this difference, the two sets of findings are not necessarily contradictory. Exposure to violent
movies may be more dangerous than exposure to non-violent movies (αv > αn , the laboratory
finding), but still less dangerous than the alternative activity (αv < σ, the field finding).
    The second factor is selection. Subjects in the laboratory are a representative sample of the
(student) population, while movie-goers in the field are a self-selected sample. The sorting of
violent individuals into violent movies, which results in large displacement effects in the field,
is not present in the lab. Finally, the third factor is the type of violence. The clips used in
the experiments typically consist of 5-10 minutes of selected sequences of extreme violence. In
the field, instead, media violence also includes meaningful acts of reconciliation, apprehension
of criminals, and non-violent sequences. The exposure to random acts of violence may induce
different effects from the exposure to acts of violence viewed in a broader context.
    Given these differences, it is interesting that in the field we detect suggestive evidence of
arousal effects, in line with the experimental findings. After accounting for selection, strongly
violent movies appear to generate an increase in assaults relative to mildly violent movies
(Section 5.3). This may occur for the same reasons as in the laboratory—an emotional effect of
arousal, or short-term imitation of violent acts. Again as in the laboratory, we find no evidence
of a cathartic effect. Importantly, the field evidence allows us to benchmark this arousal effect
against other determinants of crime. The arousal effect is of a limited magnitude, compared
to the foregone violence associated with the alternative activity.
    The field findings are important to evaluate policies that would restrict access to violent
movies, as such policies would lead to substitution toward alternative activities. In the short-
run these policies would be likely to increase crime. The relevant impact is the one estimated in
this paper, as opposed to the one in the laboratory. The results of the laboratory experiments,
however, are useful to evaluate different policies. The laboratory experiments evaluate the
impact of unexpected exposure, as in the case of a violent advertisement or a trailer placed
within family programming. In addition, the differences between laboratory and field can be
altered by changes in the laboratory design. For instance, the laboratory experiments can
incorporate sorting into a violent movie (Lazear, Malmendier, and Weber, 2005) to replicate
the selection in the field, or can change the exposure to a full length movie.


7    Conclusion
We have provided causal evidence on the short-run effect of exposure to media violence on
violent crime. We exploit the natural experiment induced by the time-series variation in the
violence of movies at the box office. We show that exposure to violent movies has three main
effects on violent crime: (i) it reduces significantly violent crime in the evening on the day of
exposure; (ii) by an even larger percent, it reduces violent crime during the night hours following
exposure; (iii) it has no significant impact in the days and weeks following the exposure.


                                                30
    We interpret the first finding as voluntary incapacitation: potential criminals that choose
to attend the movie theater forego other activities which have higher crime rates. As simple as
this finding is, it has been neglected in the literature, despite its quantitative importance. We
interpret the second finding as substitution away from a night of more volatile activities, in
particular, reducing alcohol consumption. The third finding implies that the same-day impact
on crime is not offset by intertemporal substitution of crime. An important component of
these interpretations is the sorting of more violent individuals into violent movie attendance.
    These findings appear to contradict the evidence from laboratory experiments document-
ing an increase in violent behavior following exposure to movie violence. However, the field
and the laboratory findings are not necessarily contradictory. Exposure to movie violence can
lower violent behavior relative to the foregone alternative activity (the field findings), even if it
increases violent behavior relative to exposure to non-violent movies (the laboratory findings).
In fact, despite other differences with the psychology experiments, we document suggestive ev-
idence that violent movies induce more violent crime relative to non-violent movies, consistent
with an arousal effect. This arousal effect, however, is of limited magnitude—on net, violent
movies still induce substantially less violent behavior than the alternative activity.
    We can calculate the change in assaults that would occur if the audience of violent movies
did not go to the movies, but instead engaged in their next best alternative. The total number
of evening and nighttime assaults prevented is 997 assaults per weekend, adding up to almost
52,000 weekend assaults prevented yearly.26 Our estimates imply that a strongly violent block-
buster movie like “Hannibal” (with 10.1 million viewers on opening weekend) reduced assaults
by 1,056 on its opening weekend, which amounts to a 5.2% decrease in assaults, about half the
impact of the reduction in crime due to a cold day. This short-term impact of violent movies
has been overlooked by the previous literature, yet it is substantial.
    In the paper, we find no impact of violent movies in the days and weeks following exposure.
Still, our design (like the laboratory experiments) cannot address the important question about
the long-run effect of exposure to movie violence. As such, this paper should not be used to
inform policy on the long-term effects of limiting the level of violence allowed in the media.
However, it does indicate that in the short-run these policies will likely increase violent crime, as
they induce substitution toward more dangerous activities. Other activities with a controlled,
alcohol-free environment that attract young men, like Midnight Basketball, should also reduce
crime in the short run. Additional forms of entertainment targeted at young men, including
video games and television, may also have the same effect, a topic left for future research.

  26
     We assume: (i) no impact of media violence on assaults beyond the evening and night of the media exposure,
(ii) no substitution towards other movies, and (iii) effects for the whole population being the same as for the
set of cities in the NIBRS sample. We calculate the effect separately for each time block (evening and night)
and level of violence (strong and mild). We multiply the estimated baseline coefficient by the assault rate in
NIBRS data times the US population (300 million), times average violent movie attendance.


                                                      31
A     Appendix A - Data
Imputation of daily box-office audience. The daily box-office movie revenue is available
starting from September 1997, and it covers the 10 highest-selling movies on that day. To
expand the coverage to the period January 1995-August 1997 and to the movies that do not
make the daily top 10 list, we exploit the availability of the weekend revenue throughout the
whole sample for the 50 highest-selling movies. We take advantage of the regularity in the
within-week pattern of sales (Table 1) and impute the daily data, whenever missing, using the
weekend box-office data for the same movie in the same week. We use the following model.
Denote by aj,t the daily audience of movie j on date t, and by aw       j,w(t) the weekend audience of
movie j on weekend w(t) corresponding to date t. (Since most movies are released on Friday,
the function w (t) assigns the days from Monday through Thursday to the previous weekend.)
We assume that the daily audience is a share s of the weekend audience, where the share
allowed to depend on a set of controls Y , s (Y ): aj,t = s (Y ) aw       j,w(t) . After taking logs, the
model can be written as ln (aj,t ) = ln(s (Y )) + ln(aw j,w(t) ). The  most   important control for the
                                                        d
share ln (s (Y )) is the set of day-of-week indicators dt , since different days of the week capture a
different share of the overall revenue (Table 1). In addition, we use the following set of controls
Xj,t for the weekday share: month indicators (in the summer the Monday-Thursday audience is
larger), a linear time trend, indicators for the level of violence (non-violent versus mildly violent
versus strongly violent), indicators for rating type (G/PG/PG-13/R/NC-17/Unrated/Missing
Rating), indicators for week-of-release (up to week 26), and indicators for audience size in week
w (t) (audience < .5m, ≥ .5m and < 1m, ≥ 1m and < 2m, ≥ 2m and < 5m, ≥ 5m). This set
of controls X is interacted with the day-of-week dummies, as well as present in levels. Finally,
we control for a set of holidays Ht , described below. We estimate
                                            X                 X
              ln (aj,t ) − ln(aw
                               j,w(t) ) =         β d ddt +         Γd,X ddt Xj,t + ΓXj,t + ΦHt + εj,t
                                            d∈D               d∈D

over the set of movie-day observations (j, t) for which we observe both the daily audience
aj,t and the weekend audience awj,w(t) . We use the predicted values from the regressions,
ln (aj,t ) − ln(aw                                                                                    w
                 j,w(t) ), to obtain the predicted daily audience âj,t , as follows: âj,t = exp[ln(aj,w(t) )
           d

+ln (aj,t ) −
            d ln(aw
                  j,w(t) )]. The final daily box-office audience is defined as the actual box-office
data aj,t whenever available, and the predicted value otherwise. To test the accuracy of the
imputation, we regress actual daily revenue aj,t on predicted daily revenue âj,t over the sample
of weekend days (for consistency with the main specification) for which we have both measures.
The regression yields a slope coefficient of 1.0023 with an R2 of 0.9801.
     Holiday controls. We define an extensive set of holiday indicators to take into account
that (i) holidays generally increase movie attendance; (ii) the effect of different holidays on
attendance is quite different (attendance on Labor Day is much higher than on Memorial Day);
(iii) attendance increases also in the days preceding a Holiday, and for major holidays in the
week surrounding. Taking into account these facts, we include separate indicators for Martin
Luther King Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day, and Columbus Day, separate
indicators for the Friday, Saturday, and Sunday preceding each of these holidays (that is,
three separate indicators for each holiday) and a separate indicator for the Tuesday following
these holidays. We also include an indicator for Independence Day, Veteran’s Day, three
Easter indicators (Friday, Saturday, and Sunday), three Thanksgiving indicators (Wednesday,
Thursday, and Thanksgiving weekend), four Christmas indicators (December 20-23, December
24, December 25, and December 26-30), and three New Year indicators (December 31, January
1, and January 2-3). In addition, we include an indicator for holidays if they fall on a weekend
(Independence Day, Veteran’s Day, Christmas, New Year, and Valentine’s Day). Finally, we

                                                              32
include an indicator for St. Patrick’s Day, Valentine’s Day, Halloween, Cinco de Mayo, and
Mother’s Day. (Notice that several holiday indicators drop out in the benchmark sample which
includes only Friday through Sunday).
    TV Audience controls. We include two controls for TV audience: (i) an indicator for
the date of the Superbowl; (ii) the TV audience for TV programs with an audience above 15
million viewers, and 0 otherwise. The latter variable was constructed using Nielsen data on
top shows of the year listed in Time Almanac; the variable is zero for the season 2000-2001,
for which we could not locate the data.
    Weather controls. The source for the weather variables is the ”Global Surface Summary
of Day Data” produced by the National Climatic Data Center and available from
ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/gsod.
    Weather information is collected for the capital of each state in our sample (except for
Kentucky, where Lexington rather than Frankfort is used due to data issues). An average of
the weather variables is taken, using as weights the covered NIBRS population. These weights
are specific to a state and year due to the changing NIBRS coverage over time.
    The variables used are maximum and minimum daily temperature measured in Fahrenheit,
the heat index (which combines air temperature and relative humidity to determine an apparent
temperature for how hot it actually feels), wind speed measured in knots (categorized using the
Beaufort scale), rainfall, and snow. Before averaging, the variables are categorized as dummy
variables for the maximum daily temperature falling in one of three categories (> 80 and ≤ 90,
> 90 and ≤ 100, > 100), the minimum daily temperature falling in one of three categories
(≤ 10, > 10 and ≤ 20, > 20 and ≤ 32), the heat index falling in one of three categories (> 100
and ≤ 115, > 115 and ≤ 130, > 130), the windspeed falling in one of two categories (> 17 and
≤ 21, > 21), any rain, and any snow.


B     Appendix B - Instruments
Benchmark Instrument. Our set of instruments uses information on the following weekend’s
audience for the same movie to predict movie attendance, and then aggregates these predictors
across all movies of a given violence level. The procedure is related to the imputation procedure,
and we use the same notation (Appendix A). We assume the daily audience aj,t on day t
is a share s of the weekend audience in the same week w (t), where the share allowed to
depend on a set of controls Y j , s Y j : aj,t = s Y j aw   j,w(t) . In addition, we assume that the
                                                          w                 j
                                                                               w
weekend audience decays at rate d (Y ) each week: aj,w(t)+1 = d Y aj,w(t) . Combining the
two expressions and taking logs, we obtain ln (aj,t ) − ln(aw             ) = ln(s Y j ) − ln(d Y j ).
                                                                                                  
                                                                 j,w(t)+1
The most important control for the term ln s Y j − ln(d Y j ) is the set of day-of-week
                                                                       

indicators ddt : different days of the week capture a different share of the overall revenue (Table
1). In addition, we use the same set of controls Xj,t as for the imputation procedure (Appendix
A), with only two differences: (i) the indicators for audience size refer to week w (t) + 1 (as
opposed to week w (t)), and (ii) we add indicators for slow releases (indicators for the cases in
which the weekend audience for week w (t) is less than 3 (respectively, 5) times smaller than
in week w (t) + 1. This set of controls Xj,t is interacted with the day-of-week dummies, as well
as present in levels. This allows the decay rate to vary by weekday and differentially so for
different types of movies. Finally, we include the holiday controls Ht , described above, and
365 day-of-year indicators ηd(t) . We estimate
                                        X                 X
        ln (aj,t ) − ln(aw
                         j,w(t)+1 ) =         β d ddt +         Γd,X ddt Xj,t + ΓXj,t + ΦHt + ηd(t) + εj,t   (7)
                                        d∈D               d∈D

over the set of movie-day observations (j, t) for which we observe both the daily (not imputed)

                                                           33
audience aj,t and the audience aw
                                j,w(t)+1 for the next weekend. The regression is weighted
by the next weekend’s audience aw
                                j,w(t)+1 . We use the predicted values from the regressions,
            ln(aw
ln (aj,t ) −d                                                                              w
                j,w(t)+1 ), to obtain the predicted daily audience âj,t : âj,t = exp[ln(aj,w(t)+1 ) +
            ln(aw
ln (aj,t ) −d                                                               n     m         v
                j,w(t)+1 )]. Finally, to generate the predicted audiences Ât , Ât , and Ât , we
simply aggregate across the movies in the relevant violence category. For example, Âvt =
P10 P         jv â , where djv is an indicator for film j belonging to violence level v. The
  v=8   j∈J d       j,t
instruments for the audience measures by sexual content, profanity, and MPAA-based violence
ratings differ only in the final aggregation by categories of movies.
    Instrument for DVD/VHS Rentals. The instrument for DVD and VHS rentals is
constructed similarly to the benchmark instrument, except that Video Store Magazine only
publishes the DVD and VHS rental at the weekly level. Hence, we estimate the equivalent of
the predictive specification (7) for rentals in week w (t):
                              
                   ln aj,w(t) − ln(aw
                                    j,w(t)+1 ) = ΓYj,w(t) + ΦHw(t) + ηd(t) + εj,t .

The regression is weighted by the next week’s rentals aw    j,w(t)+1 . The set of controls Yj,w(t) , as
for the standard instrument, includes month indicators, a linear time trend, indicators for the
level of violence, indicators for rating type, and indicators for rentals in week w (t) + 1. The
holiday controls Ht indicate separate indicators for whether the week w (t) includes any of
the holidays described in Appendix A, and whether the week w (t) + 1 includes any of these
holidays. The predicted values from the regressions are used to generate the predicted weekly
rentals âj,t . These predicted rentals are then approportioned to each day of week using the
within-week shares of rentals from the CEX time diaries.
    Theaters and Budget Instrument. The estimates in column 3 of Appendix Table
2 use an instrument based on the number of theaters and on the production budget. The
number of theater screens in which a movie plays in a given week is a good predictor of its
audience (Moretti, 2007). We use the data on number of screens for week w (t) from www.the-
numbers.com (the same source of the revenue data), and renormalize it by the 90th percentile
of the number of screens in that year, obtaining variable nsj,w(t) . We obtain the production
budget from the same source, and also renormalize it by the 90th percentile of the budget in
that year. To obtain the final variable we take logs: log (bj ) . An indicator variable indicates
movies for which the production budget is missing, in which case log (bj ) is set to zero. We
denote the vector of these variables as N Bj,w(t) . Since the predictability of audience using
number of screens and budget varies with both the weekday and the number of weeks a movie
has been out, we interact the variables N Bj,w(t) with a day-of-week indicators ddt as well
indicators for number of weeks out dnw j,w(t) (0 weeks, 1 week, 2-4 weeks, 5-9 weeks, 10-19 weeks,
20-26 weeks, > 26). We estimate
                  X                        X                                            X
 ln (aj,t ) =             β nw dnw
                                j,w(t) +       Γnw,N B dnw
                                                        j,w(t) N Bj,w(t) +                    β d ddt +
                nw∈N W                nw∈N W                                            d∈D
                X                                           X
                      d,N B d
                    Γ      dt N Bj,w(t) + ΓN B N Bj,t   +         Γ   d,Y
                                                                            ddt Yj,t   + ΓYj,t + ΦHt + ηd(t) + εj,t
                d∈D                                         d∈D

over the set of movie-day observations (j, t) for which we observe the daily (not imputed)
audience aj,t . The regression is weighted by the number of movies screens next week nj,w(t)+1 .
The set of controls Yj,t is the same as for the standard instrument, except that we do not use
information on the audience next week.


                                                   34
References
 [1] Anderson, Craig A., and Brad J. Bushman. “Effects of Violent Video Games on Aggressive
     Behavior, Aggressive Cognition, Aggressive Affect, Physiological Arousal, and Prosocial
     Behavior: A Meta-analytic Review of the Scientific Literature.” Psychological Science,
     Vol. 12, pp. 353–359, 2001.
 [2] Anderson, Craig, Leonard Berkowitz, Edward Donnerstein, L. Rowell Huesmann, James
     D. Johnson, Daniele Linz, Neil M. Malamut, and Ellen Wartella. “The Influence of Media
     Violence on Youth”, Psychological Science in The Public Interest, Vol. 4, pp. 81-110, 2003.
 [3] Dan Ariely and George Loewenstein. “The Heat of the Moment: The Effect of Sexual
     Arousal on Sexual Decision Making”, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, Vol. 18(1),
     pp. 1–12, 2005.
 [4] Bandura, Albert, Dorothea Ross, and Sheila A. Ross. “Imitation of Film-mediated Ag-
     gressive Models,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, Vol. 66, pp. 3–11, 1963.
 [5] Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. “The Political Economy Of Government Respon-
     siveness: Theory And Evidence From India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 2002.
 [6] Bushman, Brad J. “Moderating Role of Trait Aggressiveness in the Effects of Violent
     Media on Aggression,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol, 69, pp. 950–
     960, 1995.
 [7] Carpenter, Christopher and Dobkin, Carlos. “The Drinking Age, Alcohol Consumption,
     and Crime,” working paper, 2007.
 [8] Card, David and Gordon Dahl. “Professional Sports, Emotional Cues, and Domestic Vi-
     olence”, working paper, 2007.
 [9] DellaVigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan, “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1187-1234, 2007.
[10] DiIulio, John and Anne Piehl. “Does Prison Pay? The Stormy National Debate over the
     Cost-Effectiveness of Imprisonment.” Brookings Review. Fall, pp. 28–35, 1991.
[11] Einav, Liran. “Seasonality in the U.S. Motion Picture Industry,” Rand Journal of Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 38(1), pp. 127-145, 2007.
[12] Federal Trade Commission, Marketing Violent Entertainment To Children:A Review Of
     Self-Regulation And Industry Practices In The Motion Picture, Music Recording, And
     Electronic Game Industries., 2000.
[13] Gentzkow, Matthew. “Television and Voter Turnout”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     Vol. 121: 931-972, 2006.
[14] Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro. “Preschool Television Viewing and Adolescent
     Test Scores: Historical Evidence from the Coleman Study”, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 123(1): 2008.
[15] Green, Donald P. and Alan S. Gerber, Get Out The Vote!, Washington, D.C.: Brookings
     Institution Press, 2004.
[16] Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren. “Are Idle Hands The Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,
     Concentration And Juvenile Crime”, American Economic Review, Vol. 93, 2003.

                                              35
[17] Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren, and Enrico Moretti. “The Dynamics of Criminal Behavior:
     Evidence from Weather Shocks” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 42, 2007.
[18] Johnson, Jeffrey G., Patricia Cohen, Elizabeth M. Smailes, Stephanie Kasen, Judith S.
     Brook. “Television Viewing and Aggressive Behavior During Adolescence and Adulthood”,
     Science, Vol. 295, pp. 2468-2471, 2002.
[19] Joint Statement, Joint Statement on The Impact of Entertainment Violence on Children,
     by American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psy-
     chiatry, American Medical Association, American Psychological Association, American
     Academy of Family Physicians, and American Psychiatric Association, 2000.
[20] Josephson, Wendy L. “Television Violence and Children’s Aggression: Testing the Prim-
     ing, Social Script, and Disinhibition Predictions.” Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
     chology, Vol. 53, pp. 882–890, 1987.
[21] Kendall, Todd D. “Pornography, Rape, and the Internet,” working paper, 2007.
[22] Kessler, Daniel and Steven Levitt. “Using Sentence Enhancements to Distinguish between
     Deterrence and Incapacitation,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 343-63, 1999.
[23] Lazear, Edward, Ulrike Malmendier, and Roberto Weber, “Sorting in Experiments with
     Application to Social Preferences”, Working paper, 2005.
[24] Leyens, Jacques-Philippe, Leoncio Camino, Ross D. Parke, and Leonard Berkowitz. “Ef-
     fects of Movie Violence on Aggression in a Field Setting as a Function of Group Dominance
     and Cohesion,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 32, 346–360, 1975.
[25] Levitt, Steven. “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from
     Prison Overcrowding Litigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 111, pp. 319–52,
     1996.
[26] Levitt, Steven, and John List, “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Pref-
     erences Tell Us About The Real World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21(2),
     pp. 153-174, 2007.
[27] Loewenstein, George and Jennifer Lerner. 2003. “The Role of Affect in Decision Making,”
     in Handbook of Affective Science, eds. Richard J. Dawson, Klaus R. Scherer and H. Hill
     Goldsmith, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 619-42.
[28] Lovaas, O. Ivar, “Effect of exposure To Symbolic Aggression on Aggressive Behavior,”
     Child Development, Vol. 32, pp. 37–44, 1961.
[29] Moretti, Enrico. “Social Learning and Peer Effects in Consumption: Evidence From Movie
     Sales”, working paper, 2007.
[30] Phillips, David P. “The Impact of Fictional Television Stories on U.S. Adult Fatalities:
     New Evidence on the Effect of the Mass Media on Violence.” American Journal of Soci-
     ology, Vol. 87, pp. 1340–1359, 1982.
[31] Phillips, David P. “The Impact of Mass Media Violence on U.S. Homicides,” American
     Sociological Review, Vol. 48, pp. 560–568, 1983.
[32] Spelman, William. Criminal Incapacitation, Springer Eds., 1993.
[33] Stromberg, David. “Radio Impact on Public Spending”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     Vol. 119, pp. 189-221, 2004.


                                              36
                                                                                     Figure 1a. Weekend Theater Audience of Strongly Violent Movies
                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feb 28 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Passion of the Christ
                                            14
                                                                                                                                                            July 8 2000                   Feb 10 2001                     Mar 20 2004
                                                                                                July 26 1997                                                Scary Movie                   Hannibal                        Dawn of the Dead
                                                                                                Air Force One
                                            12
 Weekend audience (in millions of people)




                                                                            Nov 9 1996                                Dec 13 1997                   Nov 27 1999
                                                                                                                      Scream 2                                                                       July 21 2001
                                                                            Ransom                                                                  End Of Days
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jurassic Park 3
                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                July 19 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bad Boys II
                                             8



                                             6



                                             4



                                             2



                                             0
                                                   Jan-95


                                                              Jul-95


                                                                            Jan-96


                                                                                       Jul-96


                                                                                                  Jan-97


                                                                                                             Jul-97


                                                                                                                         Jan-98


                                                                                                                                   Jul-98


                                                                                                                                                 Jan-99


                                                                                                                                                          Jul-99


                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-00


                                                                                                                                                                               Jul-00


                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jul-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul-04
                                                                                                                                                                   Weekend

                                                                                        Figure 1b. Weekend Theater Audience of Mildly Violent Movies

                                                                                                                                                                                                         May 18 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Star Wars 2
                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                                                      May 4 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Spider-Man                                    July 24/31 2004
                                                                                                           Dec 27 1997                                                                                                   May 25 2002                Bourne Supremacy
                                                                                                           Titanic                          June 12 1999                                                                 Star Wars 2
 Weekend audience (in millions of people)




                                                                       May 25 1996                                                          Austin Powers 2                             Aug 4 2001                                         June 5 2004
                                            20                         Twister                                                                                                                                                             Harry Potter 3
                                                                                                                                                                                        Rush Hour 2




                                            15




                                            10




                                            5




                                            0
                                                 Jan-95


                                                            Jul-95


                                                                          Jan-96


                                                                                     Jul-96


                                                                                                 Jan-97


                                                                                                            Jul-97


                                                                                                                        Jan-98


                                                                                                                                  Jul-98


                                                                                                                                                Jan-99


                                                                                                                                                          Jul-99


                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-00


                                                                                                                                                                               Jul-00


                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jul-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-04




                                                                                                                                                                   Weekend

Notes: Plot of weekend (Friday through Sunday) box-office audience in millions of people for movies rated as strongly
violent (Figure 1a) and mildly violent (Figure 1b). The 10 weekends with the highest audience for strongly violent
(respectively, mildly violent) movies are labeled in Figure 1a (Figure 1b). Movies are rated as strongly violent
(respectively, mildly violent) if they have a kids-in-mind.com rating 8-10 (5-7). The audience data is from box-office sales
(from the-numbers.com) deflated by the average price of a ticket.

                                                                                                                                                                      37
                                                                                                                                                    Figure 1c. Log Weekend Assaults
                           9.5




                           9.0




                           8.5
 Log Weekend Assaults




                           8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Weekend Assaults
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Top 10 Strongly Violent (8-10) Movies
                           7.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Top 10 Mildly Violent (5-7) Movies




                           7.0




                           6.5
                                       Jan-95


                                                         Jul-95


                                                                           Jan-96


                                                                                             Jul-96


                                                                                                               Jan-97


                                                                                                                                 Jul-97


                                                                                                                                                   Jan-98


                                                                                                                                                                     Jul-98


                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul-00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Weekend

                                                                  Figure 1d. Residuals of Regression of Log Assault on Seasonality Controls
                                     0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Log Assault Residuals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Top 10 Strongly Violent (8-10) Movies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Top 10 Mildly Violent (5-7) Movies

                                      0.1
             Log Assault Residuals




                                     0.05




                                          0




                                     -0.05




                                      -0.1
                                                Jan-95


                                                                  Jul-95


                                                                                    Jan-96


                                                                                                      Jul-96


                                                                                                                        Jan-97


                                                                                                                                          Jul-97


                                                                                                                                                            Jan-98


                                                                                                                                                                              Jul-98


                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan-00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jul-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jul-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Weekend
 Notes: Plot of weekend (Friday through Sunday) log assaults in Figure 1c and average (Friday through Sunday) residuals
of weekend log assaults after controlling for seasonality, holidays, and weather controls (see text for list of all the controls)
in Figure 1d. The assault data is from NIBRS. The figure highlights the 10 weekends with the largest strongly violent
movie audience (see Figure 1a) and the 10 weekends with the largest mildly violent movie audience (see Figure 1b).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              38
                                                                                                       Figure 2. Theoretical Effect of Movie Violence on Assaults

                                                                                            Movie Attendance More Dangerous (MMD))
                                                                                            MMD + Arousal
                                                                                            MMD + Catharsis
                                                                                            Alternative Activity More Dangerous (AMD)
                         Effect of Exposure to Movie Violence on Assaults


                                                                                            AMD + Arousal
                                                                                            AMD + Catharsis




                                                                                    0        1              2          3           4            5          6          7           8        9       10




                                                                                                                                  Rating of Movie Violence
                                                                                                       Figure 3. Observed Effect of Movie Violence on Assaults
                                                                            0.04


                                                                                                                                                        6PM-12AM Confidence Interval
                                                                            0.03                                                                        6PM-12AM Confidence Interval
                                                                                                                                                        6PM-12AM
                                                                                                                                                        12AM-6AM Confidence Interval
                                                                            0.02
         Coefficient Estimate in IV Regressions




                                                                                                                                                        12AM-6AM Confidence Interval
                                                                                                                                                        12AM-6AM

                                                                            0.01



                                                                               0
                                                                                        0          1            2          3            4           5          6          7            8       9    10


                                                                            -0.01



                                                                            -0.02



                                                                            -0.03



                                                                            -0.04
                                                                                                                                        Rating of Movie Violence
Notes: Theoretical scenarios (Figure 2) and empirical estimates (Figure 3) of the effect of exposure to movies of violence
v=0,…,10 on assaults. The scenario “Movie Attendance More Dangerous” in Figure 2 indicates that, compared to the
alternative activity, movie attendance induces more violent behavior in the aftermath of exposure. The scenario
“Alternative Activity More Dangerous” refers to the opposite possibility. In both scenarios, the coefficients fan out with
movie violence due to the increased self-selection of potential criminals. The “Arousal” scenario indicates that the direct
effect of exposure to violent movies is to induce more crime than exposure to non-violent movies because of arousal. The
“Catharsis” scenario indicates an opposite effect because of catharsis. Figure 3 plots the coefficients and 95% confidence
intervals from IV regression of log (assaults) on 11 variables for the daily audience for movies rated with violence level
v=0,1,…,10. Separate regressions are run for assaults in the 6PM-12AM and 12AM-6AM time periods. The coefficients
can be interpreted as the percent change in assaults for an increase of one million in the audience for movies of violence v.

                                                                                                                                            39
                                      Figure 4. Effect of Movie Violence by One-Hour Time Blocks




Notes: Plot of coefficients from 24 separate IV regressions of log(assaults) on the audience size of strongly, mildly, and non-violent movies using the baseline
specification. The size of each point is inversely proportional to the estimated variance of the coefficient estimate. The horizontal lines within each 6-hour time
block are the weighted average of the estimated coefficients within a violence category, where the weights are the inverse of the estimated variances. The
violence rating of movies is from kids-in-mind.com. The audience data is obtained from box office sales (from the-numbers.com) deflated by the average price of
a ticket.




                                                                               40
                                                                        Figure 5. Share of Young Males in Audience As Function of Violence
                                                                                           (Internet Movie Database Data)
                                                          0.55

                                                                         Young Males in Audience As Function of
                                                                         Violence of Movie
                                                                         Confidence Interval (Lower Bound)
         Share of Young Males Among IMDB Reviewers of Movie




                                                              0.5
                                                                         Confidence Interval (Upper Bound)




                                                          0.45




                                                              0.4




                                                          0.35




                                                              0.3
                                                                    0    1           2           3           4         5           6          7       8   9   10
                                                                                             Rating of Violent Content of Movie (from kids-in-mind)

Notes:.Plot of the share of IMDB reviewers who are young males for a movie versus violent content. Young males are defined as men between the ages of 18
and 29. The violence rating of movies is from kids-in-mind.com. The dotted lines are pointwise 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                     41
                                                          Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                                                                            Assaults (per day)
                                                                                     Entire Day          6AM to 6PM 6PM to 12AM 12AM to 6AM
Assault Data For All Days                                                                (1)                 (2)           (3)      (4)
  Weekend (Friday - Sunday)                                                               1454                  569                  531                   354
    Friday                                                                                1589                  614                  543                   432
    Saturday                                                                              1564                  557                  558                   449
    Sunday                                                                                1209                  536                  491                   182
  Weekday (Monday - Thursday)                                                             1293                  608                  480                   205
Assault Data For Weekends (Friday - Sunday)                                                     Share of weekend assaults in category
By gender of offender
 Share with Male Offender                                                                0.779                 0.755                0.784                0.811
By age of offender
 Share with offender of age 13 to 17                                                     0.107                 0.136                0.114                0.051
 Share with offender of age 18 to 29                                                     0.378                 0.340                0.359                0.467
 Share with offender of age 30 to 44                                                     0.326                 0.317                0.342                0.315
 Share with offender of age 45-54                                                        0.076                 0.082                0.082                0.059
 Share with offender of age 55+                                                          0.027                 0.034                0.026                0.016
Alcohol-related assaults
  Share with offender suspected of using alc. or drugs                                   0.170                 0.082                0.185                0.290
  Share at a bar involving alcohol or drugs                                              0.014                 0.002                0.011                0.039
Number of Observations                                                                  N = 1,563 days, 2,272,999 assaults, 1,781 agencies
                                                                                   Movie Audience (in millions of tickets / rentals per day)
                                                                                       Theater Audience              VHS/DVD rentals
Movie Audience Data For All Days                                                              (5)                            (6)
  Weekend (Friday - Sunday)                                                                          6.29                                      3.92
    Friday                                                                                           5.74                                      4.13
    Saturday                                                                                         7.90                                      4.82
    Sunday                                                                                           5.24                                      2.82
  Weekday (Monday - Thursday)                                                                        2.00                                      2.09
Movie Audience Data For Weekends (Friday - Sunday)
By Kids-in-Mind rating
 Strongly violent movies                                                                             0.87                                      0.64
 Mildly violent movies                                                                               2.43                                      1.56
 Non violent movies                                                                                  2.99                                      1.72
  Movies with strong sexual content                                                                  0.19
  Movies with mild sexual content                                                                    1.37
  Movies with no sexual content                                                                      4.72
  Movies with strong profanity                                                                       0.82
  Movies with mild profanity                                                                         2.35
  Movies with no profanity                                                                           3.12
By alternative MPAA rating
 Strongly violent movies                                                                             0.48
 Mildly violent movies                                                                               2.19
 Non violent movies                                                                                  3.65
Notes: An observation is a day over the years 1995-2004. Assault data comes from the National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS), and the sample includes
agencies that do not have missing data on any crime (not just assaults) for more than seven consecutive days for that year. The movie audience numbers are obtained
from the-numbers.com and are daily box-office revenue divided by the average price per ticket. The ratings of violent movies are from www.kids-in-mind.com. The
audience of mildly violent movies is the audience of all movies with a violence rating 5-7. The audience of strongly violent movies is the audience of all movies with a
violence rating 8-10. These groupings are the same for sexual content and profanity as well, which are also obtained from kids-in-mind.com. The alternative MPAA rating
is based on the presence of key words used to describe why a movie received a certain rating by the MPAA. VHS/DVD rental data comes from Video Store Magazine.




                                                                                 42
                                         Table 2. The Effect of Movie Violence on Same-Day Assaults

     Specification:                                                                                    OLS Regressions                                                    IV Regressions
     Dep. Var.:                                                                                        Log (Number of Assaults in Day t)
                                                                        (1)              (2)            (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)                                        (7)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                 0.0324       0.0005     -0.0061                     -0.0051         -0.0072     -0.0091                     -0.0106
   (in millions of people in Day t)                               (0.0053)*** (0.0053) (0.0033)*                       (0.0033)        (0.0033)** (0.0026)***                 (0.0031)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                   0.0246       0.0017     -0.0084                     -0.0042         -0.0056     -0.0079                     -0.0102
   (in millions of people in Day t)                               (0.0030)*** (0.0029) (0.0020)***                     (0.0026)        (0.0027)** (0.0022)***                 (0.0028)***
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                      0.0082      -0.0164     -0.0062                     -0.0023         -0.0029     -0.0035                     -0.0050
   (in millions of people in Day t)                               (0.0029)*** (0.0030)*** (0.0021)***                  (0.0024)         (0.0026)   (0.0024)                    (0.0029)*
Control Variables:
   Year Indicators                                                       X                X                X                X                X                X                     X
   Day-of-Week Indicators                                                                 X                X                X                X                X                     X
   Month Indicators                                                                                        X                X                X                X                     X
   Day-of-Year Indicators                                                                                                   X                X                X                     X
   Holiday Indicators                                                                                                                        X                X                     X
   Weather and TV Audience Controls                                                                                                                           X                     X

   F-Test on Additional Controls       F=1934.02 F=1334.31                                            F=88.56           F=13.37          F=15.05          F=18.58
Audience Instrumented With Predicted
                                                                                                                                                                                    X
Audience Using Next Weekend's Audience
R2                                                                   0.9344           0.9711           0.9846           0.9904           0.9912           0.9931                   .
N                                                                   N = 1563         N = 1563         N = 1563         N = 1563         N = 1563         N = 1563              N = 1563
Notes: An observation is a Friday, Saturday, or Sunday over the years 1995-2004. Assault data comes from the National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS), where the sample includes
agencies that do not have missing data on any crime (not just assaults) for more than seven consecutive days. The movie audience numbers are obtained from the-numbers.com and are daily box-
office revenue divided by the average price per ticket. The ratings of violent movies are from www.kids-in-mind.com. The audience of strongly violent movies is the audience of all movies with a
violence rating 8-10. The audience of mildly violent movies is the audience of all movies with a violence rating 5-7. The specifications in Columns (1) through (6) are OLS regressions with the
log(number of assault occurring in day t) as the dependent variable. The specification in Column (7) instruments the audience numbers with the predicted audience numbers based on next
weekend's audience. Details on the construction of the predicted audience numbers are in the text. Robust standard errors clustered by week in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                               43
    Table 3. The Effect of Movie Violence on Same-Day Assaults by Time of Day.
                                                         Panel A. Benchmark Results

       Specification:                                                          Instrumental Variable Regressions
       Dep. Var.:                                                       Log (Number of Assaults in Day t in Time Window)
                                                                          (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                      -0.0050           -0.0030             -0.0130           -0.0192
   (in millions of people in Day t)                                     (0.0066)          (0.0050)           (0.0049)***       (0.0060)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                        -0.0106           -0.0001             -0.0109           -0.0205
   (in millions of people in Day t)                                    (0.0060)*          (0.0045)           (0.0040)***       (0.0052)***
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                           -0.0033            0.0016             -0.0063           -0.0060
   (in millions of people in Day t)                                     (0.0060)          (0.0046)            (0.0043)          (0.0054)
Time of Day                                                           6AM-12PM           12PM-6PM            6PM-12AM          12AM-6AM
                                                                                                                                next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                    X                 X                     X                 X
Predicted Audience Using Next
                                                                           X                 X                     X                 X
Week's Audience
N                                                                      N = 1563          N = 1563            N = 1563           N = 1562

                                                                    Panel B. First Stage

      Specification:                                                                      IV Regression, First Stage
                                                                      Audience of Strongly Audience of Mildly              Audience of Non
      Dep. Var.:                                                        Violent Movies      Violent Movies                  Violent Movies
                                                                              (1)                 (2)                             (3)
Pred. Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                    0.9145                    -0.1431                 -0.1694
   (in millions of people in Day t)                                        (0.0196)***               (0.0210)***             (0.0281)***
Pred. Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                      -0.0399                    0.8532                 -0.1817
   (in millions of people in Day t)                                        (0.0101)***               (0.0255)***             (0.0296)***
Pred. Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                         -0.0480                   -0.1363                 0.8138
   (in millions of people in Day t)                                        (0.0097)***               (0.0195)***             (0.0309)***
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                         X                        X                       X

F-Test on Instruments                                                     F = 1050.89                F = 889.02              F = 730.85
N                                                                          N = 1563                  N = 1563                 N = 1563
Notes: See notes to Table 2.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                               44
                                                                       Table 4. Medium-Run Effect of Movie Violence

     Specification:                                                                                                                      OLS Regressions
     Timing:                                                                   Next Monday and Tuesday                              Next Week         Two Weeks Later                                Three Weeks Later
                                                                                Log (Number of Assaults
                                                                                On Monday and Tuesday
     Dep. Var.:                                                                     in Time Window)                                      Log (Number of Assaults in Day t in Time Window)
                                                                                    (1)          (2)                             (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)                                     (8)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                                                                           -0.0127         -0.0081             -0.0142         -0.0209     -0.0136     -0.0199
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                                                        (0.0045)***        (0.0060)         (0.0051)***      (0.0067)*** (0.0051)*** (0.0063)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                                                                             -0.0061         -0.0087             -0.0096         -0.0194     -0.0114     -0.0199
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                                                         (0.0031)**       (0.0043)**         (0.0042)**      (0.0056)*** (0.0041)*** (0.0052)***
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                                                                                -0.0027          0.0030             -0.0050         -0.0079     -0.0070     -0.0076
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                                                          (0.0033)         (0.0050)           (0.0046)        (0.0061)    (0.0044)    (0.0056)
Lagged Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                          0.0019               -0.0004              0.0046          -0.0017             -0.0028          0.0020      0.0017     -0.0065
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                (0.0058)              (0.0087)            (0.0042)         (0.0054)           (0.0047)        (0.0062)    (0.0044)    (0.0056)
Lagged Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                            -0.007               -0.0146             -0.0018           0.0001             -0.0061         -0.0056      0.0002     -0.0105
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                (0.0050)             (0.0076)*            (0.0026)         (0.0037)           (0.0037)        (0.0049)    (0.0031) (0.0045)**
Lagged Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                               0.0012               -0.0065             -0.0007           0.0031             -0.0060          0.0012      0.0011     -0.0049
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                (0.0054)              (0.0074)            (0.0028)         (0.0041)           (0.0042)        (0.0055)    (0.0036)    (0.0048)
Lag Specification                                                                   Lag: Weekend Before                       Lag: 7 Days Before                 Lag: 14 Days Before                 Lag: 21 Days Before
Time of Day                                                                      6PM-12AM             12AM-6AM             6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM
                                                                                                       next day                      next day          next day          next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                                 X                    X                    X                X                  X                X                  X                X
Audience Instrumented With Predicted Audience
                                                                                        X                    X                   No               No                  X                X                  X                X
Using Following Week's Audience
N                                                                                 N = 1041              N = 1041             N = 1559         N = 1558          N = 1556          N = 1555          N = 1553          N = 1552
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The specifications are IV regressions with the log(number of assault occurring in day t) as the dependent variable. The specifications in Columns 3 and 4 are not instrumented, since the predictors for
the audience of the previous week are highly collinear with the contemporaneous audience.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                 45
                                                                                                   Table 5. Placebo Tests

     Specification:                                                                                                                     Placebo IV Regressions
     Dep. Var.:                                                                                                                    Log (Number of Assaults in Day t)
                                                                                 (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)                                 (7)                (8)               (9)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                           -0.0018           -0.0143          -0.0207              -0.0007          -0.0108            -0.0169             -0.0027           -0.0133     -0.0203
   (in millions per day in day t)                                            (0.0063)         (0.0072)**        (0.0091)**           (0.0049)         (0.0054)**         (0.0068)**          (0.0046)         (0.0049)*** (0.0062)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                             -0.0004           -0.0148          -0.0288              -0.0026          -0.0103            -0.0188             -0.0033           -0.0102     -0.0194
   (in millions per day in day t)                                            (0.0056)         (0.0059)**       (0.0073)***           (0.0045)         (0.0045)**        (0.0057)***          (0.0042)          (0.0041)** (0.0052)***
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                                0.0038            -0.0115          -0.0089               0.0024          -0.0055            -0.0077             0.0007            -0.0069     -0.0087
   (in millions per day in day t)                                            (0.0060)          (0.0061)*         (0.0078)            (0.0046)          (0.0049)           (0.0062)           (0.0043)           (0.0044)   (0.0056)

Placebo Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                   0.0076            0.0015             0.007               -0.0083          -0.0062            -0.007             -0.0049            0.0025            0.0051
   (in millions per day in day t)                                            (0.0063)          (0.0070)          (0.0099)            (0.0047)*         (0.0050)          (0.0064)            (0.0041)           (0.0043)          (0.0059)
Placebo Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                     0.0083            0.0016            -0.0031              -0.0061          -0.0046           -0.0068             -0.0027            0.0022            0.0024
   (in millions per day in day t)                                            (0.0054)          (0.0055)          (0.0079)             (0.0039)         (0.0038)          (0.0057)            (0.0034)           (0.0035)          (0.0046)
Placebo Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                        0.0081            0.0003            0.0034              -0.0092           -0.0042           0.0001              -0.0035            0.0068            0.0125
   (in millions per day in day t)                                            (0.0056)          (0.0060)          (0.0084)           (0.0038)**         (0.0040)          (0.0061)            (0.0034)          (0.0035)*         (0.0052)**
                                                                           Audience on Same Day and Day-Of-
Placebo Audience                                                                 Week in Another Year                                         Audience 14 Days Later                                  Audience 21 Days Later
Time of Day                                                                 6AM-6PM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM                               6AM-6PM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM                               6AM-6PM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM
                                                                                              next day                                                next day                                                next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                           X                 X                 X                   X                 X                 X                   X                 X                  X
Audience Instrumented With Predicted
                                                                                  X                 X                 X                   X                 X                 X                   X                 X                  X
Audience Using Following Week's Audience
N                                                                           N = 1200          N = 1200           N = 1199           N = 1556           N = 1556          N = 1555            N = 1553          N = 1553          N = 1552
Notes: We generate the placebo audiences for columns 1-3 by re-assigning the audience measures to the other date in the sample that falls on both the same day-of-year and the same day-of-week (if such date exists). This correspondence is
complicated by the presence of February 29 in leap years. For example, all dates between January 1 and February 28 of 1996 are matched to the corresponding date in 2001 (and viceversa). All dates between March 1 and December 31 in 1996,
instead, are matched to the corresponding date in 2002 (and viceversa). The specifications in columns 4-9 generate placebo audiences using the audiences 14 and 21 days in the future. The IV regressions include both the real audience sizes as
well as the placebo audience sizes. See also notes to Table 2.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                      46
                              Table 6. The Effect of DVD/VHS Movie Violence on Same-Day Assaults

     Specification:                                                                                      Instrumental Variable Regressions
     Dep. Var.:                                                                                 Log (Number of Assaults in Day t in Time Window)
                                                                                     (1)             (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)                                  (6)
DVD/VHS Rentals Of Strongly Violent Movies                                       -0.0042           -0.0078     -0.0148                     -0.0051          -0.0044           -0.0107
   (in millions of people in day t)                                              (0.0058)         (0.0063)    (0.0078)*                   (0.0101)         (0.0104)          (0.0120)
DVD/VHS Rentals Of Mildly Violent Movies                                          -0.0041          -0.0148     -0.0311                     -0.0034          -0.0227           -0.0193
   (in millions of people in day t)                                              (0.0059)        (0.0052)*** (0.0071)***                  (0.0103)        (0.0092)**        (0.0102)*
DVD/VHS Rentals Of Non-Violent Movies                                             -0.0029          -0.0043     -0.0225                     -0.0054          -0.0041           -0.0199
   (in millions of people in day t)                                              (0.0066)         (0.0060) (0.0076)***                    (0.0115)         (0.0106)         (0.0114)*

Theater Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                                                                                0.0017          -0.0098          -0.0192
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                                                                       (0.0082)         (0.0077)        (0.0089)**
Theater Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                                                                                  0.0034          -0.0119          -0.0202
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                                                                       (0.0076)        (0.0070)*        (0.0080)**
Theater Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                                                                                     0.0042          -0.0049          -0.0071
   (in millions of people in day t)                                                                                                       (0.0078)         (0.0070)         (0.0079)
Time of Day                                                                     6AM-6PM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM                                6AM-6PM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM
                                                                                                  next day                                                 next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                               X                X                 X                    X                 X                X
Rental and Theater Audiences Instrumented With
                                                                                      X                X                 X                    X                 X                X
Predicted Audiences Using Next Week's Audiences
N                                                                                N = 1475         N = 1475         N = 1475              N = 1475         N = 1475          N = 1475
Notes: The daily audience numbers are computed from weekly data on DVD and VHS rental revenue from Video Store Magazine. The weekly revenue is divided by the average price of a rental
and proportionately attributed to the Friday, Saturday, and Sunday using the average within-week distribution of rentals in the CEX diaries. The specifications are IV regressions with the
log(number of assault occurring in day t) as the dependent variable. See also notes to Table 2.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                           47
                    Table 7. Patterns of Movie Attendance By Demographics (CEX Data)

     Specification:                                                                              OLS Regressions
                                                                                 Share of Households Interviewed Watching a Movie
     Dep. Var.:                                                                                At the Theater in Day t
                                                                                 (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)
Share of Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                 0.9469              2.094       1.146     0.4323                          2.7751
   (in share of US population in Day t)                                    (0.1883)***        (0.5602)*** (0.3328)*** (0.2580)*                       (1.4550)*
Share of Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                   0.7736             1.4642      1.4499     0.1259                          2.7825
   (in share of US population in Day t)                                    (0.1419)***        (0.4407)*** (0.2623)*** (0.1711)                       (1.3110)**
Share of Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                      0.7614              1.0786     1.1555      0.392                          0.4031
   (in share of US population in Day t)                                    (0.1440)***         (0.4652)** (0.2491)*** (0.1741)**                      (1.2926)
Demographic Groups (By Head of Household)                                        All           Age 18-29 Age 30-44                 Age 45+         Single Males
                                                                                                                                                    Age 18-29
Full Set of Controls                                                              X                  X                X                X                   X
Regressions Weighted by Number of
                                                                                  X                  X                X                X                   X
Households Interviewed in Day t
Average Number of Households in Demographic
Group Interviewed on Day t                                                    157.88              22.61            53.94             81.29               3.96
N                                                                           N = 1563           N = 1558          N = 1560         N = 1563            N = 1474
Notes: An observation is a Friday, Saturday, or Sunday over the years 1995-2004. The dependent variable is the share of the households in the diary CEX sample that
reported attending a movie on day t. The audience numbers are obtained from daily box-office revenue divided by the average price per ticket. See also notes to Table
2.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                48
                                                                  Table 8. Test of Sobriety: Effect of Alcohol Consumption

     Specification:                                                                                               Instrumental Variable Regressions                                                   Reg. (CEX Data)
                                                                                                                                                                                    Log (Arrests for Share Consuming
                                                                                                                                                                                     Drunkenness       Alcohol Away
     Dep. Var.:                                                                    Log (Number of Assaults of a Type in Day t in Time Window)                                          in Day t)        From Home
                                                                                   (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)                                            (7)                (8)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                             -0.012     -0.0287                 -0.0137    -0.0164                 -0.0157          -0.0471              -0.0178                  -0.3303
   (millions of people in day t) (shares in Col. (7))                          (0.0080) (0.0109)***              (0.0056)** (0.0070)**               (0.0320)        (0.0275)*            (0.0096)*                  (0.2696)
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                              -0.0183      -0.025                 -0.0088    -0.0197                 -0.0042          -0.0313              -0.0029                  -0.1921
   (millions of people in day t) (shares in Col. (7))                         (0.0071)** (0.0107)**               (0.0046)* (0.0059)***              (0.0292)         (0.0252)             (0.0092)                  (0.2077)
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                                 -0.0068     -0.0102                 -0.0057    -0.0039                  0.0077          -0.0229               -0.002                  -0.0271
   (millions of people in day t) (shares in Col. (7))                          (0.0076)   (0.0114)                 (0.0048)  (0.0060)                (0.0297)         (0.0250)             (0.0092)                  (0.1993)
Type of Crime                                                                    Assaults Involving              Assaults Not Involving               Assaults At A Bar                 Arrests for Alcohol Consumption
                                                                                 Alcohol or Drugs                  Alcohol or Drugs                Involving Alc. or Drugs             Drunkenness   Away From Home
Time of Day                                                                  6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM                                                         All day                     Same
                                                                                       next day          next day          next day                                                                                     Day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                             X                X                 X                X                 X               X                    X                          X
Audience Instrumented With Predicted Audience
                                                                                    X                X                 X                X                 X               X                    X
Using Next Week's Audience
N                                                                              N = 1563         N = 1560          N = 1563        N = 1562          N = 1477         N = 1479             N = 1563                   N = 1563
Notes: The specifications in are IV regressions for specific types of assaults using NIBRS data in columns 1-6. The arrest data in column 7 is not available by time of day, and also comes from NIBRS. Column 8 uses the CEX data used in
Table 7, where the dependent variable is the share of the households in the diary CEX sample that reported consuming alcohol away from home. See also notes to Table 2.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                  49
                                 Table 9. Demographic Decomposition Of The Effect of Movie Violence

     Specification:                                                                            Instrumental Variable Regressions
     Dep. Var.:                                                                         Log (Number of Assaults in Day t in Time Window)
                                                                 (1)             (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)                   (7)        (8)
Panel A. Effects by Gender of Offender
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                         -0.0153     -0.0339                  -0.0165  -0.0142
   (in millions of people in day t)                        (0.0074)** (0.0106)***              (0.0085)* (0.0103)
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                           -0.0133     -0.0372                  -0.0086  -0.0193
   (in millions of people in day t)                        (0.0059)** (0.0100)***               (0.0070) (0.0089)**
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                              -0.0069     -0.0149                  -0.0063  -0.0046
   (in millions of people in day t)                         (0.0062) (0.0109)                   (0.0073) (0.0094)
Gender of Offender                                            Male            Male              Female         Female
N                                                           N = 1563        N = 1562           N = 1563        N = 1562
Panel B. Effects by Age of Offender
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                          -0.017     -0.0204                -0.0067          -0.0163     -0.0211     -0.0588     -0.0026    -0.0077
   (in millions of people in day t)                        (0.0069)** (0.0077)***              (0.0065)        (0.0090)*   (0.0106)** (0.0179)***   (0.0206)   (0.0267)
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                           -0.0123     -0.0207                 -0.0032         -0.0165     -0.0115     -0.0416     -0.0182    -0.0086
   (in millions of people in day t)                        (0.0058)** (0.0070)***              (0.0057)       (0.0071)**    (0.0096) (0.0189)**     (0.0186)   (0.0260)
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                              -0.0057     -0.0092                 -0.0022         -0.0029     -0.0122     -0.0220     -0.0142    -0.0269
   (in millions of people in day t)                         (0.0061) (0.0076)                  (0.0058)         (0.0073)    (0.0102) (0.0181)       (0.0170)   (0.0254)
Age Group of Offender                                          18-29           18-29             30-44           30-44       45-54      45-54         55+        55+

Time of Day                                                6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM
                                                                     next day          next day          next day          next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                           X               X                 X               X          X          X            X          X
Predicted Audience Using Next
                                                                  X               X                 X               X          X          X            X          X
Week's Audience
N                                                           N = 1563        N = 1562           N = 1563        N = 1562    N = 1563   N = 1546      N = 1546   N = 1434
Notes: See notes to Table 2. The specifications are separate IV regressions each of the specified age and gender groups.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                               50
                                                 Table 10. Movie Blockbusters by IMDB Rating and Violence

  Violence                  Blockbuster Movies Not Liked                                       Blockbuster Movies Liked                                Blockbuster Movies Highly Liked
   Rating                  by Young Males (Date, Audience)                                  by Young Males (Date, Audience)                            by Young Males (Date, Audience)
     (1)                                   (2)                                                           (3)                                                          (4)
                          Harry Potter And The Chamber Of                                                                                           Austin Powers In Goldmember (7/27/02,
                   Top 1                                                                 Shrek 2 (5/22/04, 17.4m)
      0-4                 Secrets (11/16/02, 15.2m)                                                                                                 12.6m)
                          Harry Potter And The Chamber Of                                Harry Potter And The Sorcerer's Stone
    Non-           Top 2                                                                                                                            Incredibles (11/6/04, 11.3m)
                          Secrets (11/23/02, 7.3m)                                       (11/17/01, 15.9m)
   Violent
                   Top 3 Runaway Bride (7/31/99, 6.8m)                                   Shrek 2 (5/29/04, 11.8m)                                   Bruce Almighty (5/24/03, 11.2m)
   Movies                 Sweet Home Alabama, America's                                  Finding Nemo, Toy Story 2, Monsters                        Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls,
                  Top 4-6
                          Sweethearts, Erin Brockovich                                   Inc.                                                       Waterboy, Big Daddy
                 Effect on            -0.0041 (0.0062) (6PM-12AM)                               -0.0035 (0.0042) (6PM-12AM)                                -0.0090* (0.0053) (6PM-12AM)
                  Crime                0.0049 (0.0071) (12AM-6AM)                               -0.0057 (0.0055) (12AM-6AM)                                 -0.0079 (0.0063) (12AM-6AM)
                                                                                         Harry Potter and The Prisoner Of
                    Top 1       Double Jeopardy (9/25/99, 4.6m)                                                                                     Spider-Man (5/4/02, 19.8m)
      5-7                                                                                Azkaban (6/5/04, 15.1m)
                    Top 2       Save The Last Dance (1/13/01, 4.1m) Mummy Returns (5/5/01, 12.4m)                                                   Matrix Reloaded (5/17/03, 15.2m)
   Mildly
   Violent                                                                                                                                          Lost World: Jurassic Park (5/24/97,
                    Top 3       Double Jeopardy (10/2/99, 3.3m)                          Planet Of The Apes (7/28/01, 12.3m)
                                                                                                                                                    14.3m)
   Movies                       Absolute Power, Random Hearts,                           Day After Tomorrow, Independence
                  Top 4-6                                                                                                                           Spider-Man 2, X2: X-Men, Star Wars 2
                                Unfaithful                                               Day, Pearl Harbor
                 Effect on             0.0049 (0.0111) (6PM-12AM)                              -0.0099** (0.0047) (6PM-12AM)                              -0.0111*** (0.0039) (6PM-12AM)
                  Crime               -0.0268 (0.0141)* (12AM-6AM)                            -0.0177*** (0.0057) (12AM-6AM)                              -0.0179*** (0.0052) (12AM-6AM)

    8-10            Top 1       Missing (11/29/03, 1.8m)                                 Passion Of The Christ (2/28/04, 13.5m) Hannibal (2/10/01, 10.1m)
  Strongly          Top 2       Nurse Betty (9/9/00, 1.3m)                               Passion Of The Christ (3/6/04, 8.5m)                       Jurassic Park 3 (7/21/01, 9.1m)
   Violent          Top 3       Copycat (11/4/95, 1.2m)                                  Air Force One (7/26/97, 7.9m)                              Scary Movie (7/8/00, 8.2m)
  Movies                                                                                 Ransom, Sleepy Hollow, General's
                  Top 4-6 Jade, In Dreams, A Rich Man's Wife                                                                                        Bad Boys 2, Troy, Terminator 3
                                                                                         Daughter
                 Effect on             0.0625 (0.0384) (6PM-12AM)                              -0.0084 (0.0082) (6PM-12AM)                                -0.0140*** (0.0047) (6PM-12AM)
                  Crime                0.0526 (0.0549) (12AM-6AM)                             -0.0252*** (0.0087) (12AM-6AM)                               -0.0150** (0.0061) (12AM-6AM)
Notes: We divide movies into thirds using the fraction of IMDB raters of a movie that are male and of age 18-29. Movies not liked by young males are defined by movies in the bottom third of this distribution,
movies liked by young males are in the middle third, and movies strongly liked by young males are in the top third. The ratings of movie violence are from www.kids-in-mind.com. The table divides movies into
9 categories defined by the interaction of how liked the movie is by young males and the violence level. The top 3 movies with the highest weekend audience are reported for each category, along with the next
3 three largest distinct blockbuster movies. The "Effect on Crime" rows report the coefficients on the audience sizes for each of the 9 categories from two separate regressions for the evening (6PM-12AM) and
nighttime hours (12AM-6AM), where the dependent variable is log(number of assault occurring in day t in the specified time block) and the independent variables are the audiences in millions of people for
movies in each of the 9 categories. See also notes to Table 2.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                     51
                                                             Table 11. Test of Selection: Effect of Sexual Content and Profanity

     Specification:                                                                  OLS Regressions (CEX Data)                                                   Instrumental Variable Regressions
                                                                                       Share of 18-29 Year-Old
     Dep. Var.:                                                                            at Movie Theater                                           Log (Number of Assaults in Day t in Time Window)
                                                                                       (1)        (2)       (3)                             (4)            (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)                                     (9)
Audience Of Movies With Strong Sexual Content                                         2.5784                          1.2893            -0.0148     -0.0291                                                         -0.0043          -0.0122
  (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                             (1.1528)**                       (1.1201)          (0.0071)** (0.0097)***                                                      (0.0065)         (0.0091)
Audience Of Movies With Mild Sexual Content                                           1.997                           0.6965            -0.0125     -0.0183                                                         -0.0015          0.0012
  (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                            (0.5275)***                       (0.4431)         (0.0048)*** (0.0066)***                                                      (0.0034)         (0.0045)
Audience Of Movies With No Sexual Content                                             1.2924                                            -0.0095     -0.0152
  (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                            (0.4202)***                                         (0.0039)** (0.0049)***
Audience Of Movies With Strong Profanity                                                             1.9073          -0.0479                                                 -0.0153     -0.0169                    -0.0039         -0.0008
  (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                                            (0.6475)***       (0.6048)                                              (0.0058)*** (0.0077)**                  (0.0048)         (0.0067)
Audience Of Movies With Mild Profanity                                                                1.484          -0.1814                                                 -0.0115     -0.0196                     -0.001         -0.0046
  (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                                            (0.4913)***       (0.3916)                                              (0.0042)*** (0.0052)***                 (0.0027)         (0.0035)
Audience Of Movies With No Profanity                                                                 1.3417                                                                  -0.0092     -0.0131
  (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                                            (0.4315)***                                                              (0.0039)** (0.0052)**
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                                                                   2.0275                                                                                       -0.0116    -0.0168
   (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                                                           (0.5900)***                                                                                   (0.0051)** (0.0065)**
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                                                                     1.3937                                                                                       -0.0103    -0.0182
   (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                                                           (0.4554)***                                                                                   (0.0041)** (0.0053)***
Theater Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                                                                1.0526                                                                                       -0.0059    -0.0041
   (share of pop. in day t) (milllions for Col. (4)-(9))                                                            (0.4852)**                                                                                    (0.0043)   (0.0055)
Time of Day                                                                           All Day         All Day         All Day         6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM                    6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM                     6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM
                                                                                                                                                next day                             next day                              next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                                   X               X               X                  X                X                   X                 X                  X                 X
Audience Instrumented With Predicted Audience
                                                                                           .               .              .                  X                X                   X                 X                  X                 X
Using Next Week's Audience
N                                                                                    N = 1558 N = 1558 N = 1558                         N = 1563         N = 1562           N = 1563          N = 1562            N = 1563          N = 1562
Notes: The ratings of violent, sexual, and profanity content of movies are from www.kids-in-mind.com. The audience of strong, mild, and no sexual (profanity) content use the same breakpoints as for violence: categorizations (8-10, 5-7, and 0-4
ratings from kids-in-mind.com). In Columns 1-3 the dependent variable is the share of households with head aged 18-29 in the diary CEX sample that reported spending on atteding a movie at the movie theater on day t. Attendance by young males
is a proxy for attendance by violent sub-groups of the population. See also notes to Tables 2 and 7.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                       52
                                                                     Table 12. Examples of Studies of Media Effects on Violence in Psychology

    Paper                                              Exposure to violence                                  Control Group                           Subjects             Location Sample                             Measure                        Treatment Control
                                                         (Type of movie)                                                                                                            Size                            of Violence t                    Group t T Group t C
                                                               (1)                                                     (2)                                (3)               (4)      (5)                                 (6)                            (7)       (8)
Laboratory Experiments
    Lovaas (1961)                                 5-min. Extract from "Rassling                     5-min. Non-Violent Clip from                  Children of   Playroom 10 + 10    Time Spent Playing with                                               98.2            58.6
                                                    Match" -- cartoon violence                              "Bear Facts"                         Nursery School                  Aggressive Doll (hits other doll)
    Bandura, Ross, and Ross                     10-min. Scenes of Aggression of                                   No Movie                        Children of   Playroom 24 + 24                             Aggression toward Doll                       91.5            54.3
    (1963)                                                   Doll                                                                                Nursery School
    Geen and O'Neal (1969)                       7-min. Prizefight Scene from                      7-min. Scenes on Non-violent                       College            Laboratory 12 + 12                  Intensity Electric Shock                     22.2            10.3
                                               "Champion" + 2 min. White Noise                      Sport + 2 min. White Noise                        Students                                              Inflicted on Other Subject
                                                  7-min. Prizefight Scene from                     7-min. Scenes on Non-violent                                                                                                                           12.7            14.7
                                                          "Champion"                                          Sport
    Bushman (1995)                                    15-min. Violent Scenes                         15-min. non-violent scenes                       College            Laboratory         738          Level of Noise Inflicted On                       4.6             3.9
                                                        from "Karate Kid III"                         from "Gorillas in The Mist"                     Students                                         Other Subject For Slow Answer
    Josephson (1987)                          14-min. Scenes of Killing of Police 14-min. Scenes of Motorcross                                     Grades 2-3,              School          396              Aggression in 9 Min. of                       6.6             3.6
                                              Officer and SWAT team in Action          Bike-Racing Team                                               Boys                                                    Floor Hockey Game
    Leyens et al. (1975)                           Showing of 5 Violent Movies                   Showing of 5 Non-Violent Movies                      Juveniles           Detention          85        % Committing Phys. Aggression                     4.0%             .2%
                                                     On 5 Consecutive Days                          On 5 Consecutive Days                            in Belgium            Facility                       In Evening After Movie
                                                                                                                                                                                                       % Committing Phys. Aggression                     2.1%            1.5%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          At Noon Day After Movie
Surveys
    Johnson et al. (2002)                       High (Self-reported) Television  Low (Self-reported) Television Random Sample NY State                                                      707            % Committing Assaults                        25.3%            5.7%
                                                Viewing at Age 14 (>=3 hrs./day) Viewing at Age 14 (<1 hrs./day)                                                                                         Causing Injury, at Age 16-22

Notes: Calculations of effects on violence are by the authors based on data from the papers cited. Columns (7) and (8) report the level of violence in the Treatment and Control group. The difference is always significant at the 5% level, except for the second comparison in the
Geen and O"Neal (1969) paper and the second comparison in Leyens et al. (1975).




                                                                                                                                       53
           Appendix Table 1. Movie Blockbusters by Violence Level (Kids-in-mind Measure)

                                                                                             Weekend Sexual              MPAA     Liking
 Violence                                                                   Weekend           Theater Content Profanity Violence By Young
  Rating                      Title of Blockbuster                           Date            Audience Rating Rating Rating        Males
    (1)                                 (2)                                   (3)               (4)     (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)
       0       Birdcage                                                     3/9/1996 4,026,083                     4            6           Low            Low
               You've Got Mail                                             12/19/1998 3,925,587                    2            3           Low            Low
               You've Got Mail                                             12/26/1998 3,855,011                    2            3           Low            Low
       1       Runaway Bride                                                7/31/1999        6,771,654             2            2           Low            Low
               Erin Brockovich                                              3/18/2000        5,178,850             3            8           Low            Low
               Notting Hill                                                 5/29/1999        4,355,314             4            5           Low            Low
       2       Liar Liar                                                    3/22/1997 6,709,569                    3            4           Low          High
               Toy Story                                                   11/25/1995 6,599,610                    0            0           Low         Medium
               Sweet Home Alabama                                           9/28/2002 6,135,755                    2            3           Low          Low
       3       Shrek 2                                                      5/22/2004 17,397,404                   3            2           Low         Medium
               Shrek 2                                                      5/29/2004 11,838,217                   3            2           Low         Medium
               Finding Nemo                                                 5/31/2003 11,650,366                   0            0           Low         Medium
       4       Harry Potter And The Sorcerer's Stone   11/17/2001 15,953,113                                       0            2          Low          Medium
               Harry Potter And The Chamber Of Secrets 11/16/2002 15,207,829                                       1            3         Medium         Low
               Austin Powers In Goldmember              7/27/2002 12,576,592                                       6            6          Low           High
       5       Harry Potter And The Prisoner Of Azkaban 6/5/2004 15,086,532                                        1            2         Medium        Medium
               X2: X-Men United                         5/3/2003 14,188,845                                        4            3         Medium         High
               Star Wars 2: Attack Of The Clones        5/18/2002 13,774,151                                       2            1         Medium         High
       6       Spider-Man                                                   5/4/2002 19,766,628                    3            3         Medium         High
               Spider-Man 2                                                  7/3/2004 14,195,850                   3            3         Medium         High
               Planet Of the Apes                                           7/28/2001 12,297,262                   3            3         Medium        Medium
       7       Matrix Reloaded                                              5/17/2003 15,219,637                   6            5         Medium         High
               Lost World: Jurassic Park                                    5/24/1997 14,255,579                   0            3         Medium         High
               Mummy Returns                                                 5/5/2001 12,467,726                   4            3         Medium        Medium
       8       Jurassic Park 3                                             7/21/2001 9,104,505                    1             2         Medium           High
               Scary Movie                                                  7/8/2000 8,240,157                    10            7         Medium           High
               Scream 2                                                    12/13/1997 8,188,454                    2            8          High            High
       9       Bad Boys 2                                                  7/19/2003 7,715,185                     6            10         High          High
               Saving Private Ryan                                         7/25/1998 6,500,639                     1             7        Medium         High
               Sleepy Hollow                                               11/20/1999 5,751,378                    3             1         High         Medium
      10       Passion Of The Christ                                        2/28/2004 13,484,402                   1            1           High        Medium
               Hannibal                                                     2/10/2001 10,114,135                   4            5           High         High
               Passion Of The Christ                                         3/6/2004 8,531,673                    1            1           High        Medium
  Missing A Perfect Murder                                                   6/6/1998        3,545,842 Missing Missing Medium                            Missing
          A Perfect Murder                                                  6/13/1998        2,404,994 Missing Missing Medium                            Missing
          A Cinderella Story                                                7/17/2004        2,207,419 Missing Missing  Low                               Low
Notes: The audience numbers are obtained from daily boxoffice revenue divided by the average price per ticket. The ratings of movie violence in column 1 are from
www.kids-in-mind.com. The next three columns report the title (column 2), the weekend (column 3), and the weekend audience size (column 4) for the 3 movies with
highest weekend sales in a given violence category. Columns 5-8 report the sexual and profanity content ratings (columns 5 and 6) obtained from kids-in-mind.com, an
alternative violence rating using MPAA descriptions (column 7), and a measure of how liked the movie is by young males using IMDB movie ratings (column 8). These last
two measures used in columns 7 and 8 are described in detail in the text.




                                                                                54
                                                                                               Appendix Table 2. Robustness

     Specification:                                                                                    Instrumental Variables Regressions                                                                  OLS Reg.            Poisson Reg.
     Dep. Var.:                                                                                        Log (Number of Assaults in Day t in Time Window)                                                                       No. of Assaults
                                                (1)                                           (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)                                        (6)                    (7)                  (8)
Panel A. Effects in Morning and Afternoon (6AM-6PM)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies          -0.0037                                        -0.003                -0.0046                -0.0048                0.0005                 -0.0044              -0.0096                 -0.0081
   (in millions of people in day t)         (0.0046)                                      (0.0048)               (0.0045)               (0.0043)              (0.0039)                (0.0043)            (0.0035)***             (0.0029)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies             -0.003                                       -0.0022                -0.0046                 -0.003               -0.0006                 -0.0063              -0.0088                 -0.0102
   (in millions of people in day t)         (0.0041)                                      (0.0043)               (0.0042)               (0.0030)              (0.0033)               (0.0037)*            (0.0027)***             (0.0023)***
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies               0.0003                                        -0.0004                -0.0012                0.0008                -0.0012                 -0.0029              -0.0079                 -0.0098
   (in millions of people in day t)         (0.0041)                                      (0.0044)               (0.0042)               (0.0036)              (0.0035)                (0.0037)            (0.0028)***             (0.0023)***
Panel B. Effects in The Evening (6PM-12AM)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                  -0.013                 -0.0131               -0.0158                -0.0141              -0.0144                 -0.0115                -0.0099                -0.0081
   (in millions of people in day t)                               (0.0049)***            (0.0054)**            (0.0048)***            (0.0050)***           (0.0046)***              (0.0046)**           (0.0037)***             (0.0030)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                   -0.0109                  -0.009               -0.0107                -0.0074              -0.0165                 -0.0121                -0.0065                -0.0075
   (in millions of people in day t)                               (0.0040)***             (0.0047)*             (0.0042)**             (0.0035)**           (0.0035)***             (0.0037)***            (0.0029)**             (0.0023)***
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                      -0.0063                 -0.0049               -0.0062                -0.0041              -0.0098                 -0.0076                -0.0026                 -0.003
   (in millions of people in day t)                                (0.0043)                (0.0050)              (0.0044)               (0.0036)             (0.0040)**              (0.0039)**             (0.0030)               (0.0024)
Panel C. Effects in The Night (12AM-6AM)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                 -0.0192                -0.0239               -0.0202                -0.0124                -0.0206                -0.0155                 -0.0098               -0.0133
   (in millions of people in day t)                               (0.0060)***            (0.0066)***           (0.0059)***             (0.0064)*             (0.0054)***            (0.0055)***             (0.0052)*             (0.0035)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                   -0.0205                -0.0207               -0.0202                -0.0123                -0.0245                -0.0167                 -0.0089               -0.0106
   (in millions of people in day t)                               (0.0052)***            (0.0060)***           (0.0054)***            (0.0043)***            (0.0040)***            (0.0046)***            (0.0041)**             (0.0029)***
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                       -0.006                -0.0076               -0.0047                -0.0039                -0.0103                -0.0047                  0.0045                0.0005
   (in millions of people in day t)                                (0.0054)               (0.0067)              (0.0056)                (0.0050)              (0.0042)**             (0.0049)                (0.0043)              (0.0029)
                                                                 Benchmark      IV: Instrument IV: Instruments Benchmark + Benchmark + Benchmark + OLS Regress.          Poisson
                                                               IV Specification Next Week's      Budget and Revenue From     Include     Control For (No Instruments) Regression
Robustness Specification                                                          Audience      No. Theaters First Week of    Mo-Th    Week-Of-Year                  (No Instruments)
Control Variables:                                                                                             Release Only           (No Day-Of-Year)
   Full Set of Controls                                              X                 X               X            X           X                            X               X
Audience Instrumented With Predicted
                                                                        X                                                                   X                      X                      X
Audience Using Following Week's
N                                                                  N = 1563               N = 1563               N = 1563              N = 1563               N = 3645               N = 1563              N = 1563                N = 1563
Notes: This Table presents a series of robustness checks to the results in Table 3, reproduced in Column 1. Column 2 reports the estimates using, as an instrument for audience in week w(t), the weekend audience in week w(t)+1 for the same movies.
Column 3 uses instruments constructed as in the benchmark instruments, but using the number of theaters showing the movie in week w(t) and the production budget (when available) as predictors. This specification also includes the instrument for
overall movie audience constructed with the bechmark instruments. (See text for additional details) Column 4 uses only the audience from movies in the first week of release. Column 5 uses data also from Monday-Thursday, in addition to Friday-
Sunday. Column 6 does not use the 365 day-of-year indicators and uses instead 52 week-of-year indicators. Column 7 presents an OLS specification, and Column 8 presents a Poisson regression (also not instrumented). to See also notes to Table 2.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                        55
                                       Appendix Table 3. Alternative MPAA-Based Measure of Movie Violence

      Specification:                                                                                     Instrumental Variable Regressions                                           OLS Reg. (CEX Data)
                                                                                                                                                                                     Share 18-29 Year Old
      Dep. Var.:                                                                            Log (Number of Assaults in Day t in Time Window)                                           at Movie Theater
                                                                                                (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)                                               (5)        (6)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies - MPAA Meas.                                                -0.0139             -0.0252                0.0005               -0.0091                3.5074             -0.6748
   (millions of people in day t) (shares for Col. (5)-(6))                                    (0.0063)**          (0.0068)***             (0.0064)             (0.0084)             (1.0986)***          (0.9869)
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies - MPAA Meas.                                                  -0.0109             -0.0187               -0.0003               -0.0026                1.3357             -0.2593
   (millions of people in day t) (shares for Col. (5)-(6))                                   (0.0039)***          (0.0050)***             (0.0027)             (0.0037)             (0.4308)***          (0.4235)
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies - MPAA Meas.                                                      -0.008             -0.0104                                                            1.1594
   (millions of people in day t) (shares for Col. (5)-(6))                                     (0.0042)*           (0.0053)*                                                         (0.4544)**
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies - Stand. Meas.                                                                                       -0.0138               -0.0149                                   2.5821
   (millions of people in day t) (shares for Col. (5)-(6))                                                                              (0.0058)**            (0.0078)*                                (0.8728)***
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies - Stand. Meas.                                                                                         -0.0109               -0.0187                                   1.6948
   (millions of people in day t) (shares for Col. (5)-(6))                                                                              (0.0046)**           (0.0061)***                               (0.5604)***
Theater Audience Of Non-Violent Movies - Stand. Meas.                                                                                      -0.0062              -0.0067                                   1.1249
   (millions of people in day t) (shares for Col. (5)-(6))                                                                                (0.0044)             (0.0055)                                 (0.4809)**
Time of Day                                                                                  6PM-12AM             12AM-6AM             6PM-12AM              12AM-6AM                  All day            All day
                                                                                                                   next day                                   next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                                             X                    X                     X                    X                      X                  X
Audience Instrumented With Predicted Audience
                                                                                                    X                    X                     X                    X
Using Next Week's Audience
N                                                                                             N = 1539              N = 1538             N = 1539             N = 1538               N = 1534           N = 1534
Notes: The MPAA ratings are obtained using the one-line MPAA summary of the movie . We characterize as mildly violent movies those for which the MPAA rating contains the word "Violence" or "Violent",
with two exceptions: (i) If the reference is qualified by "Brief", "Mild", or "Some", we classify the movie as non-violent; (ii) If the word violence is qualified by either "Bloody", "Brutal", "Disturbing", "Graphic",
"Grisly", "Gruesome", or "Strong", we classify the movie as strongly violent. The standard ratings of violent movies are from www.kids-in-mind.com. In Columns 5-6 the dependent variable is the share of
households with head aged 18-29 in the diary CEX sample that reported spending on atteding a movie at the movie theater on day t. Attendance by young males is a proxy for attendance by violent sub-
groups of the population. See also Tables 2 and 7.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                          56
                                                      Appendix Table 4. Effect of Movie Violence on Different Types of Crimes

     Specification:                                                                                                   Instrumental Variable Regressions
     Dep. Var.:                                                                                            Log (Number of Assaults of a Type in Day t in Time Window)
                                                                       (1)               (2)               (3)      (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)                                                 (9)              (10)
Audience Of Strongly Violent Movies                                 -0.0125    -0.0186     -0.0104    -0.0184                               -0.0153    -0.0339                   -0.0228          -0.0117            -0.0074          -0.0096
   (millions of people in day t)                                  (0.0053)** (0.0068)*** (0.0074) (0.0085)**                              (0.0074)** (0.0106)***               (0.0129)*         (0.0142)          (0.0038)*         (0.0069)
Audience Of Mildly Violent Movies                                   -0.0084    -0.0213     -0.0132    -0.0189                               -0.0133    -0.0372                   -0.0099          -0.0112            -0.0025          -0.0042
   (millions of people in day t)                                   (0.0045)* (0.0060)*** (0.0065)** (0.0074)**                            (0.0059)** (0.0100)***                (0.0116)         (0.0132)           (0.0030)         (0.0046)
Audience Of Non-Violent Movies                                      -0.0055     -0.006     -0.0046    -0.0055                               -0.0069    -0.0149                   -0.0011           0.0087            -0.0027          -0.0024
   (millions of people in day t)                                    (0.0047)  (0.0062)    (0.0066)   (0.0077)                              (0.0062)   (0.0109)                  (0.0105)         (0.0128)           (0.0033)         (0.0049)
Type of Crime                                                        Assaults At Home                      Assaults Away                    Assaults of Known                  Assaults of Stranger                  Theft and Burglary
                                                                                                            From Home                            Person
Time of Day                                                      6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM 6PM-12AM 12AM-6AM
                                                                           next day          next day          next day          next day          next day
Control Variables:
   Full Set of Controls                                                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Audience Instrumented With Predicted
                                                                        X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X                 X
Audience Using Next Week's Audience
N                                                                  N = 1563         N = 1562           N = 1563         N = 1562          N = 1563          N = 1562           N = 1563         N = 1560           N = 1563         N = 1562
Notes: An observation is a Friday, Saturday, or Sunday over the years 1995-2004. The total number of assaults is computed using all agencies with population of at least 25,000 and reporting crimes in at least 300 days in the year. The
audience numbers are obtained from daily box-office revenue divided by the average price per ticket. The ratings of violent movies are from www.kids-in-mind.com. The audience of strongly violent movies is the audience of all movies with a
violence rating 8-10. The audience of mildly violent movies is the audience of all movies with a violence rating 5-7. The specifications are IV regressions with the log(number of crimes of a given type occurring in day t) as dependent variable.
The audience numbers are instrumented using the predicted audience numbers based on next weekend's audience. Robust standard errors clustered by week in parenthesis.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                       57
