                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DID THE DEATH OF DISTANCE HURT DETROIT AND HELP NEW YORK?

                                       Edward L. Glaeser
                                     Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto

                                       Working Paper 13710
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13710


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2007




We are grateful to Diego Puga and participants at the NBER Economics of Agglomeration Conference
for helpful comments. Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for State and Local Government and Ponzetto
thanks the Institute for Humane Studies for financial assistance. Kristina Tobio and Scott Kominers
provided superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Edward L. Glaeser and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Did the Death of Distance Hurt Detroit and Help New York?
Edward L. Glaeser and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
NBER Working Paper No. 13710
December 2007
JEL No. R0

                                            ABSTRACT

Urban proximity can reduce the costs of shipping goods and speed the flow of ideas. Improvements
in communication technology might erode these advantages and allow people and firms to decentralize.
However, improvements in transportation and communication technology can also increase the returns
to new ideas, by allowing those ideas to be used throughout the world. This paper presents a model
that illustrates these two rival effects that technological progress can have on cities. We then present
some evidence suggesting that the model can help us to understand why the past thirty-five years have
been kind to idea-producing places, like New York and Boston, and devastating to goods-producing
cities, like Cleveland and Detroit.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
Harvard University
29 Garden Street Apt. 512
Cambridge, MA 02138
ponzetto@fas.harvard.edu
1     Introduction
Thirty years ago, every major Northeastern and Midwestern city looked troubled. America
had twenty cities with more than 450,000 people in 1950. Every one of them lost population
between 1950 and 1980, except for Los Angeles, Houston and Seattle. The primary source of
economic decline for these places was a decline of manufacturing, which …rst suburbanized, as
in the case of Henry Ford’s River Rouge Plant, and then left metropolitan areas altogether.
Improvements in information technology had made it quite easy for corporate leaders, who
often remained in the older cities, to manage production in cheaper locales.
    But since 1980 a number of older cities, which had been declining, started once again
to grow both in population and often more strikingly in incomes. Places like New York,
San Francisco, Boston and Minneapolis have all thrived since the 1970s, generally in idea-
intensive industries, like …nance, professional services and new technology. Urban density
that once served to connect manufacturers with railroads and boats now serves to facilitate
contact of smart people in idea-producing sectors. The idea-producing advantages of geo-
graphic concentration are not a new phenomenon. After all, Alfred Marshall wrote in 1890
that in dense agglomerations “the mysteries of the trade become no mystery, but are, as it
were, in the air.” However, these idea-producing advantages appear to be more and more
critical to the success of older, high density cities.
    This paper advances the hypothesis that improvements in transportation and communica-
tion technology can explain both the decline of Detroit and the reinvigoration of Manhattan.
While we present some suggestive evidence, the main contribution of this paper is a model
that illustrates how reductions in the costs of communication can cause manufacturing cities
to decline and innovative cities to grow. Reductions in transport costs reduce the advantages
associated with making goods in the Midwest, but they increase the returns to producing
new ideas in New York.
    In the model individuals choose between three activities: (1) innovating, which creates
more varieties of advanced products, (2) manufacturing those advanced goods, and (3) pro-
ducing in a traditional sector which we think of as agriculture. Firms can also choose whether
to locate in a city or in the hinterland. Urban location is associated with the scarcity of real


                                                2
estate, but also with the availability of shared infrastructure and with knowledge spillovers
that depend on the direct interaction between individuals, and therefore thrive on density.
   We assume that the traditional sector needs land the most and su¤ers the least from
poor communication, while the innovative sector needs land the least and loses the most
from communication di¢ culties. Since the city has a comparative advantage in speeding
communication and limited, and hence expensive, land, the traditional sector locates entirely
in the hinterland, while the innovative sector locates entirely in the city. The manufacturing
sector is generally split between the city and the hinterland. These predictions of the model
roughly describe modern America, where high human capital industries tend to be centralized
within metropolitan areas, manufacturing is in medium-density areas and natural resource-
based industries are generally non-urban (Glaeser and Kahn, 2001).
   All individuals have the same level of productivity in the manufacturing or traditional
sectors, but we assume that there is heterogeneous ability to innovate. As a result, the most
able people end up in the innovative sector. Heterogeneity of ability determines decreasing
returns to the size of the innovative sector, and it also predicts that the economy will become
more unequal if it becomes more innovative.
   The model allows us to consider the impact of improvements in information technology.
We model these improvements as a reduction in the disadvantage that people working in
the hinterland su¤er due to the local nature of knowledge spillovers and the inability to
share urban infrastructure. This may a¤ect both the manufacturing and innovative sectors;
however, as long as the innovative sector stays entirely in the city, what matters at the
margin is the cost associated with advanced manufacturing in the hinterland. In our view,
the comparative statics are meant to re‡ect the increasing ability of corporate leaders or idea
producers, who remain in urban areas, to communicate with far-‡ung production facilities.
   When the costs of distance fall, manufacturing …rms leave the city, which causes a decline
in urban income and property values. The economy as a whole is getting more productive
as the city’s advantage in production is disappearing. This e¤ect captures the decline in
erstwhile manufacturing powerhouses like Cleveland and Detroit.
   But the decline in communication costs also has two other impacts which are more benign
for the city. Most importantly, reducing these communication costs increases the returns to


                                              3
innovation. Since the city has a comparative advantage in producing new ideas, this e¤ect
increases incomes in the urban area. The exodus of manufacturing and the decline in the
costs of urban land also increase the total size of the innovative sector in the city, which in
turn further bolsters urban success through the increasing returns to new idea production
that are a key element in models like ours (Grossman and Helpman 1991, Romer 1990).
   As communication costs decline and the size of the innovative sector increases, within-city
inequality increases. This increase in inequality does not represent a welfare loss, for im-
provements in communication technology improve the real wages for all workers even though
nominal wages for workers in the city decline. City population will rise as city manufacturing
declines, because the innovative sector is less land-intensive than the manufacturing sector.
   As long as manufacturing is the industry on the margin between the city and the hin-
terland, then decreasing the productivity costs of locating in the hinterland will reduce city
property values. However, once all manufacturing has left the city, then further decreases in
communication costs impact the city mainly by increasing the returns to innovation through
a reduction of the costs of production. In this case, further improvement in information
technology causes urban land values to rise. We think of the …rst case as capturing cities like
New York and Boston in the 1970s, when the exodus of manufacturing …rst caused prop-
erty values to plummet, while the extension re‡ects these cities in more recent years, when
booming innovative sectors have been associated with rising real-estate costs.
   We also extend the model to consider a second city. The agglomeration externality
implied by local knowledge spillovers makes it e¢ cient for the innovative sector to cluster
completely in one of the two cities. Manufacturing instead locates in both. In this case,
an improvement in communication technology causes the more innovative city to increase
its population and real income relative to the manufacturing city. When improvements
in transportation technology reduce manufacturers’ dependence on urban infrastructure,
property values in the two cities also diverge. This model is meant to show how technological
progress can strengthen idea-oriented cities and hurt production-oriented cities.
   After discussing the model, we turn to a little suggestive evidence. First, we document
the connection between urban success and specialization in innovation, measured, as the
model suggests, by employment in primarily non-governmental occupations that are high-


                                              4
education. Specialization in these high-education, and presumably more innovative sectors,
is positively correlated with income growth between 1980 and 2000 and with employment
growth over the same time period in the Northeast and Midwest. We also …nd that successful
places increased their specialization in these activities, just as the model suggests.
    Second, we turn to the model’s predictions about urban inequality. We …nd that inequal-
ity within cities rose more in cities that had faster income growth and in cities with more
initial specialization in skilled occupations initially. These e¤ects are, however, modest.



2     Urban Diversity and Improvements in Communica-
      tion Technology
Before proceeding to the model, we …rst review four facts that motivate the model: (1) the
past forty years have seen spectacular improvements in communication and transportation
technology, (2) those improvements have made separation between idea-producers and man-
ufacturers increasingly common, (3) there has been a remarkable heterogeneity in the growth
of both income and population among many older cities since 1980, and (4) while all of the
older cities su¤ered a signi…cant decline in manufacturing jobs, the successful older cities
have increasingly specialized in idea-intensive sectors.
    Thousands of pages have been written about the improvements in transportation and
telecommunication that have made it easier to ship goods and communicate ideas over long
distances. Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004) summarize some of the evidence on the decline
in moving goods over space; the real cost of moving a ton a mile by rail has declined by
more than 90 percent over the last 120 years. The improvements in other transport modes
have been at least as striking and the improvements in communications technology are, if
anything, even more miraculous. Figure 1 shows the decline in the real cost of a three-minute
phone call between New York and London from 1930 to 2000. The decline has been more
than ninety-nine percent.
    The substantial improvement in information and transportation technology has at least
two separate sources. First, there has been a proliferation of new technologies that facilitate



                                               5
communication across space. Among the communication technologies that were not generally
available in 1975 but are commonplace today are fax machines, cellular phones, e-mail, the
internet, wi-…, and personal digital assistants. Many of these technologies, like cellular
phones, existed before 1975, but they only became widely a¤ordable after that date.
   Increased competition in key communication sectors, like telephones, air travel and cargo
shipping, has also improved the ability to exchange information, goods and services over
long distances. For example, in 1973, Federal Express began challenging the U.S. Postal
Service in providing speedy delivery of packages. In 1982, as part of a settlement of an anti-
trust case, ATT divested its local exchanges. After this divestment there was a considerable
increase in long-distance phone companies, such as MCI and Sprint, that made long-distance
communication cheaper. In the late 1970s, the airline industry was also deregulated, which
increased competition and reduced prices in that sector.
   These technological improvements have been accompanied by an “increasing separation
of the management and production facilities of individual …rms”(Duranton and Puga, 2005).
Duranton and Puga (2005) connect this separation to the increasing specialization of cities
on the basis of function (i.e. management or production) rather than industrial sector. Kim
(1999) is among the empirical sources cited by those authors, and he found that the share of
manufacturing workers in the U.S. working in multi-unit …rms increased from 51 percent in
1937 to 73 percent in 1977. There is also an increase in the number of corporate headquarters
that are separate from their production facilities (Kim, 1999), which is also seen in the work
of Henderson and Ono (2007). The rise in multinational …rms, which has been extensively
documented and discussed (Markusen, 1995), represents a particularly extreme example of
increasing geographic distance between …rm leadership and production.
   Our third motivating fact concerns the heterogeneity in urban success within the U.S.
over the last forty years. Population and income give us two alternative measures of urban
growth and Figure 2 shows the path of population for six major metropolitan areas. Since
1970, San Francisco has grown by more than 17 percent. Chicago has grown by 13 percent,
while Detroit has lost more than 20 percent of its population. New York and Boston lost
population in the 1970s, but have gained since then. Over the third decade, the population
of New York increased by two percent while the population of Boston rose by eight percent.


                                              6
Cleveland has steadily lost population.
   There has also been substantial divergence in income levels across metropolitan areas.
Figure 3 shows the time path of earnings per worker in the largest county of each of these
metropolitan areas. Since County Business Patterns is the natural source of …rm-level data,
this pushes us to look at the counties that surround the areas’economic centers. The earnings
of New York and San Francisco soar over this time period. Wayne County (Detroit) begins
with the highest payroll per worker and declines over the time period, starting out quite
prosperous but losing substantially relative to the other two areas. In 1977, Wayne’s payroll
per worker was slightly higher than that of New York and today it is less than 60 percent of
income in New York.
   Figure 4 shows the distribution of median family income across metropolitan areas in
1980 and 2000. As the …gure shows, the variance of incomes across metropolitan areas
increased substantially over this twenty-year period. Almost all of the increase occurred in
the 1980s.
   Our …nal motivating fact is that the successful cities are specialized in idea-producing
industries, while the less successful cities are in social services with some remaining manufac-
turing. Table 1 shows the top …ve industry groups measured by total payroll in the largest
counties of the six metropolitan areas shown in 1977 and 2002. In 1977, manufacturing
dominates four of the six cities, sometimes by a very substantial margin. In 1977, more than
one half of Wayne County’s payroll was in manufacturing. Even in New York, the payroll in
Finance and Insurance only slightly nudged out manufacturing.
   By 2002, manufacturing remains the dominant sector in Detroit and Cleveland, but it
is now a much smaller share of the total payroll. In 2002, more than …fty-three percent of
the payroll in New York is in …nance and insurance and professional, scienti…c and technical
services. More than forty percent of the payroll of San Francisco lies in these two areas.
Chicago and Boston are more mixed and they do both idea-oriented production and manu-
facturing. In the next section, we present a model that attempts to explain the divergence
of city economies as a result of improvements in the ability to communicate across space.




                                               7
3      The Model

3.1       Basic setup

This model attempts to describe innovation and production in a closed economy where labor
is mobile across space. We will address inter-urban inequalities in an extension that allows
for a second city, but we begin with two locations: a city and the hinterland. Workers choose
between three occupations: working in the traditional sector, working in the advanced sector,
and innovating in a way that produces more varieties of di¤erentiated goods for the advanced
sector.
     Individual utility is de…ned over the traditional good Z and measure n of advanced goods
that are aggregated into a composite commodity Y in the manner of Dixit and Stiglitz (1977):
                                     Z    n
                                                            1

                               Y =            x (j) dj          with    2 (0; 1)                           (1)
                                      0

     The traditional good Z is produced with a …xed technology that has constant returns to
scale. The market for Z is perfectly competitive, so its price equals unit cost: pZ = cZ . We
treat Z as the numeraire, so that pZ equals one.
     Our focus is on demand for the advanced goods, and we will characterize aggregate
demand by the homothetic preferences of a representative household, whose budget share
for Y is
                                                           pY Y
                                              (pY ) =                                                      (2)
                                                         pY Y + Z
For example, if the utility function has constant elasticity of substitution , so that U (Y; Z) =
          1   1     1    1                                                                            1
(1    &) Y        +& Z       , then the budget share is                (pY ) = pY 1 &= (1   )+1           . We
will assume that elasticity of substitution is never below one; equivalently, that demand
                                                                                                  0
for the advanced good has no less than unitary own-price elasticity; hence that                       (pY )
0. Individuals will also need to consume exactly one unit of location-speci…c capital as a
residence
     Each di¤erentiated advanced good is produced by a monopolistic competitor at a constant
unit cost of cx . As in Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), monopolistic competition with constant
elasticity of substitution implies mark-up pricing, so the price of each di¤erentiated good,


                                                        8
px , satis…es:
                                                             1
                                                   px =          cx                                       (3)

and monopoly pro…ts are
                                                   X
                                                 = (1            ) px                  (4)
                                                    n
where X is the total output of di¤erentiated varieties by identical producers. This implies
the price index for the composite commodity Y :
                                                             1
                                                 pY = n               px                                  (5)

Thus greater variety is equivalent to higher e¢ ciency. As in Ethier (1982), we could interpret
the invention of new goods as an increase in specialization, associated with productivity gains
arising from the division of labor.


3.2     The Innovation Sector

Each worker requires      n   units of location-speci…c capital (i.e. land) to produce innovation,
and one unit of location-speci…c capital for a residence.
    Advanced goods are invented by an innovative sector that thrives on proximity. The
urban advantage in producing new ideas is a re‡ection of knowledge spillovers that depend
on the face-to-face interactions of researchers, and are therefore local. Each innovator’s
productivity depends on the external e¤ect S of aggregate human capital. In the manner
of Fujita and Thisse (2003), we assume that the innovation knowledge spillovers in the city
are a function of the number of innovators in the city LUn and of the number of innovators
outside of the city LR
                     n:
                                      "Z                              Z                     #
                                            LU
                                             n                              LR
                                                                             n
                               SU =              h (j) dj +                      h (j) dj                 (6)
                                        0                               0

where     > 0 measures the returns to scale in knowledge externalities, and                     2 (0; 1) is an
inverse measure of the di¢ culty of achieving pro…table spillovers by means of occasional
long-distance communication, rather than day-to-day proximity. For innovators who locate
outside of the city, low density implies that all interactions are sporadic, yielding spillovers
                                        " Z U R             #
                                                        Ln +Ln
                                      SR =                         h (j) dj                               (7)
                                                    0


                                                         9
   Each worker’s knowledge stock is assumed for simplicity to be identical, depending on
worldwide scienti…c progress. With a convenient normalization h (j) = 1 for all j. Hence

                  SU = LUn + LR
                              n            > SR =           LUn + LR
                                                                   n         for all LUn ; LR
                                                                                            n                   (8)

implying that it is e¢ cient for all knowledge workers to congregate in the city.
   Workers are heterogeneously endowed with creativity according to a Pareto distribution
(cf. Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple, 2004) with minimum a > 0 and shape                            > 1, so that

                                            a                                          1
                         F (a) = 1                     and f (a) = a a                                          (9)
                                            a
and each urban innovator’s output is aSU . We assume that all individuals have the same
output in manufacturing both the di¤erentiated goods and the numeraire, and that all
heterogeneity is in creativity. As a result, creative people sort perfectly into the innovative
sector, and employment in this sector is characterized by a marginal worker with creativity
t. Heterogeneity in the ability to innovate both acts as a check on the amount of innovation,
because eventually the marginal innovator is not very good at innovating, and predicts more
inequality in the innovative sector.
   When all innovation occurs in the city, total employment in innovation is

                              Ln = LUn = L [1               F (t)] = La t                                      (10)

and therefore knowledge spillovers are

                                       SU = Ln = L a t                                                         (11)

and the total amount of innovation is
                             Z 1
                   n = LSU       af (a) da = L1+ a(1+                )
                                                                                  t1   (1+ )
                                                                                                               (12)
                                t                                             1
   For notational convenience, de…ne the inverse measure of productivity

                                               1             a       (1+ )    1

                                n      L   (1+ )   1                                                           (13)
                                                                 1
which is decreasing in the mean of the skill distribution a = (                        1), and in the size of the
pool of workers L, because a larger pool means that more able people will be available to
this sector

                                                       10
   Then, as a function of the amount of innovation, employment equals:

                                                   Ln =      nn
                                                                  (1+ )    1                                             (14)

and the output of the marginal innovator equals:

                                                              1               1
                                                  tSU =           n (1+   )       1                                      (15)
                                                              n

Free entry into this sector means that tSU must equal the opportunity cost of labor for this
marginal worker plus the cost of              n   units of location-speci…c capital.


3.3     The Spatial Equilibrium

Production of manufacturing goods occurs with a Leontief technology, with                                         x   unit of
location-speci…c capital per worker employed in production, in addition to one unit of capital
as a residence. Output per worker depends on local knowledge spillovers S , with                                      2 [0; 1]
measuring the importance of knowledge spillovers for manufacturing relative to innovation.
It is also a function of the availability of labor-saving urban infrastructure. Producing one
unit of advanced goods in the city requires                   x SU        units of labor, and producing it in the
hinterland requires   x   (1 +       x ) SR   .
   This set-up enables us to nest two extreme versions of the model. In the …rst version,
there are no knowledge spillovers, which requires                         = 0, but cities have innate productivity
advantages due to transportation and other infrastructure. We assume that this infrastruc-
ture costs a …xed amount F             K (1 +        x)             1 = (1 +          x)   that is defrayed by real-estate
taxation. In the second version, cities have no innate productivity advantages, but there are
spillovers.
   Production of the traditional good is una¤ected by knowledge spillovers, requiring                                       Z

unit of labor in the city and          Z   (1 +     z)    in the hinterland, as well as               Z   units of location-
speci…c capital per unit of labor in production, plus one unit in consumption. We normalize
the units of labor so that       Z   (1 +     z)   equals one.
   We also allow innovators to derive a productivity bene…t from the presence of urban
infrastructure, so that a rural innovator’s output is aSR = (1 +                              n)   for some parameter       n

capturing the substitution of labor for infrastructure.

                                                             11
     We assume that the traditional sector is quite capital intensive, which is meant to re‡ect
the heavy use of land in agriculture. The advanced production sector uses an intermediate
level of capital, and innovation requires the least amount of capital, because that sector is
in the business of producing ideas. As such,

                                                    Z   >   x   >    n   0                           (16)

We also assume that the value of urban infrastructure has the reverse ranking across sectors,
so that
                                                    n       x        Z   0                           (17)

     The city is endowed with K units of location-speci…c capital and the hinterland is endowed
with KR units of this same capital. We assume that rural capital is not a scarce resource,
because KR > (1 +         Z ) L,   so that there would be excess land even if everyone lived in the
hinterland and worked in the most land-intensive sector. As a result, the price of rural capital
will equal zero. On the other hand, urban capital is scarce, so that not all the population can
be productively employed in the city even in the least land-intensive sector: K < (1 +               n ) L.

     We are interested in the case where there is some advanced manufacturing in both the
rural and urban areas. If the advanced producers are indi¤erent between these two locations,
which is necessary for production to occur in both places, then the traditional producers,
who have greater land requirements and less productivity losses due to distance from the
city, will all prefer to locate in the hinterland. Since both the price of the traditional output
and the labor requirement           Z   (1 +   z)   are normalized to one, the wage in the hinterland also
equals one.
     Workers must pay for their one unit of residential capital. Since they could earn a wage
of one in the hinterland, they must then be paid a wage

                                                    wU = 1 + wK                                      (18)

in the city, where wK is the price of location-speci…c capital in the urban area. This im-
plies that the cost of producing one unit of each advanced good in the urban area equals

 x   [1 + (1 +   x ) wK ] SU   and the cost of producing the same good in the hinterland equals

 x   (1 +   x ) SR   .

                                                                12
   When advanced manufacturing takes place in both the city and the rural area, then the
price of urban capital must make advanced producers indi¤erent between the two locations,
which requires that:
                                       1                                SU
                              wK =                  (1 +          x)                  1                    (19)
                                     1+    x                            SR
   Indi¤erence for the marginal worker between the urban innovation sector and the two
manufacturing sectors implies that the value of research output for the marginal researcher,
net of capital costs, must equal the wage that could be earned in urban manufacturing:

                                          tSU         wK          n   = wU                                 (20)

As long as there is urban manufacturing, no innovators choose to locate out of the city. The
latter would be the most pro…table choice for an individual with creativity a if and only if

                                1     a                     (1 + n ) wK
                                  <                  <                                                     (21)
                               SR   1+          n        (1 + n ) SU SR

and this is impossible when 19 holds, because then 8, 16 and 17 imply

                      1                    SU                             1                       SU
             wK =             (1 +   x)                       1                       (1 +   n)        1   (22)
                    1+    x                SR                           1+        n               SR

   To complete the equilibrium, we note that the total production of advanced goods com-
bines rural and urban production, or

                                          Ln
                                 X=                  LU +                    LR                            (23)
                                           x                      1+     x

where LU and LR denote respectively urban and rural employment in advanced manufactur-
ing. The total amount of labor used in the three sectors must sum to the total amount of
labor in the economy, which implies:

                                     L = L n + L U + LR + Z                                                (24)

   We are interested in the case where capital is scarce in the city and is completely used up
by residential and production uses associated with the innovative sector and the production
of di¤erentiated goods:
                                K = (1 +            n ) Ln    + (1 +         x ) LU                        (25)


                                                         13
3.4    Comparative Statics

The primary value of this model is to examine the impact that an improvement in com-
munication technology would have on the success of the city. The state of transport and
information technology can be summarized by the single parameter

                                            (1 +   x)       1>0                                    (26)

which captures the productivity gain that manufacturers derive from locating in the city.
The urban advantage includes two di¤erent components. For                 x   > 0, manufacturers bene…t
from the value of urban infrastructure, e.g. as a transport hub. For               < 1 and    > 0, they
also pro…t from knowledge spillovers by co-locating with urban innovators.
   As we show in the Appendix, the equilibrium of this model is de…ned by urban employ-
ment in innovation

                             (      1) (1      ) (pY ) (1 + x ) L +            K
                     Ln =                                                                          (27)
                                     (1       ) (pY ) 1 + x + (1 +            n)

   Innovation reduces the cost of producing advanced goods, and therefore the Dixit-Stiglitz
price index pY . This decrease in price may then increase the share of the budget spent
on advanced goods if demand is su¢ ciently elastic: then the increase in demand for the
advanced sector in turn drives innovation up further. To guarantee a stable equilibrium, we
must assume that the budget share does not increase too much as price declines:
                                                                      0
                                 [      (1  ) (pY )]             pY     (pY )
                                                             >                                     (28)
                       (1         ) [(1 + )   1] +                    (pY )

The right-hand side of this equation is the own-price elasticity of the budget share of Y ,
which can identically be expressed as "            1, where " is the (absolute value of) own-price
elasticity of demand for Y . The left-hand side captures the extent to which heterogeneous
ability creates decreasing returns in the innovative sector (low ). The decreasing returns
that come from drawing less and less able people into the innovative sector must o¤set the
increasing returns that come from greater variety (low           ), as well as those deriving from
knowledge spillovers (high   and ).
   In a stable equilibrium where manufacturing locates in both the city and the hinterland,
improvements in transportation and communication technology are described by a reduction

                                                    14
in        . A decrease in the cost of distance may also reduce the value of urban infrastructure
for innovators          n,   and any decrease in     reduces the value of proximity for innovation as
well as for manufacturing. However, as long as the innovative sector is not so large that
the city is completely specialized, manufacturing rather than innovation is on the spatial
margin, and therefore changes in the productivity of innovation in the hinterland do not
impact equilibrium quantities.
         A decline in        causes urban property values to decline. As it becomes easier to produce
di¤erentiated goods in the hinterland, the price of urban capital declines, since the value of
being in the city for advanced manufacturers declines. This e¤ect captures the decline of old
manufacturing cities in the …rst twenty-…ve years after World War II, when manufacturing
suburbanized and then went to lower density areas within the U.S. The wages for production
workers in the city also fall, since they need to be paid less to compensate them for having
to buy urban residential capital.
         The reduction in the cost of urban capital, however, is a boon to the innovative sector,
because that capital is an input into production which has decreased in price. As the price
of urban capital falls, the amount of urban innovation rises because it has become cheaper
to produce. This is one reason why decreasing communication costs increase the amount of
innovation.
         A second reason is that improvements in communication technology cause the cost of
producing the advanced good to fall. As this price falls, the budget share of Y increases if
demand is elastic, or in other words if the elasticity of substitution between the two goods
Y and Z in the utility function ( ) is above unity.1 Then the market for the advanced
sector expands, making innovation more pro…table, and thereby attracting previously extra-
marginal innovators.

Proposition 1 As                declines because of an improvement in information and transportation
technology, the price of advanced goods falls and all real incomes rise. Output of advanced
manufacturing increases, while output of the traditional good and employment in its produc-
tion contract. Innovation and employment in innovation increase.
     1
         Furthermore, if advanced goods were a luxury their budget share would increase with real income, and
therefore decrease with pY . However, we retain the conventional assumption of homothetic preferences.

                                                       15
   Improvements in transportation technology are essentially reductions in the cost of pro-
ducing the advanced goods. We should therefore not be surprised that their price declines.
Those declining good prices then drive real incomes up. As the advanced sector gains a cost
advantage it expands, and the traditional sector contracts.
   The improvement in communication technology also increases the amount of innovation
for two reasons, as discussed above. The returns to innovation rise as communication costs
fall and the cost of urban capital declines, as we discuss in the next proposition.

Proposition 2 As         declines the price of urban capital falls. The output and employment
levels in urban manufacturing decline and wages for production workers in the city fall. But
innovation and employment in its production increase, and the total population of the city
increases.

   This proposition suggests how we might expect changes in communication technology
to impact various measures of urban success. The price of land, which is one widely used
metric for the demand for a place, must fall, since the urban advantage that accrues to the
sector that is on the margin between urbanizing and not declines. Urban manufacturing
employment also declines because the urban edge in manufacturing falls. As the price of
urban real estate falls, nominal wages in the city also fall, since those wages are set to keep
real incomes for production workers equal between the city and the hinterland.
   On the other hand, population in the city increases because urban capital is …xed and
manufacturing is such a heavy user of capital relative to innovation. For this process to work,
we must have conversion of old manufacturing space to new residential space for innovators,
and we have certainly seen much of that in old manufacturing areas such as lower Manhattan.
Warehouses converted into lofts are a prime example of this process in action. The rise of
the innovative sector in the city is another more positive sign of urban promise.
   For the next proposition we assume that       n   = 0 so that the distribution of innovators’
income is Pareto like the distribution of ability. In this case, it follows that:

Proposition 3 If     n   = 0, the ratio of the income of the worker who earns more than P
percent of the urban workforce to the income of the worker who earns more than P percent of


                                               16
the urban workforce rises as               declines whenever the …rst worker is in the innovative sector
and the second worker is in manufacturing.

      This proposition shows that at least some measures of inequality will be increasing in
the city as technology improves. Decreasing communication costs increase the share of the
population working in the highly unequal innovative sector. The real-world analogy to this
is that, as New Yorkers moved from working in highly equal unionized jobs in the textile
industry to working in …nancial services, where the returns to ability (or luck) are immense,
we witnessed a sizable increase in inequality.


3.5       A Purely Innovative City

We considered so far an equilibrium with some manufacturing both inside and outside of
the city. We now consider the case where communication technology has improved to the
point that goods production in the city entirely disappears and the city comes to specialize
in innovation. To keep things simple, we continue to assume that the information costs
associated with innovators leaving the city are such that innovation only occurs in the city.
In this case, the city is entirely innovative and all innovation is in the city. The total amount
of innovation in the city is limited by the amount of urban capital, so that the maximum
city population is
                                                                 K
                                                        Ln =                                                 (29)
                                                                1+     n

      Employment in innovation equals this upper limit for a positive value of                        , and thus
with a positive price of urban capital wK , if and only if urban capital is su¢ ciently scarce:

                           K           (       1)(1  ) (pY )
                        (1+ n )L
                                   <            (1  ) (pY )
                                                    1   (1+ )   1
                                                                            (1   )[(1+ )   1]+               (30)
                                           1                          K
                        with pY =               x   n                1+ n


If this condition holds, then there is a threshold                     > 0 such that if the cost of distance falls
below      innovation rises to the maximum level possible in the city.2 In that case, Proposition
4 follows:
  2
      Symmetrically, there is also a minimum level of innovation below which all advanced manufacturing,




                                                                17
Proposition 4 If            declines below       , the amount of innovation, innovative employment
and city population remain constant; output of advanced manufacturing increases; the price
of advanced goods declines and all real incomes increase.
                       0
    If and only if         (pY ) < 0, as       declines below       the price of urban capital increases,
employment in the advanced sector increases, and output and employment in the traditional
sector contract.

    Once the city has completely specialized in innovation, further improvement in commu-
nication technology will not impact city population any more. They may instead start to
increase the value of urban property if demand for the advanced good is su¢ ciently elastic.
The elasticity of demand for the composite advanced good is important because it ensures
that the falling production costs will make innovation more pro…table. In that case, further
improvements in communication technology increase the amount spent on advanced goods,
which boosts demand for the ideas produced in the city. The model seems to suggest that
during an earlier period, when manufacturing was still leaving cities like New York and
Boston, improving communication technologies were associated with declining urban prop-
erty values. However, in the post-1980 world, when these places have specialized highly in
idea production, the rise in real-estate costs may re‡ect the continuing improvement in the
ability of communicating ideas which has acted to increase the returns to innovation.


3.6      Two cities

Finally, we consider an extension of the model that is intended to capture the heterogeneous
experiences of di¤erent older cities since 1970, and in particular the diverging fates of in-
novating and manufacturing cities. Divergence occurs in our model because manufacturing
cities are merely hit by the declining value of their infrastructure, such as a port or a rail
and possibly some traditional production, would occur in the city:
                                          "                   1+ x
                                                                            #   1
                                    K                         1+ n +
                        Ln ( ) =            1+                                      < Ln
                                  1+ n         (1   )(     1) 1 +

Although this corner solution is reached for a …nite value of    , it does not seem to be relevant for a modern
economy, and we simply assume that         is always su¢ ciently small for manufacturing to be pro…table outside
of the city.

                                                        18
hub; while this is true also of innovating cities, they enjoy the counterbalancing positive
e¤ect of an increase in innovation, and therefore in local knowledge spillovers.
   Suppose that city i 2 f1; 2g host Lin innovators, with L1n > L2n        0, while LR
                                                                                     n       0 are
employed in innovation outside of both cities. Then knowledge spillovers are

 S1 = L1n +      L2n + LR
                        n     > S2 = L2n +       L1n + LR
                                                        n      SR =      L1n + L2n + LR
                                                                                      n       (31)

implying that is naturally e¢ cient for all knowledge workers to congregate in the same
location. While an unstable equilibrium where innovators split equally between the two cities
is a possibility, we assume that the innovators, either through coordination or decentralized
location choices, have succeeded in reaping the advantages of locating in a single place,
and we will refer to the city where innovators cluster as the innovative city. The cities are
otherwise assumed to be identical: in particular K1 = K2 = K < (1 +             n ) L=2,   the last
inequality ensuring again that not all the population can be urbanized given the scarcity of
urban capital.
   When the innovative city hosts both innovation and manufacturing, while the manufac-
turing city is entirely specialized in manufacturing, Proposition 5 follows:

Proposition 5 As         declines, relative to the manufacturing city the innovative city will
see the size of its innovative sector grow, the size of its manufacturing sector shrink, its
population grow, and its average real income increase.
   When the value of urban infrastructure    x   falls, property values in the manufacturing city
fall relative to the innovative city

   This proposition emphasizes that declining communication costs increase the degree of
inequality across cities, as we saw in the previous section. As those costs decline, the innov-
ative city sees its population and income grow more quickly than the income and population
of the manufacturing city.
   The second part of the proposition is meant to capture the increasing divergence of
housing values in New York and Detroit. Older cities were built on their physical advantages
as transportation hubs, whose importance has been steadily diminishing; those that did not
…nd a new source of comparative advantage in the agglomeration of innovative individuals
are bound to decline as their geographic edge is blunted.

                                                 19
4     Evidence on Urban Growth
In this section, we turn to the empirical implications of the model about disparity between
areas. The model predicted that cities that specialized in innovation would bene…t from
declining communication costs, while cities that specialized in production would be hurt by
those costs. The model also predicts that urban success will be accompanied by increasing
specialization in innovative activities.
    We start with the awkward task of de…ning specialization in innovation. We mean to
de…ne innovation broadly and we certainly believe that the …nanciers of Wall Street and
the management consultants of Chicago are no less innovative than the software engineers of
Silicon Valley. The …nance sector in New York, for example, is clearly enormously innovative
in ways that can and do reduce the costs of producing …nal goods. As such, to de…ne
innovation, we followed the prediction of the model that high human capital people will
specialize in innovation. The prediction pushed us to use skilled occupations as a proxy for
specialization in innovation. Speci…cally, we de…ned innovative occupations as those which
were among the top twenty percent of occupations on the basis of education, where the
share of workers with college degrees in 1970 is our measure of education. However, since
our model is really about the private sector, we excluded those occupations which had more
than one-half of their employees working for the government.
    Table 2 gives a list of the twenty largest occupations ranked by education in 1970. While
doctors and lawyers rank high on the list, perhaps justi…ably so, the list of skilled occupations
includes many di¤erent types of engineers. While there are many reasons to be skeptical
about this method of measuring innovative activity, we think it provides a measure that is at
least correlated with the level of innovation in the local economy. Moreover, at the very least
this measure enables us to test the predictions of the model about the correlation between
specialization in the high-skill sector and urban success.
    In Figure 5, we show the correlation between this measure of innovative occupations and
the metropolitan-area …xed e¤ect in a wage regression based on year 2000 Census Individual
Public Use Micro Sample data. The wage regression has controlled for individual human
capital measures, like years of schooling and age. The correlation between the wage residual


                                               20
and the measure of skilled occupations reminds us that in places with more skilled occupa-
tions, the wages of everyone appear to be higher, perhaps because of human capital spillovers
(as in Rauch, 1993).
   The model predicts that those cities that specialized in innovation were more likely to
bene…t from the improvements in information technology that have occurred over the last
twenty-…ve years. We test this hypothesis by looking at specialization in skilled occupations
in 1980 and city growth since then. Figure 6 shows the 26 percent correlation between
income growth at the metropolitan-area level and the initial share of employment in the
more skilled occupations. A one percent increase in skilled occupations in 1980 is associated
with an approximately four percent increase in income growth since then.
   Table 3 considers in a multivariate regression the relationship between initial specializa-
tion in skilled occupations and growth in both income and population, another measure of
urban success. The …rst regression shows the strong positive correlation between income and
initial concentration in skilled occupations when we control for initial population, income
and regional dummies. As the share of employment in these skilled occupations increases
by one percent, we estimate that income grows by about …ve percent. This coe¢ cient is
almost unchanged from the coe¢ cient estimated with no other controls. The second regres-
sion reproduces this result for the Northeast and the Midwest. The coe¢ cient on skilled
occupations increases slightly. In the third regression, we also control for the initial share
of the adult population with college degrees. This control reduces our estimated coe¢ cient
on skilled occupations by about forty percent, but the coe¢ cient remains statistically and
economically signi…cant.
   Regressions (4), (5) and (6) look at the relationship between skilled occupations and
population growth. Regression (4) shows that specialization in skilled occupations is not
correlated with population growth across the entire set of metropolitan areas in the United
States. Regression (5) shows that the correlation is signi…cantly positive in the set of older
metropolitan areas in the Northeast and Midwest. Regression (6) shows that in this case,
controlling for initial skills does make the skill occupation coe¢ cient insigni…cant. As such,
specialization in innovation does not seem to be important in the growing areas of the
sunbelt, but it does seem to be related to the success of older places (as in Glaeser and Saiz,


                                              21
2004). One interpretation of the greater importance of innovation in the rustbelt than in
the sunbelt is that the cities in the sunbelt do not have the same high costs of production
that limit urban manufacturing in the older areas. Later development of these places means
that land is more readily available and accessible by highways. An alternative interpretation
emphasizes the role of skilled people in opposing new housing in California.
   We now turn to the model’s predicted correlations about increasing innovation. Figure
7 shows that places that began within a higher concentration of workers in skilled industries
increased the degree of that concentration between 1980 and 2000. An increase in the
initial share of skilled occupations of ten percent is associated with a growth in the share
of skilled occupation of 5.6 percent. Just as skilled places became more skilled over the
period (Berry and Glaeser, 2005), places that started in more skilled occupations increased
their concentration in those occupations. This supports the predictions of the model that
decreasing communication costs increase the di¤erences in specialization between cities.
   The model also predicts that there will be a positive correlation between places that
specialized further in idea production and income growth. The extremely strong link between
changes in income and changes in the share of workers in skilled occupations is borne out
by the data, as shown in Figure 8. The correlation is 46 percent, and from 1980 to 2000, an
increase in the specialization in skilled sectors by one percentage point is associated with a
5 percent increase in income. Places that specialized further in skilled occupations became
richer.
   While patents are only one form of innovation, they do at least represent a hard measure
of innovative activity. As such, we can look at whether our measure of high human capital
occupations is correlated with patenting and whether we see a correlation between increases
in patenting and increases in income at the metropolitan area level. The correlation be-
tween our measure of skilled occupations and the logarithm of the number of patents at the
metropolitan level is 57 percent. The 18 percent correlation between increases in patenting
and increases in income between 1990 and 2000 is also signi…cant, with a regression coe¢ cient
of .066 and a standard error of .015.




                                             22
4.1    Inequality within Cities

A second implication of the model is that declining communication costs will increase the
returns to innovative people and that urban inequality will rise. The model can also predict
that inequality will rise faster in cities which are specialized in innovation and more successful.
    Figure 9 shows that the 16 percent correlation between the increase in the variance of
log incomes within metropolitan areas and the initial specialization of the metropolitan area
in skilled occupations. Places that had more skilled occupations became more unequal. The
correlation is weaker but it still signi…cant if we measure inequality by the di¤erence between
the log wage at the 90th percentile of the income distribution and the log wage at the 10th
percentile of the income distribution.
    Table 4 examines whether these regressions hold up in a multivariate setting. Regression
(1) shows that there is a positive correlation between initial specialization in skilled occupa-
tions and increases in the variance of log income even controlling for initial income, income
variance, population and region dummies. Regression (2) shows that this relationship be-
comes statistically insigni…cant once we control for the share of the population with college
degrees. Interestingly, the coe¢ cient on skilled occupations does not get smaller, but just
less precisely estimated. Regressions (3) and (4) reproduce (1) and (2) using the di¤erence
in the 90th percentile log wage and the 10th percentile log wage. In this case, the coe¢ cient
is positive, but the results are uniformly insigni…cant.
    Figure 10 shows that increasing inequality within cities is also, weakly, associated with
rising income at the city level. Places that had faster income growth were also places that
had more growth in the variance of log wages: urban success and urban inequality have gone
together.



5     Conclusion
The past forty years have seen a remarkable range of urban successes and failures, especially
among America’s older cities. Some places, like Cleveland and Detroit, seem caught in
perpetual decline. Other areas, like San Francisco and New York, had remarkable success as
they became centers of idea-based industries.

                                                23
   In this paper, we suggested that these urban successes and urban failures might re‡ect the
same underlying technological change: a vast improvement in communication technology. As
communication technology improved, it enabled manufacturing …rms to leave cities, causing
the urban distress of Detroit or Manhattan in 1975. However, declining communication costs
also increased the returns to new innovations, and since cities specialize in idea-production,
this helped invigorate some cities.
   The model suggests that future improvements in information technology will continue
to strengthen cities that are centers of innovation, but continue to hurt cities that remain
oriented towards manufacturing. Certainly, there is every reason to think that the free ‡ow
of people and capital across space will only continue to increase the returns to new ideas.
The important question for the future of cities is whether urban areas will continue to have
a comparative advantage in producing ideas.
   The great challenge to urban areas therefore comes from the possibility that innovation
will also leave dense agglomerations. While this is possible, there is a remarkable contin-
uing tendency of innovative people to locate near other innovative people. Silicon Valley,
for example, is built at lower densities than New York, because it is built for drivers not
pedestrians, but it is certainly a dense agglomeration. As long as improvements in infor-
mation technology continue to increase the returns to having new ideas, then the edge that
proximity gives to innovation seems likely to keep such agglomerations strong.




                                             24
References
 [1] Christopher Berry and Edward L. Glaeser (2005) “The Divergence of Human Capital
    Levels Across Cities”. Papers in Regional Science 84(3): 407-444.

 [2] Avinash Dixit and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1977) “Monopolistic Competition and Optimal
    Product Diversity”. The American Economic Review 67: 297-308.

 [3] Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga (2005) “From Sectoral to Functional Urban Special-
    ization”. Journal of Urban Economics 57(2): 343-370.

 [4] Wilfred J. Ethier (1982) “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern
    Theory of International Trade”. The American Economic Review 72: 389-405.

 [5] Masahisa Fujita and Jacques-François Thisse (2003) “Does Geographical Agglomeration
    Foster Economic Growth? And Who Gains and Loses from It?”The Japanese Economic
    Review 54(2): 121-145.

 [6] Edward L. Glaeser and Janet E. Kohlhase (2004) “Cities, Regions and the Decline of
    Transport Costs”. Papers in Regional Science 83(1): 197-228.

 [7] Edward L. Glaeser and Albert Saiz (2004) “The Rise of the Skilled City”. Brookings-
    Wharton Papers on Urban A¤airs 5: 47-94.

 [8] Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman (1991) Innovation and Growth in the Global
    Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

 [9] Elhanan Helpman, Mark Melitz and Stephen Yeaple (2004) “Export Versus FDI with
    Heterogeneous Firms”. The American Economic Review 94(1): 300-316.

[10] J. Vernon Henderson and Yukako Ono (2007) “Where do Manufacturing Firms Locate
    Their Headquarters?”Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming.

[11] International Monetary Fund (1997) World Economic Outlook. Washington, DC: Inter-
    national Monetary Fund.



                                           25
[12] Sukkoo Kim (1999) “The Rise of Multiunit Firms in U.S. Manufacturing”. Explorations
    in Economic History 36(4): 360-386.

[13] James R. Markusen (1995) “The Boundaries of Multinational Enterprises and the The-
    ory of International Trade”The Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2): 169-189.

[14] Alfred Marshall (1890) Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan.

[15] James E. Rauch (1993) “Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human
    Capital: Evidence from the Cities”. Journal of Urban Economics 34: 380-400.

[16] Paul M. Romer (1990) “Endogenous Technological Change”. Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 98: S71-S102.

[17] Steven Ruggles, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
    Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2004) Integrated Public Use
    Microdata Series: Version 3.0. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.




                                          26
                                                                                                                          Figure 1
                                                                                                          Secular Decline in Communication Costs

                                                              300




                                                              250




                                                              200




                                                              150




27
                                                              100




                                                              50




     Real $ Cost of a Three-Minute Call, New York to London
                                                               0
                                                                          1930             1940               1950      1960        1970           1980   1990   2000



                                                                    Source: IMF World Economic Outlook 1997
                                                                                             Figure 2
                                                                             Population Growth Across Cities, 1970-2000

                                     1.2

                                                                                                                             San Francisco
                                    1.15
                                                                                                                             Chicago
                                     1.1

                                                                                                                             Boston
                                    1.05


                                      1                                                                                      New York


                                    0.95




28
                                     0.9                                                                                     Cleveland




     Population (Indexed to 1970)
                                    0.85


                                     0.8


                                    0.75
                                                                                                                             Detroit
                                     0.7
                                                          1970                           1980                   1990      2000
                                                                                                    Year

                                           Source: U.S. Census Bureau, indexed to 1970
                                                                                               Figure 3
                                                                   Trends in Earnings Per Worker Across Cities, 1977-2002 (by county)
                                         $80,000
                                                                                                                                         New York, NY



                                         $70,000



                                                                                                                                          San
                                         $60,000
                                                                                                                                          Francisco, CA



                                                                                                                                         Middlesex,
                                         $50,000
                                                                                                                                         MA




29
                                                                                                                                             Cook, IL
                                                                                                                                             Wayne, MI
                                         $40,000




     Average Payroll (in 2002 dollars)
                                                                                                                                        Cuyahoga, OH

                                         $30,000




                                         $20,000
                                                         1977                 1980            1986             1990             1995       2002
                                                                                                      Year

                                           Source: County Business Patterns
                                              Figure 4
            Change in the Distribution of Median Family Income Across Cities, 1980-2000
       .00008




                                     Income 1980
       .00006
    Density
    .00004




                                                           Income 2000
       .00002
       0




           $20,000                $40,000                $60,000                $80,000

Source: U.S. Census Bureau




                                                30
                              Figure 5
   Employment in Innovative Sectors and Knowledge Spillovers, 2000

                    Log Wage Residual 2000                                       Fitted values
                                               New York
10.2
                                                                              Minneapo

                                                                                  Charlott
                                                                Atlanta-
                                           West Pal                                  Austin-R
                                                           Kansas C                              San Fran
                                                      Indianap
                                                              Richmond
                                                            Louisvil
                                              Phoenix-             Omaha-Co
                                                      San Dieg Columbus
                                                                  Albany-S
 10              Las Vega                                  Nashvill
                        Grand  Ra
                          Fort Way       St. Loui
                                               Wichita,
                                                 SaltHonolulu
                                                     Lak
                   Lancaste          Greensbo Orlando,  Columbia
                                     Dayton,
                                         Harrisbu
                        Toledo,   Allentow
                                       Tulsa, O
                                        Tampa-St            Albuquer
                            Syracuse        Charlest      Chicago-
                        Canton-M             Birmingh
                                            Rocheste
                                        Little R
                            Buffalo-
                                   Baton
                                 San    Pittsbur
                                     Spokane,
                                         Ro
                                      Anto
         Stockton                                       Jackson,
                                                  Knoxvill
        Youngsto                        Tucson,
                                        Oklahoma
 9.8
                       Memphis,           New Orle

       Bakersfi
                  Fresno,




 9.6
                   .05                                         .1                                           .15
                                              2000 Share in High Skill Occ.

           Source: U.S. Census Bureau and Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                          31
                              Figure 6
Specialization in Innovative Sectors and Income Growth, 1980-2000

             Change Income 1980-2000                                         Fitted values

.6                                                                         San Fran
                                                                     Austin-R

                                                                            Boston-Q
                                                                                        San Jose
                                              Portland
                                                               Newark-U
                            Providen
                               Tampa-St                      Atlanta-
                            Jacksonv       CharlottAlbany-S
                                               Philadel
                                             West Pal                                              Washingt
                                          Nashvill      New  York Minneapo
                                                       Columbus
                                                           Nassau-S      Hartford
                       Memphis,Springfi Knoxvill
                                          Baltimor
                                     Orlando,   San Dieg
                                             Sacramen                                 Seattle-
.4                     GreensboBirminghOmaha-Co      Oxnard-T
                                                    Richmond
                                                  LauColumbia
                                           Cincinna
                                           Fort Jackson,
                       Charlest
                         Tacoma,             Little R Kansas CDallas-P
                               LouisvilSaltIndianap
                    San AntoAllentow         LakHarrisbu
                  Lancaste Grand
                 Stockton             Ra St. Loui
                                 Spokane,
                                Syracuse             Chicago-
                                                 Phoenix-
                               Honolulu
                          Buffalo-Akron,Dayton,
                                          O         Wichita, Albuquer
                   Riversid               Tucson,
                                               Milwauke
              Las VegaToledo,        Fort WayRocheste
                                             Clevelan
                                                  Tulsa, O
                                 Pittsbur          Oklahoma
                                    Baton Ro          Los Ange
                                  New   Orle
                                    Detroit-
                           Canton-M
.2
                       Fresno,
                      Youngsto                                Houston-
               Gary, IN
                   Bakersfi
            El Paso,




0
     .02                      .04                    .06                                    .08               .1
                                         1980 Share in High Skill Occ.

       Source: U.S. Census Bureau and Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                    32
                                Figure 7
       Increasing Specialization in Innovative Sectors, 1980-2000

              Change Share in High Skill Occ.                                  Fitted values

.08

                                                                                          San Jose

                                               Charlott
.06                                                                          San Fran

                                                                              Boston-Q
                                 Bergen-P                                                            Washingt
                                             Omaha-Co                  Austin-R
                                  Louisvil
                                               Cincinna               Minneapo
                                             Baltimor
                                  Honolulu Nashvill Albany-S
.04                        Jersey C
                          Charlest                 Portland
                                                        Richmond
                                                           Columbus
                                                               Nassau-S
                               Jacksonv            Philadel      Atlanta-
                                  Birmingh     Indianap
                                        Orlando, Sacramen
                                                   Milwauke
                                                     Jackson,        Dallas-P   Denver, Seattle-
                          Greensbo Detroit- Knoxvill
                                           Salt             KansasNewark-U
                                                         Chicago-
                                                 LakSanColumbia
                                                          Dieg      C
                       San Anto Tampa-St
                                     New Orle                    Albuquer
                                    Pittsbur             Oxnard-T
                                    Spokane,
                                Allentow
                            Tacoma,           St.West
                                                  Loui
                                             Tucson,    Pal
                                                     Phoenix-
                                                 Rocheste
                                                        Wichita,
                             Buffalo-Akron,
                         Toledo,       Baton ORo Little R New York
                                            Dayton,
                               Providen        Fort Lau
                                                      Harrisbu
.02            Las Vega
                Gary, IN Memphis,
                    Lancaste       Syracuse Clevelan
                              Canton-M                 Oklahoma
                                                      Tulsa, O
                                  Springfi
                                 Grand Ra                 Los Ange Houston-
                        Fresno,         Fort Way
                                             Miami, F
                   Stockton
             El Paso, Riversid
                                                                              Hartford
                    Bakersfi
                       Youngsto

 0
      .02                      .04                       .06                                  .08               .1
                                             1980 Share in High Skill Occ.

        Source: U.S. Census Bureau and Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                          33
                                   Figure 8
Increasing Specialization in Innovative Sectors and Income Growth, 1980-2000

                     Change Income 1980-2000                                        Fitted values

    .6                                                                         Austin-R         San Fran

                                                                                       Boston-Q
                                                                                                               San Jose
                                                                     Portland
                                                         Newark-U
                                   Providen            Tampa-St Atlanta-
                                                                JacksonvAlbany-S                    Charlott
                                                                 Philadel
                                             West Pal
                 Hartford       SpringfiNew York                  Nassau-S
                                                           Knoxvill         Minneapo Washingt
                                                                       Nashvill
                                                                   Columbus
                               Memphis,                                    Baltimor
                                                          San  Dieg
                                                              Orlando,
                                                            Seattle-
                                                            Sacramen
    .4                               Fort Tacoma,
                                           Lau
                                                   Oxnard-T
                                                          Greensbo
                                                             Birmingh
                                                        Columbia   Richmond
                                                            Jackson,        Cincinna
                                                                                   Omaha-Co
                                         Little R                    Charlest
                                                              Dallas-P
                                                              Indianap
                                                          Kansas
                                    Harrisbu Allentow     Salt
                                                        San    LakC
                                                            Anto                  Louisvil
                   Stockton Grand   Ra
                                 Lancaste
                                 Syracuse     St. Loui
                                                Spokane,
                                              Phoenix-     Chicago-
                                      Dayton,
                                         Buffalo- O Albuquer
                                           Wichita,
                                         Akron,                          Honolulu
                   Riversid                 Tucson,          Milwauke
                          Fort WayLas Toledo,
                                      Vega   Rocheste
                                   Clevelan
                                 Tulsa,  O
                                 Oklahoma
                            Los Ange Baton Ro Pittsbur
                                                      New   Orle
                                                         Detroit-
                                Canton-M
    .2
              Youngsto      Houston-
                         Fresno,Gary, IN
               Bakersfi
                   El Paso,




     0
         0                           .02                   .04                                    .06                     .08
                                              Change Share in High Skill Occ.

             Source: U.S. Census Bureau and Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                           34
                                     Figure 9
Specialization in Innovative Sectors and Increasing Income Inequality, 1980-2000

                   Change in Variance - 1980-2000                                   Fitted values
                                      Bergen-P

      .3                                                                         San Fran
                                                                                              San Jose
                                                            New York



                                                            Los AngeNewark-U
                                                                Nassau-S
                               Jersey C                              Dallas-P
                                                  Charlott Chicago-
      .2                                                  Oxnard-T               Boston-Q
                                      Louisvil                            Austin-R
                              Charlest
                                                         San Dieg        Houston-                        Washingt
                                            Detroit-Cincinna
                                       Birmingh              Richmond
                                                        Philadel      Atlanta-
                        Stockton      Grand   Ra
                                         Pittsbur Miami, F Columbia
                                          New Orle West      Pal
                                                          Phoenix-
                                                        Milwauke
                                       Tampa-St                                     Denver, Seattle-
                             Fresno,
                                   Canton-M
                                          Akron, O ClevelanColumbus
                               GreensboSpringfi         Portland
                  El Paso,RiversidBuffalo-                       Kansas C
                                                  BaltimorJackson,
                                                      Little R
      .1            Las VegaSan Anto
                             Toledo,Jacksonv Nashvill
                               Memphis,            St. Loui
                                                 Dayton,
                                                           Harrisbu
                                                    Indianap
                                                      Sacramen
                                                           Tulsa, O Albuquer
                        Lancaste
                         Bakersfi                Knoxvill
                                                Salt
                                             Orlando,  Rocheste
                                                      Lak                         Hartford
                     Gary, IN          Honolulu     Fort LauAlbany-S
                                                  Tucson,                  Minneapo
                            Youngsto        Baton Ro
                                     Allentow
                                Tacoma, SyracuseOmaha-Co
                                         Spokane,            Wichita,
                                                            Oklahoma
                                    Providen Fort Way




      0
           .02                      .04                      .06                                  .08               .1
                                                 1980 Share in High Skill Occ.

             Source: U.S. Census Bureau and Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                          35
                                     Figure 10
                  Income Growth and Increasing Inequality, 1980-2000

                       Change in Variance - 1980-2000                            Fitted values
                                                                                                              San Fran
   .290377
                                                                                                   San Jose
                                                                                   New York



                                                     Los Ange                              Newark-U
                                                                                  Nassau-S
                                                                          Dallas-P
                                                                     Chicago-           Charlott
                                                                             Oxnard-T               Boston-Q
                                                                         Louisvil                         Austin-R

                                                                             Charlest
                                         Houston-                                San Washingt
                                                                                      Dieg
                                                   Detroit-                  Cincinna
                                                                              Richmond
                                                                              Birmingh       Atlanta-
                                                                                         Philadel
                                                                     Stockton
                                                                     Grand   Ra
                                                  NewPittsbur
                                                       Orle Milwauke          ColumbiaWest Pal
                                                                     Phoenix- Seattle-
                                        Fresno,Canton-M                                     Tampa-St
                                                                Akron, O
                                                          Clevelan                  Columbus
                                                                                    Springfi       Portland
                                                                              Greensbo
                                                                         Kansas   C
                                    El Paso,                   Riversid
                                                                 Buffalo- Little
                                                                             Jackson,
                                                                                  RBaltimor
                                                             Las Vega  Harrisbu
                                                                          Indianap   Nashvill
                                                                                Sacramen Jacksonv
                                                             Toledo,
                                                         Tulsa,        San
                                                                      St.
                                                                OAlbuquer
                                                                 Dayton,     Anto
                                                                          Loui    Memphis,
                                     Bakersfi                RochesteLancaste       Knoxvill
                                                                        Salt LakOrlando,
                                                                                     Hartford
                                       Gary, IN                Tucson,       Fort Lau    Albany-S
                                                     Baton Ro Honolulu              Minneapo
                                        Youngsto                       Allentow
                                                                    SyracuseOmaha-Co
                                                                           Tacoma,
                                                                    Spokane,
                                                      Oklahoma Wichita,
                                                            Fort Way                         Providen


   .034067
           -.075387                                                                                                .652578
                                              Change Income 1980-2000

Source: U.S. Census Bureau and Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                        36
                                                                                 Table 1
                                               Main Industry Groups by Share of Total City Payroll, 1977 and 2002 (by county)


                                                                      1977                                                                       2002

                                                                                                % Total                                                   % Total
                                                                                                Annual                                                    Annual
                                                         Top Industries                         Payroll                             Top Industries        Payroll

     Chicago                     Manufacturing                                                  36.03%    Finance & insurance                             14.00%
     (Cook County)               Retail Trade                                                   10.62%    Professional, scientific & technical services   12.72%
                                 Wholesale Trade                                                10.35%    Health care and social assistance               11.03%
                                 Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                             9.37%    Manufacturing                                   11.01%
                                 Transportation and Other Public Utilities                       8.41%    Wholesale trade                                 6.77%

     Cleveland                   Manufacturing                                                  44.07%    Manufacturing                                   15.94%
     (Cuyahoga County)           Wholesale Trade                                                 9.92%    Health care and social assistance               15.01%
                                 Retail Trade                                                    9.52%    Finance & insurance                             10.44%
                                 Transportation and Other Public Utilities                       8.77%    Professional, scientific & technical services   9.40%
                                 Health and Social Services                                      6.70%    Wholesale trade                                 8.27%

     Boston                      Manufacturing                                                  39.26%    Professional, scientific & technical services   18.85%




37
     (Middlesex County)          Retail Trade                                                   10.89%    Manufacturing                                   12.92%
                                 Wholesale Trade                                                 9.31%    Information                                     8.91%
                                 Educational Services                                            7.24%    Wholesale trade                                 8.30%
                                 Health and Social Services                                      6.77%    Health care and social assistance               8.23%

     New York                    Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                            22.96%    Finance & insurance                             39.50%
     (New York County)           Manufacturing                                                  19.85%    Professional, scientific & technical services   14.25%
                                 Wholesale Trade                                                11.18%    Information                                     7.91%
                                 Business Services Incl. Legal Services and Computer Services   10.68%    Management of companies & enterprises           6.70%
                                 Transportation and Other Public Utilities                       9.77%    Health care and social assistance               5.91%

     San Francisco               Transportation and Other Public Utilities                      23.37%    Finance & insurance                             23.07%
     (San Francisco County)      Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                            17.14%    Professional, scientific & technical services   21.26%
                                 Manufacturing                                                  11.85%    Information                                     8.40%
                                 Construction                                                   10.16%    Health care and social assistance               7.89%
                                 Retail Trade                                                    8.27%    Management of companies & enterprises           4.86%

     Detroit                     Manufacturing                                                  55.22%    Manufacturing                                   20.46%
     (Wayne County)              Retail Trade                                                    8.83%    Health care and social assistance               11.66%
                                 Transportation and Other Public Utilities                       7.17%    Management of companies & enterprises           8.56%
                                 Health and Social Services                                      6.86%    Professional, scientific & technical services   6.17%
                                 Wholesale Trade                                                 6.61%    Transportation & warehousing                    6.01%

     Source: County Business Patterns
                             Table 2
             Main Occupations of Skilled Workers, 1970


 1    Physicians
 2    Dentists
 3    Lawyers
 4    Physicists and astronomers
 5    Veterinarians
 6    Geologists
 7    Chemical engineers
 8    Optometrists
 9    Petroleum, mining, and geological engineers
10    Other health and therapy occupations
11    Chemists
12    Architects
13    Economists, market researchers, and survey researchers
14    Pharmacists
15    Clergy and religious workers
16    Metallurgical and materials engineers, variously phrased
17    Aerospace engineers
18    Electrical engineers
19    Civil engineers
20    Mechanical engineers

Source: The Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                       38
                                                              Table 3
                       Specialization in Innovative Sectors and Growth in Income and Population, 1980-2000


                                                                              (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                                                                              Change in Log Income        Change in Log Population

Share of Workers in High Skill Occupations in 1980                           5.757     6.684     3.839     1.437     6.071     0.564
                                                                            (0.943)   (1.076)   (1.698)   (2.129)   (1.941)   (3.494)

Log Income 1980                                                              -0.266   -0.351     -0.278    -0.21     -0.216    -0.254
                                                                            (0.101)   (0.108)   (0.101)   (0.228)   (0.195)   (0.189)

Log Population 1980                                                          -0.007   -0.003     -0.005   -0.013     -0.046    -0.044
                                                                            (0.013)   (0.012)   (0.013)   (0.029)   (0.022)   (0.021)

Share of Population with BA in 1980                                                              0.676                         2.084
                                                                                                (0.499)                       (1.117)

Northeast Dummy                                                              0.062     0.054     0.054     -0.029    -0.04     -0.063
                                                                            (0.026)   (0.019)   (0.026)   (0.058)   (0.033)   (0.035)

South Dummy                                                                  0.016               0.006     0.203
                                                                            (0.026)             (0.027)   (0.059)

West Dummy                                                                   0.008               -0.011    0.316
                                                                            (0.025)             (0.028)   (0.056)

Constant                                                                     2.941     3.729     3.026     2.431      2.73    3.045
                                                                            (1.031)   (1.123)   (1.027)   (2.327)   (2.027)   (1.96)

R-squared                                                                   0.4173    0.6999    0.4309    0.4425    0.2631    0.338

Source: U.S. Census Bureau and the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                                            39
                                                                      Table 4
                                 Specialization in Innovative Sectors and Increasing Income Inequality, 1980-2000


                                                                                 (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                                            Change in Variance of Log Income   Change in 90/10 Income Ratio

Share of Workers in High Skill Occupations in 1980                              1.158             1.224           1.088            1.351
                                                                               (0.516)           (0.941)         (0.947)          (1.729)

Variance of Log Income 1980 or 90/10 Income Ratio 1980                         -0.139             -0.14          -0.455           -0.458
                                                                               (0.206)           (0.207)         (0.157)          (0.159)

Log Income 1980                                                                  0.05             0.051           0.077            0.079
                                                                               (0.055)           (0.056)         (0.101)          (0.103)

Log Population 1980                                                              0.03             0.03            0.054            0.053
                                                                               (0.008)           (0.008)         (0.013)          (0.014)

Share of Population with BA in 1980                                                               -0.023                           -0.093
                                                                                                 (0.276)                          (0.509)

Northeast Dummy                                                                 0.015             0.015           0.01             0.011
                                                                               (0.014)           (0.014)         (0.025)          (0.026)

South Dummy                                                                     0.033             0.033           0.069            0.07
                                                                               (0.016)           (0.017)         (0.030)          (0.032)

West Dummy                                                                      0.039             0.038           0.098            0.01
                                                                               (0.015)           (0.017)         (0.028)          (0.032)

Constant                                                                       -0.859            -0.862          -0.842           -0.852
                                                                               (0.564)           (0.569)         (1.04)           (1.05)

R-squared                                                                       0.412             0.412          0.346             0.347
Source: U.S. Census Bureau and the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series




                                                                                 40
A      Appendix
A.1     Proof of Propositions 1 and 2
Equations 8, 18 and 19 yield equilibrium factor rewards
                                  (
                                     wK = (1+ 1+
                                               x)
                                                  x
                                                     1

                                     wU = (1+ x1+
                                                )
                                                  x
                                                    + x


and equations 2, 1, 3, 5, 14 and 23 then yield prices
                 (
                    px = 1 x (1 + x )      Ln
                                                                             1       (1+ )   1        (1        )[(1+ )     1]+
                                    1
                        pY =            x (1 +            x)                 n                   Ln
and quantities
                 8                  (1+ )        1      (1+ )       1
                 >
                 > n=                                Ln
                 >
                 >
                                n
                 >
                 < X=           1
                                        LU +           1+      x
                                                                   LR Ln
                                x
                                            (1       )[(1+ )       1]                                      (1     )[(1+ )    1]+
                 >
                 > Y =      1
                                                                         LU +               L R Ln
                 >
                 >                      n                                            1+
                 >
                 :          1
                                x
                                     (pY )
                                                                                          x

                   Z=               (pY )
                                                 (1 +          x)            L U + LR

    The factor-market clearing conditions 24 and 25 yield
       8
       >
       >    LU = 1+K x 1+       n
                                  L
                           1+ x n h                                                                                                i
       <
            LR = 1 (1 (p)Y )(pY ) L               1 (pY )
                                        (pY ) + 1 (1   ) (pY )
                                                               (1 + x )                                                                 K
                                                                                                                                       1+ x
                                                                                                                                            +
       >            h                                                                                                                     i
       >
       :                                       1 (pY )                                                                                         Ln
                      ( x       n)  (pY ) 1 (1    ) (pY )
                                                          (1 + n ) (1 +                                                       x)              1+ x

and …nally, considering also equations 4 and 15, the free-entry condition 20 becomes the
equilibrium condition
                        (           1) (1             ) (pY ) (1 +                   x) L   + (1 + x )                             1 K
                 Ln =
                                     (1              ) (pY )     x                       n + (1 + n ) (1 +                   x)

which de…nes a unique and stable equilibrium provided that
                                                                                                                  0
                                            [      (1  ) (pY )]                                        pY          (pY )
                                                                                             >
                            (1               ) [(1 + )   1] +                                                    (pY )
    In an interior equilibrium (i.e. for LU                                  0 and LR             0) as               declines:

  1. Factor rewards in the city decline, since
                                                                                          @ log wK
                                                      wK =                           )             =1
                                                                        1+       x         @ log
      and
                                                                                             @wK
                                                          wU = 1 + wK )                          =1
                                                                                             @wU

                                                                             41
2. Employment in innovation increases, since for 0 (pY )                                                 0 the equilibrium system
                 (
                    Ln = ( 1)(1
                             (1
                                  ) (pY ) (1+ x )L+ K
                                 ) (pY ) 1+ x +(1+ n )
                                                                     (1    )[(1+ )       1]        (1    )[(1+ )      1]+
                                    1
                        pY =             x (1 +          )           n                        Ln

  implies           (                                                                                               0
                        dLn                 (1+ x )[(1+ n )L K]                                               pY      (pY ) dpY
                        Ln
                              =       [1+ x +(1+ n ) ][(1+ x )L+ K]
                                                                    d +                                            (pY ) pY
                        dpY          1          (1    )[(1+ ) 1]+    dLn
                        pY
                              =     1+
                                        d                            Ln

  and therefore
                                                                                                               0
                                         (1+ x )[(1+ n )L K]                                             pY     (pY )
                    @Ln            [1+ x +(1+ n ) ][(1+ x )L+ K]
                                                                                         +     1+             (pY )
                        =                                    0
                                                                                                                         Ln < 0
                    @                        1      pY     (pY )           (1       )[(1+ )        1]+
                                                         (pY )


  by the stability condition 28. As the technology of production does not change, this
  implies that the amount of innovation increases.

3. The prices of advanced goods and the relative price index decline, since

                        1                                             @px                      1                  @Ln
                px =          x   (1 +       ) Ln        )                = px                                                    >0
                                                                      @                       1+               Ln @

  and
                @pY                 1               (1                    ) [(1 + )                1] +               @Ln
                    = pY                                                                                                          >0
                @                  1+                                             Ln                                  @
  It follows that the real income of all agents increases.

4. Employment in urban manufacturing contracts, since
                               K                 1+              n                 @LU                  1+     n @Ln
                     LU =                                            Ln )              =                             >0
                              1+         x       1+              x                 @                    1+     x @

  As the technology of production does not change, this implies that the output of urban
  manufacturing declines.

5. Urban population increases, since
                                         @Ln @LU   x                                     n    @Ln
                                            +    =                                                <0
                                         @    @    1+                                    x    @

6. Total output of advanced goods expands, because
                                                                     1+
                                                    1+               1+
                                                                           n

            X   =                                                          x
                                                                                   L1+
                                                                                    n
                  (1  )( 1) x 1 +
                  @X              ( x                                               n)                             1+         @Ln
                )    = X                                                                                                               <0
                  @      (1 + ) [1 +                                           x   + (1 +          n)     ]         Ln        @


                                                                     42
      A fortiori, output of advanced manufacturing outside of the city expands, and output
      of the Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate expands, because
                      (1    )[(1+ )       1]
                 Ln                                   @ log Y   @ log X (1                                  ) [(1 + )            1] @ log Ln
      Y =X                                     )              =        +                                                                     <0
                  n                                     @         @                                                                    @

  7. Output of the traditional good contracts, because

                 [1      (pY )]        K
       Z=                         L+
                 (1      ) (pY )     1+ x
          @Z                  K                                                      +      1                               0            @pY
      )      =Z                      +                                                                                  j       (pY )j         >0
          @           (1 + x ) L + K [    (1                                        ) (pY )] [1                (pY )]                    @

A.2     Proof of Proposition 3
The income of an urban innovator with productivity a is

                                                  y (a) = a SU                     wK        n


Thus for n = 0, the income distribution of innovators follows a Pareto distribution with
shape and minimum 1+wK dictated by the indi¤erence condition of the marginal innovator.
Recalling de…nition 9, the value of percentile p in a Pareto distribution with minimum 1+wK
                     1
is (1 + wK ) (1 p) .
    If fraction of the city population is employed in manufacturing and 1        in innovation,
the value of percentile P      of the urban income distribution is the homogeneous income
of manufacturing workers 1 + wK ; while percentile P > corresponds to percentile p =
 P        = (1  ) of the income distribution of innovators. Thus their ratio is
                                                          1
                                      1                               @R            1        1         @
                           R=                                  )         =                         R         <0
                                      1         P                     @                 1              @

A.3     Proof of Proposition 4
When the city is completely specialized and all innovation occurs in the city, equation 29
denotes total employment in innovation, while LU = 0. Then prices are
                   (
                     px = 1 x (1 + ) Ln
                                                                   1       (1+ )    1        (1    )[(1+ )   1]+
                                  1
                           pY =           x    (1 +            )   n                    Ln

and quantities        8                   (1+ )       1       (1+ )    1
                      >
                      > n=                             Ln
                      >
                      >
                                      n
                      < X=           1
                                                      LR Ln
                                  (1+ )           x
                                                              (1   )[(1+ )    1]            (1    )[(1+ )    1]+
                      >
                      > Y =                1
                                                                                   LR Ln
                      >
                      >           (1+ ) x                 n
                      :           1 (pY )
                        Z=                L
                                     (pY ) R


                                                                       43
and by the labor-market clearing condition 24
          8          (1+ )   1   (1+ )   1
          >
          >  n =               L
          >
          >        n             n
          >
          < X=          (pY )          1
                  1 (1     ) (pY ) (1+ ) x
                                           L Ln Ln
                                             (1 )[(1+ ) 1]                           (1    )[(1+ )       1]+
          >
          >  Y  =       (pY )          1
                                                           L                   L n Ln
          >
          >       1 (1    ) (pY ) (1+ ) x  n
          >
          : Z = 1 (pY )
                  1 (1    ) (pY )
                                    L Ln

   Finally, the free-entry condition 20 yields the equilibrium price of urban capital

                        (     1) (1      ) (pY ) 1               L                 (1      ) (pY )
              wK =
                            [1 (1       ) (pY )] 1 +       n     Ln        (      1) (1     ) (pY )

which is positive by condition 30.
   Innovation does not expand out of the city as long as

                                                           (      1) (1          ) (pY )            L
             (1 +   n)           1 + (1 +     n ) wK   =                                                       1
                                                                [1 (1           ) (pY )]            Ln

   Then as      declines below          , it is straightforward that:

   1. The amount of innovation is …xed at n by the urban capacity constraint; employment
      in the innovative sector and city population are likewise constrained.

   2. The relative price of di¤erentiated goods px declines. The price index for the advanced
      sector pY declines, and therefore the the real income of all agents increases.

   3. Output of the di¤erentiated goods X and of their aggregate Y increases.
                    0
   If and only if       (pY ) < 0, as      declines below          :

   1. The relative price of urban capital increases, since
                                                                                                0
                            @wK         @wK      [1 + (1 + n ) wK ]                                 (pY )
                                = 0 and     =
                            @           @pY   (1 + n ) [1 (1      ) ]                               (pY )

   2. The traditional sector contracts
                              @Z         @Z                            L       Ln           0
                                 = 0 and     =                                                  (pY )
                              @          @pY               [1     (1           ) (pY )]2

      Thus employment in the traditional sector contracts and conversely employment in the
      advanced sector expands.




                                                       44
A.4       Proof of Proposition 5
Equilibrium factor rewards are
                                                              8
                                                              >
                                                              > wK1
                                                                    = (1+ 1+
                                                                          x)                      1
                                                              >
                                                              < 1            x

                                                                wU = (1+ x1+
                                                                           )
                                                                              x
                                                                                              +    x


                                                              >
                                                              > w 2
                                                                    =   x
                                                              >
                                                              : K     1+ x
                                                                wU2 = 1 + 1+x x

prices are          (                       1
                            px =                   x   (1 +     x)         Ln
                                                                               1      (1+ )    1           (1    )[(1+ )      1]+
                                             1
                            pY =                   x   (1 +         x)         n                   Ln
and letting L1 and L2 denote employment in manufacturing in the two cities, quantities are
            8         (1+ ) 1   (1+ ) 1
            >
            >  n =            L
            >
            >       n           n
            >
            >
            < X = 1 L1 +           L2 + 1+ x LR Ln
                                x
                                            (1     )[(1+ )     1]                                                    (1    )[(1+ )      1]+
              >
              > Y =         1
                                                                        LU +        L2 +                L R Ln
              >
              >
                                        n                                                     1+      x
              >
              >
                                x

              : Z=          1        (pY )
                                                 (1 +     x)              L1 +          L2 +                    LR
                                    (pY )                                                             1+    x


   Factor-market clearing implies
                            8          K      1+
                            < L1 = 1+ x 1+ nx Ln
                                       K
                                L2 = 1+ x
                            :
                                L = L n + L 1 + L 2 + LR + Z

so that the free-entry condition becomes the equilibrium condition

                        (               1) (1           ) (pY ) (1 + x ) L + (1 +                               x)            +     x    1 K
              Ln =
                                         (1            ) (pY )      x     n + (1 +                              n ) (1    +    x)

   The comparative statics are analogous to those in Propositions 1 and 2, even if x and
      now appear independently and not only combined in the single parameter . The
equilibrium system
                 8
                 < L = ( 1)(1 ) (pY ) (1+ x )L+[(1+ x )       + x 1]K
                    n       (1  ) (pY )  x     n +(1+  n )(1+ x)
                                                  (1+ )   1    (1 )[(1+ ) 1]+
                 : p = 1 (1 + )              1
                                                            L
                                Y                  x                x          n                       n

implies
          8
          >   dLn                            f(1+       n )(1+ x )        L    [ x     n +(2+ n + x )                ]K g
          >
          >         =                                                             + x 1]K g
                                                                                            d x+
          >
          >
              Ln                    [   x        n +(1+ n )(1+ x )            ]f(1+    x )L+   [(1+    x)
          <                             (1+ x )f(1+ x )(1+ n )L [1+ x (1+ n ) x ]Kg
                                                                                  + x 1]K g
                                                                                            d                                                  +
                              [ x n +(1+ n )(1+ x )       ]f(1+ x )L+[(1+ x )
          >
          >                        0
          >
          >                 + pY (p(p Y ) dpY
          >
          :   dpY             1
                                     Y)   pY
                                                              (1  )[(1+ ) 1]+
              pY
                    =       1+ x
                                 d x+ 1 d                                           dLn
                                                                                    Ln


                                                                               45
                                 0
and therefore, for all               (pY )        0
                           (1+       n )(1+ x )             L    [ x          n +(2+ n + x )               ]K                             pY    0
                                                                                                                                                  (pY )
                                                                                                                             +
      dLn      [   x       n +(1+ n )(1+ x )                    ]f(1+         x )L+   [(1+      x)        +   x     1 ]K g       1+   x        (pY )
          =                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                           Ln < 0
      d x                                          1            pY     (pY )          (1        )[(1+ )       1]+
                                                                     (pY )


and
                                                                                                                                                     0
                                (1+       x )f(1+ x )(1+ n )L                     [1+ x (1+ n )           x ]Kg                                pY      (pY )
                                                                                                                                 +
    dLn            [   x     n +(1+       n )(1+       x)         ]f(1+            x )L+[(1+ x )              +     x   1 ]K g                      (pY )
          =                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                               Ln < 0
   d(   )                                               1            pY     (pY )          (1     )[(1+ )         1]+
                                                                          (pY )


recalling the scarcity assumption (1 + n ) L > 2K and the stability condition 28.
    As     falls, because of a decline in any combination of x and         , Ln increases: this
implies that in the …rst city the innovative sector grows, the manufacturing sector contracts,
and population grows— none of which happens in the second city. Relative real income
grows with Ln because all inframarginal innovators are earning a positive pro…t from their
creativity.
    Moreover, the relative value of urban capital in the innovative city increases when urban
infrastructure becomes less valuable, because
                        1                                                                 1   2
                       wK   (1 +                  x)                      1           @ (wK =wK )                                     1
                        2
                          =                                                       )               =                              2
                                                                                                                                          <0
                       wK                              x                                  @ x                                    x




                                                                                      46
