NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANAGERIAL OVERCONFIDENCE AND CORPORATE POLICIES
Itzhak Ben-David
John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey
Working Paper 13711
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13711

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2007

We thank Jim Bettman, Audra Boone, George Constantinides, Werner DeBondt, Michael Gofman,
Markus Glaser, Dirk Hackbarth, Ulrike Malmendier, John Payne, Michael Roberts, Aner Sela, Hersh
Shefrin, Doug Skinner, Richard Thaler and workshop participants at the AFA Annual Meetings 2007,
IDC Caesarea Center conference, MIT, NBER Behavioral Finance conference, University of Chicago,
DePaul University, Tel-Aviv University, Yale, and the Whitebox Conference for Behavioral Economics
at Yale for helpful comments and suggestions. We especially thank Hui Chen and Simon Gervais for
modeling suggestions. We appreciate the research assistance of Hai Huang. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Itzhak Ben-David, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Managerial Overconfidence and Corporate Policies
Itzhak Ben-David, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey
NBER Working Paper No. 13711
December 2007
JEL No. G30,G31,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
Miscalibration is a standard measure of overconfidence in both psychology and economics. Although
it is often used in lab experiments, there is scarcity of evidence about its effects in practice. We test
whether top corporate executives are miscalibrated, and whether their miscalibration impacts investment
behavior. Over six years, we collect a unique panel of nearly 7,000 observations of probability distributions
provided by top financial executives regarding the stock market. Financial executives are miscalibrated:
realized market returns are within the executives' 80% confidence intervals only 38% of the time. We
show that companies with overconfident CFOs use lower discount rates to value cash flows, and that
they invest more, use more debt, are less likely to pay dividends, are more likely to repurchase shares,
and they use proportionally more long-term, as opposed to short-term, debt. The pervasive effect of
this miscalibration suggests that the effect of overconfidence should be explicitly modeled when analyzing
corporate decision-making.

Itzhak Ben-David
The University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1561
ibendavi@ChicagoGSB.edu
John R. Graham
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu

Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

I. Introduction
A key role of managers is to estimate future unknowns (e.g., demand, cash flows, competition)
and to use these predictions as inputs to design corporate policies. This task is complicated
by overconfidence, as psychological evidence indicates that people exhibit overconfidence in
predictions, i.e., they forecast probability distributions that are too narrow. This happens
either because people overestimate their ability to predict the future1 or because they underestimate the volatility of random events.2 Despite the importance of this issue, there has
been no wide-scale empirical research that studies the relation between the overconfidence
(i.e., miscalibration of beliefs) of managers and the corporate policies they devise.
In this paper we measure the overconfidence of managers in a unique sample of 6,901 S&P
500 forecasts made by top U.S. financial executives. Our measure of overconfidence is based
on miscalibration of beliefs and is operationalized using a method drawn from laboratory
experiments. We link our estimate of executive overconfidence to firm-level archival data
and study how miscalibration is reflected in corporate policies. Each quarter from March
2001 to June 2007, we surveyed hundreds of U.S. Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) and asked
them to predict expected one- and ten-year stock market returns, as well as the 10th and
90th percentiles of the distribution of market returns. We use the narrowness of individual
probability distributions for stock market returns as a proxy for each respondent’s confidence.
By evaluating the same forecasting task across all executives, we can assess whether CFOs
are miscalibrated and this bias can be disentangled from any potential bias in the mean
estimate (what we refer to as optimism). We examine the time-series and cross-sectional
1

Surveyed subjects typically provide too-narrow confidence bounds for their predictions (Alpert and Raiffa
1982). Researchers also document that experts in a variety of professional fields overestimate the precision
of their information, e.g., clinical psychologists (Oskamp 1965), and physicians and nurses (ChristensenSzalanski and Bushyhead 1981, Baumann, Deber, and Thompson 1991).
2
Studies have shown that professionals are miscalibrated with regard to estimating the probabilities of
random outcomes, e.g., engineers (Kidd 1970) and entrepreneurs (Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg 1988). Related to our study, von Holstein (1972) documents that investment bankers provide miscalibrated forecasts
of stock market returns; Deaves, Lüders, and Schröder (2005) find that stock market forecasters are overconfident on average and become more overconfident with past successful forecasts, and Bar-Yosef and Venezia
(2006) report that subjects (students and security analysts) in the laboratory exhibit overconfidence in their
predictions of future accounting numbers. Deaves, Lüders, and Lou (2003) find that laboratory subjects who
are miscalibrated also tend to trade excessively.

1

determinants of overconfidence3 (i.e., the narrowness of the confidence interval), and analyze
the relation between our overconfidence measure and a range of corporate policies including
capital spending, mergers and acquisitions, financing, and payout.
Recent research examines the relation between corporate policies and managerial biases.
In several papers, Malmendier and Tate measure CEO overconfidence as an overestimation of their own firm’s future returns (feeling “above average”) based on the degree of
under-diversification of the executives’ personal portfolios, and also according to the CEOs’
representation in the popular press (Malmendier and Tate 2005b). They show that biased
managers exhibit high investment-cash flow sensitivity (Malmendier and Tate 2005a), engage intensively in unsuccessful mergers and acquisitions (Malmendier and Tate 2007), and
avoid tapping the capital markets (Malmendier, Tate, and Yan 2006). Using Malmendier
and Tate’s news-based proxy, Hribar and Yang (2006) show that firms with CEOs who feel
“above average” are more likely to issue point estimates in their earnings forecasts (rather
than estimate ranges), are more likely to issue narrow range estimates, and are more likely
to manage earnings to meet these forecasts.
In contrast, our empirical design allows us to separate overconfidence from optimism. We
define overconfidence as a general miscalibration in beliefs (Lichtenstein and Fischoff 1977,
Koriat, Lichtenstein, and Fischoff 1980, Lichtenstein, Fischoff, and Phillips 1982, Kruger and
Dunning 1999, Alba and Hutchison 2000, Shefrin 2001, Soll and Klayman 2004, Hackbarth
2007). According to this definition, overconfident people overestimate the precision of their
own beliefs, or underestimate the variance of risky processes; in other words, their subjective
probability distributions are too narrow. The specific interpretation of overconfidence is
important particularly when testing theoretical predictions regarding the effects of biases
on corporate policies. Theoretical models distinguish between optimistic managers who
overestimate the mean of their firms’ cash flows (Shefrin 2001, Heaton 2002, Hackbarth 2007),
which we refer to as optimism, and overconfident managers who either underestimate the
volatility of their firms’ future cash flows (Shefrin 2001, Hackbarth 2007) or overweight their
3

Although we measure relative confidence, we use the term overconfidence because the majority of CFOs
provide responses that would be considered overconfident by any reasonable metric, as discussed in Section III.

2

private signals relative to public information (Gervais, Heaton, and Odean 2007, Gervais and
Goldstein 2007).4 Our data allow us to disentangle respondents’ biases in the first and second
moments, in other words, we can measure miscalibration (overconfidence) separately from
optimism. To our knowledge, our paper is the only one with direct and distinct measures of
miscalibration and optimism, and that links both these constructs to firms and their actions.
Furthermore, our survey provides evidence for a different subset of officers than the
Malmendier and Tate studies do. Our survey respondents are finance officers, mostly CFOs.
Bertrand and Schoar (2003) show that there is a pronounced “CFO effect” in corporate
decisions related to investment, acquisitions, capital structure, and payout. Graham, Harvey,
and Puri (2007) present evidence that CFOs play a relatively important role in capital
structure, payout, and capital allocation decisions. Therefore, in this paper, we conduct
experiments that uniquely address whether and how personal characteristics of CFOs affect
these important corporate decisions.
The paper consists of two parts. In the first part, we investigate whether respondent CFOs
are, on average, overconfident in their predictions. According to the confidence bounds that
CFOs provide, they are severely miscalibrated: only 38% of the realized S&P 500 returns
fall within the 80% confidence interval that respondents offer. We document that expected
market returns and confidence bounds depend on recent past market returns and on returns
of the CFOs’ own firms. Interestingly, the lower confidence bound is far more sensitive to
past market returns than is the upper confidence bound. As a consequence of the different
sensitivities, executives are more confident following periods of high market return and less
confident following low market returns periods. This behavior is consistent with the argument
of Soll and Klayman (2004) that people make inferences about the distribution of random or
unknown variables from a few known cases (such as past returns), and with Arnold (1986),
March and Shapira (1987) and Kahneman and Lovallo (1993), who argue that managers
focus on downside risk. In addition, we document that CFO confidence is a time-persistent
personal characteristic that increases with forecasting skill.
4

Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001) use similar overconfidence
definitions for stock market investors.

3

In the second part of the paper, we associate CFO overconfidence with a variety of corporate policies. We present a simple model in which overconfident managers underestimate
cash flow volatility, and as a result use low discount rates to value these cash flows. In the
model, an overconfident manager decides first about the size of the investment and then
determines the mix of financing, given market prices for financial claims. The manager
overinvests in projects and generally believes that investors underestimate the value of the
firm and the value of equity. As a result, the manager prefers to use internal resources
before external sources of financing and is less likely to pay dividends. Furthermore, we
find that for reasonable modeling assumptions and parameters, debt leverage increases with
overconfidence, as does the likelihood of engaging in share repurchases.
The empirical tests corroborate the predictions of the model. First, we find that our S&P
500-based overconfidence measure is correlated with a firm-specific overconfidence measure.
That is, managers who provide narrow estimates for the S&P 500 return distribution tend to
estimate very tight distributions for their own firms’ cash flows. Second, consistent with the
implication that overconfident managers use lower discount rates, we find that overconfident
CFOs expect a lower internal rate of return (IRR) for their firms’ projects. Third, we
document that firms with overconfident managers (based on their S&P 500 predictions) invest
more in capital expenditures and in acquiring other firms. Moreover, the market reaction
to these acquisitions is negative on average. Fourth, firms with overconfident managers
have higher leverage. Fifth, these firms are less likely to pay dividends and more likely to
repurchase shares.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section II details the method that we use to collect the overconfidence data, the construction of variables, and it presents some summary
statistics. In Section III, we provide evidence on the miscalibration in CFO expectations.
Section IV explores the determinants of overconfidence. Section V presents a simple model
of overconfidence and corporate policies, and derives empirical predictions. Section VI tests
the predictions of the model in data on corporate policies. Some concluding remarks are
offered in Section VII.

4

II. Data
A. Executive Survey
Our study is based on a unique data set of stock market predictions made by senior finance
executives, the majority of whom are CFOs and financial vice presidents, collected in 26
quarterly surveys conducted by Duke University between March 2001 and June 2007. Each
quarter, we poll between 2,000 and 3,000 financial officers with a short survey on important
topical issues (Graham and Harvey 2006). The usual response rate for the quarterly survey
is 5% to 8% and most of the responses arrive within the first two days of the survey invitation
date.5 The survey usually contains eight questions about the U.S. economy, firm policies,
and firm short-term forecasts. Some of the questions are identical for each survey and
some change over time depending on economic conditions. The historical surveys as well as
aggregated responses can be accessed at www.cfosurvey.org.
We base our overconfidence proxies on two survey questions. The first question is:
“Over the next year, I expect the S&P 500 return will be:
- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be less than
- I expect the return to be:

%

%

- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be greater than

%”

The second question is similar but relates to annualized stock market return forecasts over
the next 10 years. The initial words change from “Over the next year, I expect the S&P 500
return will be” to “Over the next 10 years, I expect the average annual S&P 500 return will
be”.6
In contrast to most studies that use survey data, we are able to examine the characteristics
of a sizable fraction of the respondents. Although the survey does not require CFOs to
5

The bulk of our tests exploit variation within the respondent group, yet the overall response rate of 5%
to 8% could potentially lead to non-response bias in the inference of some tests (e.g., in Section III). We
explore this issue further in Section II.E.
6
The first question appeared in the surveys in its current form starting 2001Q2. The second question has
been asked in its current form since 2002Q1. In the earliest surveys, executives were asked only for their
expected returns.

5

provide identifying information, about half of the firms voluntarily provide such information,
and about a quarter of the firms are confirmed to be U.S. public firms. Overall, our sample
includes 6,901 one-year expected returns and 6,280 ten-year expected returns with valid 10th
and 90th percentile information. Of this sample, 2,653 observations are from public firms
(self-reported), and of them, we are able to match 2,262 observations (858 unique firms) to
CRSP and Compustat. For the analysis in Section VI, we exclude utility firms (2-digit SIC
code 49) and financial firms (2-digit SIC code 60 to 69), and require respondents to respond
to the optimism questions (see Section II.C below), leaving 1,421 observations (594 unique
firms). For 1,104 observations (504 unique firms) there is a full set of survey responses and
accounting data.

B. Measures of Overconfidence
Our overconfidence measure maps each CFO’s 10th and 90th percentile predictions into an
individual probability distribution for each respondent. Wide distributions reflect high subjective uncertainty about the estimated variable, while narrow distributions reflect subjective
confidence. We use the method proposed by Davidson and Cooper (1976) to recover respondent i’s individual probability distribution, based on the normal distribution. The imputed
volatility is calculated as:
σ̂i =

x(0.90) − x(0.10)
Z

(1)

where x(0.90) and x(0.10) represent the 90th and 10th percentile of the respondent’s distribution, and Z is the number of standard deviations within the confidence interval. For
confidence intervals of 80% in a normal distribution, Z equals 2.65. Keefer and Bodily (1983)
show that, given information about the 90th and 10th percentiles, this simple approximation
is the preferred method for estimating the standard deviation of a probability distribution
of a random variable.

6

Our desired overconfidence variable is a relative measure that is independent of CFOs’
opinions about the future level of the stock market.7 To disentangle the tightness of confidence bounds from the level of expected returns and contemporaneous market effects, we
use a double-sorting procedure. This procedure allows us to measure the narrowness of
CFOs’ confidence intervals with respect to the confidence intervals of other CFOs who hold
similar beliefs about the expected stock market returns at the same point in time. First,
for each survey date, we form groups (deciles) based on expected returns. Then, within
each group, we sort again and form deciles based on the size of confidence intervals.8 We
use this procedure to generate two overconfidence variables, one short-term and one longterm. Overconfidence ST is the short-term overconfidence measure and is based on one-year
forecasts of the S&P 500. Overconfidence LT is the long-term overconfidence measure, analogously based on the ten-year forecasts. To ease interpretation of the results, we orthogonalize the long-term overconfidence variable against the short-term overconfidence variable
and scale them so that they have values between 0 and 1.

C. Attitudes Towards the Stock Market, U.S. Economy, and the
CFOs’ Own Firms
Our survey data have the advantage of allowing for the measurement of overconfidence while
controlling for potential optimism in expected returns. We create two optimism variables,
Optimism ST and Optimism LT , based on expected one- and ten-year return forecasts,
respectively. The optimism variables are formed using a procedure that parallels the construction of the overconfidence variables.
In addition, we are also interested in isolating the effects of overconfidence from other,
potentially correlated, attitudes about the U.S. economy and about the CFOs’ own firms.
7

For example, CFOs who are bullish about the stock market may also anticipate high volatility and thus
provide wide confidence intervals because they believe that the direction of the stock market is related to
volatility, and not because they have low confidence.
8
Our results are qualitatively the same if, instead of the double-sorting procedure, we decile rank respondents according to their confidence interval scaled by their expected returns. The non-parametric
double-sorting procedure that we use has the advantage of not imposing a linear relation between confidence
intervals and expected returns.

7

In particular, it is plausible that managers who exhibit overconfidence are also optimistic
about the future of their firms. Alternatively, it is possible that managers who anticipate a
bright future for their firms feel more confident. In these two cases, our tests might capture
the effects of the covariates of overconfidence, rather than the direct effect of overconfidence.
To address this concern, in addition to using Optimism ST or LT , which are based on the
expected returns of the stock market, we introduce additional controls for optimism about
the U.S. economy (Optimism U .S .) and firm-specific optimism (Optimism firm), based on
two questions that appear in most surveys.9 The questions are:
“a. Rate your optimism about the U.S. economy on a scale from 0-100, with 0
being the least optimistic and 100 being the most optimistic.
b. Rate your optimism about the financial prospects for your company on a scale
from 0-100, with 0 being the least optimistic and 100 being the most optimistic.”
To facilitate the interpretation of these variables, we decile-rank them within a given quarter’s
survey, orthogonolize them, and scale them so that they have values between 0 and 1.

D. Firm Data
Throughout the analysis, we use several databases with firm-level information. A detailed
description of the variables is provided in Appendix A. First, we retrieve accounting data
from Compustat, including industry classification, book leverage, asset market-to-book ratio, profitability, five-year sales growth, collateralized assets, capital expenditures scaled by
lagged assets, cash spent on acquisitions scaled by lagged assets, and indicator variables for
repurchases and dividend payments. We merge the survey observations with annual Compustat data, matching by the nearest fiscal end-of-year date. Second, we use CRSP to compute
one-year past returns for the market and firms; in addition, we use CRSP to approximate
9

We have responses for these questions for about 85% of the identified observations (excluding three
surveys: 2001Q4, 2002Q1, 2005Q1).

8

firm age. Third, we use merger transactions data and information about acquired targets
from Thomson SDC Platinum.10

E. Summary Statistics
In Table I, Panels A through D, we present summary statistics for survey responses and the
characteristics of the respondent firms. Panel A presents a broad profile of the sample (firm
data are for non-utilities and non-financial firms). The annual sales of the median firm is
$2.1bn. The average asset market-to-book ratio (M/B) is 1.48, and the average annualized
five-year sales growth rate is 9.4%. Profitability (operating profit scaled by lagged total
assets) averages 13.4% and capital expenditure intensity (capital expenditures scaled by
lagged total assets) averages 8.0%. 58.2% of the firms pay dividends and 41.6% repurchase
their own shares. Respondents come from a balanced range of industries (Table I, Panel B).
In Panel C we compare the attributes of the portion of our sample for which we have
Compustat data to the attributes of the pooled population of Compustat firms between 2001
and 2006. Overall, our sample firms are more established and advanced in their life cycle
than most Compustat firms. In particular, respondent firms are relatively mature and large:
49.7% of the identified firms in our sample are from the top firm-age quintile of Compustat
firms and 61.7% are from the top sales quintile of Compustat firms. It is not surprising
that our procedure of matching responses to Compustat firms finds successful matches more
often for mature and large companies. In other characteristics, such as market-to-book
ratio, past sales growth, and debt, our sample firms are similar to the universe of Compustat
firms. Overall, based on the portion of our respondents that we can link to Compustat, our
sample appears to over-represent large and mature firms, and therefore our results should
be interpreted with this in mind.
10

To ensure that our results are not driven by outliers and following the practice of many studies using
similar data, we winsorize our survey data within each survey date at the 1% level. Similarly, we winsorize
Compustat and CRSP data.

9

III. Are CFOs Overconfident?
In this section we conduct two tests to assess whether CFO respondents are, on average,
overconfident. There could be two reasons for CFO overconfidence. First, as discussed in
the introduction, previous studies in psychology have almost unanimously shown that people, and professionals in particular, are overconfident on average. Second is a compelling
argument by Goel and Thakor (2008). They argue that top executives should be expected
to be overconfident because promotion in corporations is typically based on past performance, which is ultimately tied to the risk taken by executives. Overconfident managers
underestimate risk and therefore take actions with excessive risk. As a consequence, the
variance of outcomes from their actions is greater, and therefore overconfident managers will
be over-represented among the right-tail “winners” and are more likely to get promoted.
We perform two tests to investigate whether CFOs are overconfident. The first test
measures the fraction of ex post S&P 500 return realizations that fall between the 10th and
90th percentiles provided by CFOs’ predictions. The second test compares the individual
volatility imputed from the survey data to the individual volatility as predicted by a simple
model of bias.

A. Method I: Ex Ante Predictions vs. Ex Post Realizations
We begin by calculating CFO overconfidence as miscalibration of beliefs. We compute the
percentage of executives for whom the realized return of the stock market falls within their
80% confidence intervals, as derived from the 10th and 90th percentile survey responses. If
executives are well-calibrated and our sample period is representative, we expect this figure
to be 80%.
Table II presents the response statistics per survey. We list the survey means for the
lower confidence bounds (column (1)), expected returns (column (2)), and upper confidence
bounds (column (3)) for the one-year forecasts. In column (4) we present the mean of the
individual volatilities where each is computed using Equation (1), and column (5) contains
10

the disagreement volatility (dispersion of beliefs), which is calculated as the standard deviation of expected returns across all respondents for any given date. Similarly, we present
the results for the ten-year forecasts starting in column (6). Finally, we report market data
in columns (11) to (13): realized returns and volatility for the forecasted horizon, and the
VIX11 for the survey date.
Table III compares the S&P 500 forecasts to realizations. In column (1) we calculate the
average forecast error (the difference between mean expected returns from Table II, column
(2), and the S&P 500 return realization in column (11)). The mean forecast error is 1.4%.
In columns (2) to (4) of Table III we compute for each survey cohort the percentage
of CFOs for whom the S&P 500 realization was in the 80% confidence interval. We judge
whether CFOs are miscalibrated by examining whether ex post market realizations fall in the
ex ante confidence intervals. Over the sample period, only 37.9% of the stock market return
realizations are within the 80% confidence bounds estimated by CFOs (see column (3) and
Figure 1). This degree of miscalibration is not unusual for studies that request respondents
to estimate 80% confidence bounds (Lichtenstein, Fischoff, and Phillips 1982, Russo and
Schoemaker 1992, Klayman, Soll, Gonzáles-Vallejo, and Barlas 1999, Soll and Klayman
2004). Thus, based on a miscalibration definition, CFOs as a group are overconfident in our
sample.

B. Method II: Model of Bias
Next, we consider a simple model of forecasting that allows us to assess ex ante whether
CFOs are overconfident. With the model, we assess the tightness of CFO confidence intervals
without needing to compare forecasts to outcomes (as in the Section III.A). This procedure
helps us assess whether ten-year stock market forecasts are too tight (even though ex post
realizations are not yet available), and also provides additional tightness benchmarks for the
one-year forecasts. In particular, we test whether the 10th and 90th percentiles provided by
11

VIX is an index that reflects the average of imputed volatility across traded options in the S&P 500
futures index, traded in the Chicago Board of Options Exchange (CBOE).

11

CFOs match anticipated volatility, as well as whether they are calibrated to historical S&P
500 volatility.
We assume that the true model of the S&P 500 returns is:
rSP = µSP + ˜SP ,

(2)

2
where µSP is the unobservable mean return, and the error term ˜SP ∼ N (0, σSP
).

Forecaster i believes that the future return of the S&P 500 is
r̂i = µ̂i + ˆi ,

(3)

where µ̂i is the mean return estimate, and i is a forecaster-specific error term. The forecaster
does not know the unobservable mean return of the stock market µSP , instead she believes
that
µ̂i = µSP + ē + êi ,

(4)

where ē potentially captures a systematic bias in beliefs about the mean. If ē > 0 then forecasters are on average optimistic. The error term eˆi captures the uncertainty that forecaster
i has about the mean, and êi ∼ N (0, σe2 ). For simplicity, we assume mutual independence
between êi and ˆi .
2
+
The forecaster-specific error term ˆi is assumed to be normally distributed ˆi ∼ N (0, σSP

θi ). The additional term θi potentially captures underestimation (θi < 0) or overestimation
(θi > 0) of stock market volatility. This parameter corresponds with the definition of overconfidence as an underestimation of the volatility of random process (as in Hackbarth 2007).
Thus the total variance of the forecasted returns r̂i is:
2
σ̂i2 = σSP
+ θi + σe2 .

12

(5)

In the context of our survey, we interpret the CFO responses as the mean and the 10th and
90th percentiles of the return distribution r̂i , from which we can extract the total variance
σ̂i2 .

B.1. Model Calibration: Are CFOs Optimistic?
Using the survey data, we calibrate some of the parameters of the model. We estimate
whether CFOs are optimistic on average with respect to the S&P 500 by examining whether
their forecast errors (expected returns minus realized returns) are significantly greater than
zero. The forecast error, therefore, is:
ē = E[r̂i ] − µSP .

(6)

Forecast errors are presented in Table III, column (1). The average forecast error is positive
but insignificantly different from zero: ē = 1.4% (t = 0.29).12 Hence, expected returns
provided by the CFOs are unbiased within the sample period.

B.2. Model Calibration: Are CFOs Overconfident?
We first assess whether CFOs are overconfident in the short-term. For each survey we
estimate the mean bias about the variance, θ̄, across agents:
2
θ̄ = E[σ̂i2 ] − σSP
− σe2 .

(7)

We estimate E[σ̂i2 ] as the mean of the individual variances in each survey, averaged across
surveys (0.0036), and σe2 as the variance of point estimates across forecasters, averaged across
2
surveys (0.0015). We use three different proxies for the variance of the stock market, σSP
,

based on: (1) market expectation of future stock market variance, averaged across surveys13
12

All our statistical inferences adjust for overlapping periods, using Newey and West (1987).
Based on the VIX index (see Table II, column (13)). The mean annual variance imputed by the VIX
over the sample period was 0.0424 (20.6% in standard deviation terms).
13

13

(0.0424), (2) realized stock market variance, averaged across surveys14 (0.0264), and (3)
historical stock market variance15 (0.0201).
Even if we pick the most conservative (lowest) estimate for the variance of the stock market, drawn from historical statistics, CFOs underestimate the variance of the stock market
by E[θ̄] = −0.0180 (t = −69.9) (−13.4% in standard deviation terms). Therefore, CFOs are
overconfident as a group according to the short-term miscalibration definition.
Next, we assess ex ante whether CFOs are overconfident in the long term. To do so, we
calibrate Equation (7) for long-term overconfidence. We estimate E[σ̂i2 ] as the mean of the
individual variances, averaged across surveys (0.0015), and σe2 as the mean of the variance
of point estimates, averaged across surveys (0.0007) (both are annualized). We use two
2
, both based on historical realizations:
estimates for the ten-year stock market variance, σSP

(1) the average annualized stock market variance across all ten-year windows from 1950
to 2006 (0.0209), and (2) the lowest annualized stock market variance across all ten-year
windows since 1950 (0.0129).
The results indicate that CFOs in our sample are overconfident in the long term. When
using the average stock market variance for the calculation, the bias in the perceived variance
of stock market returns is θ̄ = −0.0200 (−14.2% in standard deviation terms). Based on
the lowest stock market variance in any given ten year window, CFOs still underestimate
the variance by θ̄ = −0.0121 (−11.0% in standard deviation terms). This bias is depicted
in Figure 3. The top histogram presents the distribution of annualized ten-year historical
market volatilities; the bottom histogram presents the distribution of the corresponding
survey-imputed volatilities. While historical ten-year volatilities are concentrated between
11% and 16%, almost the entire distribution of survey-based volatilities is below 10%.
14

The mean of the squared one-year realized volatility (measured using daily returns): 0.0264 (16.3% in
standard deviation terms; see Table II, column (12)).
15
The variance of the S&P 500 is the mean of all historical one-year windows of realized variance of the
S&P 500 between January 1950 and December 2006, 0.0201 (14.2% in standard deviation terms). The
historical distributions of the one-year volatilities are illustrated in Figure 2. In the top chart we present the
histogram of the distribution of one-year historical volatilities of the S&P 500. In the bottom panel of the
figure we provide the histogram of imputed survey volatilities for comparison. The histograms indicate that
CFOs anticipate distinctly lower volatilities than those actually experienced over the previous 57 years.

14

IV. Determinants of Overconfidence
In this section, we investigate which factors affect managerial forecasts, and examine some
candidate variables that could potentially explain temporal and cross-sectional overconfidence.

A. Past Market and Firm Performance
There is a theoretical argument that, following good outcomes, people predict narrower
distributions of future events. In a model by Einhorn and Hogarth (1978), decision makers
“learn” about their decision making ability by observing the outcomes of past decisions,
while ignoring exogenous determinants of these outcomes. Following favorable outcomes,
decision makers become more confident about their judgement through a self-attribution
mechanism, even if the outcome was independent of their prior decisions. In applying this
idea to trading behavior, Gervais and Odean (2001) argue that traders become overconfident
after observing a series of past successes that they attribute to their own abilities. As an
extension of this reasoning, Hilary and Menzly (2006) find that security analysts exhibit
greater aggressiveness following successes in predicting earnings.
Table IV explores the relation between one-year survey forecasts and future and past
S&P 500 return realizations.16 In Panel A we regress average forecasts across surveys (lower
bounds, expected returns, and upper bounds), as well as the average imputed individual
volatility, on future and past S&P 500 one-year returns. Since we examine quarterly forecasts
for one-year horizons, we encounter autocorrelations due to overlapping data and therefore
adjust the standard errors for the two-year overlap17 in the data using the Newey and West
(1987) procedure with 7 quarterly lags. The statistically insignificant coefficients on one-year
future S&P returns in columns (1) to (3) indicate that the CFOs’ stock market forecasts are
not associated with future market return realizations.
16

For brevity we present only analysis of one-year forecasts. Ten-year forecasts exhibit similar patterns.
Results are available upon request.
17
Allowing for data overlap for both one-year past returns and for one-year future returns.

15

Interestingly, CFOs are more confident following periods of high stock market returns.
One-year forecasts are correlated with past S&P 500 returns (columns (1) to (3) in Panel
A). This effect is especially strong on the lower bound (R2 = 0.75) and on the expected
returns that CFOs provide. Since the average confidence upper bounds are not affected
by past returns very much (R2 = 0.14), individual volatility effectively increases following
poor past returns and decreases following periods of high stock market returns (negative
coefficient in column (4) of Panel A).18 This effect is depicted in the 10th and 90th percentiles
(averaged across respondents) shown in Figure 4. In March 2003, the lower confidence
bound was relatively low (−7.0%) because the actual S&P 500 return in the year before the
survey date was exceptionally low (−31.0%). Likewise, the average lower confidence bound
in September 2003 was relatively high (1.1%) because the realized return in the preceding
year was especially high (17.5%). The average upper confidence bound, however, does not
co-move as much with past market returns. These results are consistent with the model
of Gervais and Odean (2001) and with Alba, Hutchison, and Lynch (1991) and Soll and
Klayman (2004), who argue that forecasters rely heavily on past extreme cases to estimate
the distribution of uncertain variables. The lower confidence bound is particularly sensitive
to past returns, perhaps because managers tend to focus on downside risk in their analysis
of projects (Arnold 1986, March and Shapira 1987, Kahneman and Lovallo 1993).
In Panel B of Table IV, we test whether CFO stock market forecasts are influenced by
idiosyncratic past returns of their own firms (i.e., the part of their firm’s return unrelated to
overall market returns). In these regressions, we face cross-sectional correlation (executives
forecast the same index) and overlapping data problems (forecasting horizon is one year and
observations are quarterly). We address the issue by using a Fama and MacBeth (1973)
approach in which we perform cross-sectional regressions of forecasts on past one-year firm
returns.19 Then, we compute the mean of the regressions’ coefficients and adjust the standard
errors with the Newey and West (1987) procedure for three lags. This procedure is also
18

These results are in line with Deaves, Lüders, and Schröder (2005), who analyze the forecasts of German
stock market forecasters and with Shefrin (2005), who reports results from the UBS survey of retail investors.
19
Since the Fama and MacBeth (1973) procedure captures common cross-sectional effects (such as market
returns) in the intercepts of the cross-sectional regressions, we effectively control for the market return and
the regression coefficients reflect the effect of past firm idiosyncratic returns on forecasts.

16

advantageous because it implicitly demeans firm returns each quarter, so that the effects
reflected in the regressions in Panel B are distinct from the market-wide effects depicted
in the regressions in Panel A. The results suggest that lower return bounds and expected
returns provided by CFOs are associated with their own firms’ past returns. These results
are consistent with the model of den Steen (2004) in which agents become overconfident after
making decisions and afterwards succeeding. Comparing the results in Panel A to those in
Panel B, we note that the effect of past market-wide returns on the confidence bounds is
larger by an order of magnitude, relative to the effect of past firm-specific returns.

B. Personal Characteristics
In this section, we examine the personal determinants of CFO overconfidence. In particular, we explore the persistence of overconfidence through time, its relation to demographic
attributes, and its association with skill.

B.1. Persistence of Overconfidence
First, we investigate whether overconfidence and optimism are persistent characteristics of
decision makers. Across surveys, there are 785 pairs of sequential responses from the same
executives (i.e., respondent from the same firm with same position in the firm). For these
observations, the correlation between sequential Overconfidence ST (Overconfidence LT ) is
0.45 (0.29), and the correlation between sequential Optimism ST (Optimism LT ) is slightly
lower, 0.35 (0.25). Hence, both optimism and overconfidence persist through time for a given
CFO, although overconfidence exhibits stronger persistence. These results are consistent with
evidence about the stability of individual biases over time (Jonsson and Allwood 2003, Glaser,
Langer, and Weber 2005).

17

B.2. Demographic Profile
Second, we conduct a test that explores the relation between executive biases and demographic characteristics. We collect demographic details from respondents in two surveys
(2003Q4 and 2004Q1). The questions inquire about age, education, professional experience,
and gender. Our analysis (untabulated) reveals few significant relations between overconfidence and demographic attributes. Specifically, we find that CFOs with different levels of
education and experience express the same degree of overconfidence. Furthermore, we find
no significant gender effect in overconfidence.

B.3. Do Overconfidence Variables Capture Skill?
Third, we consider the possibility that our overconfidence variables capture skill rather than
miscalibration, i.e., CFOs who forecast the stock market better also provide narrower confidence bounds. To investigate the relation between overconfidence and skill we examine
whether overconfident CFOs produce more accurate forecasts. Table V, column (1) presents
regressions of absolute forecast error (as a proxy for skill) on the overconfidence variables.
The results indicate that overconfident CFOs predict future stock market returns more precisely.
However, the tradeoff between the size of confidence intervals and the improvement in
accuracy is less than proportional. When moving from the median to the top decile of
long-term overconfidence, the size of the confidence intervals decreases by about 6.5% (untabulated), but the average absolute forecast error decreases only by 0.36% (half of 0.71%,
Table V, column (1)). This difference in magnitudes implies that miscalibration overshadows
accuracy on net. In other words, although overconfident CFOs are slightly more accurate,
their confidence intervals are still much too narrow.
To formally test this hypothesis, we examine whether the likelihood that a realization
that would fall within the confidence interval is correlated with overconfidence, even after
controlling for the absolute forecast error. Thus, we regress an indicator variable of whether

18

S&P 500 realizations fall within each individual confidence interval on three variables: the
two individual overconfidence measures, and the absolute forecast error. The results indicate
that overconfidence plays an important role in explaining the CFOs’ tight confidence intervals. If skill (low forecast error) entirely explains CFOs’ tight confidence intervals, then the
overconfidence variables should not be significant in the regression. The results in column (2)
show that both overconfidence variables remain negative and statistically significant, even
after controlling for the absolute forecast error. These results are consistent with the findings
of the psychology literature, suggesting that overconfidence increases with accuracy (Sporer,
Penrod, Read, and Cutler 1995) and expertise (Arkes, Dawes, and Christensen 1986, Paese
and Feuer 1991, Spense 1996). We conclude therefore that although CFO overconfidence is
associated with skill, our overconfidence variables capture genuine miscalibration.

V. A Simple Model of Overconfidence and Corporate
Policies
To motivate our empirical predictions, we develop a simple model of investment and financing
decisions by overconfident managers. The purpose of the model is to provide a common
framework within which to derive empirical predictions about various corporate policies. In
this section we describe the main assumptions of the model and provide intuition for its key
implications. The detailed model and calibration results are provided in Appendix B. In
Section VI we interpret our empirical results within the context of the model’s implications.
We assume that overconfidence affects managerial judgment in two distinct ways. First,
by definition, managers who are overconfident should underestimate the volatility of their
own firms’ cash flows.20
20

Hackbarth (2007) presents a model in which overconfident managers underestimate cash flow volatility.
In the presence of bankruptcy costs, this bias causes them to invest less than otherwise. Furthermore, this
bias leads them to believe that the market overvalues their firms’ equity since the equity is modeled as an
option on the firm’s assets, and thus is perceived to have a lower value when asset volatility is lower.

19

Assumption 1 (Underestimation of Own Cash Flow Volatility) Overconfident managers underestimate the volatility of their own firms’ cash flows.
Second, we argue that overconfident managers use low discount rates when valuing cash
flows. This effect is supported by asset pricing models that link volatility and uncertainty
to expected returns. Overconfident managers might use too low discount rates if they either
perceive volatility as too low,21 or if they underestimate ambiguity, i.e., they are too confident
about the business model and parameters that generate their firms’ cash flows,22 or both.
Assumption 2 (Low Discount Rates) Overconfident managers use lower discount rates
than unbiased managers do.
In sum, we assume that overconfident managers perceive cash flows as safer, and at the
same time use lower discount rates to value them. Firm policies of overconfident managers,
therefore, should reflect these beliefs.

A. Investment Decision
The manager decides how much to invest. To an overconfident manager, investment projects
seem safer than they really are, and he evaluates them with a low discount rate. Therefore,
in comparison to a less confident manager, a greater number of projects will be perceived to
have positive net present value and an overconfident manager will invest more.23
21

Traditional asset pricing research links investor expected returns to volatility through the market price
of risk (e.g., Rubinstein 1973), as long as investors care about this risk. In the case of firms, managers should
care about whether cash flows are systematic or idiosyncratic because they have underdiversified human
capital invested in their firms and they usually hold undiversifiable equity stakes.
22
Recent theoretical models in asset pricing argue that agents demand a higher risk premium when they
are not sure about the model or parameters that generate returns (e.g., Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent
2000, Cagetti, Hansen, Sargent, and Williams 2002, Hansen and Sargent 2001, Epstein and Schneider 2002,
Maenhout 2004). Hence, lower ambiguity is associated with lower expected returns.
23
The hypothesis between the relation between overconfidence and degree of investment is consistent with
the finding of Camerer and Lovallo (1999) that lab subjects are likely to enter into a business market when
payoffs are linked to their abilities. An alternative, non-mutual exclusive, explanation for why some firms
invest more than others is related to managerial agency costs and empire building (Jensen 1986).

20

Proposition 1 (Overinvestment) Overconfident managers invest more than less confident managers.
Furthermore, the manager believes that the cumulative value of his firm’s projects is
higher than what outside investors believe.
Proposition 2 (Overvaluation) Overconfident managers perceive the value of investment
projects as being higher than outside investors perceive them to be.

B. Financing Decision
Next, the manager decides about the capital structure of his firm. He believes that investors
underestimate the value of projects, and as a consequence incorrectly price the firm’s securities. Since there are no frictions in our setting (e.g., bankruptcy costs, agency costs, taxes,
etc.), the manager attempts to maximize current shareholder wealth by exploiting perceived
market mispricings. The model implies that at the chosen leverage, the manager perceives
his firm’s equity to be undervalued by the market.24
Proposition 3 (Overvaluation of Equity) Overconfident managers believe that their firms’
equity is undervalued by the market.
In our setting the effects of overconfidence on capital structure and payout decisions
rely primarily on the balance of two effects of overconfidence (underestimation of volatility,
and overvaluation of cash flows due to low discount rate), and the overall effect ultimately
depends on the parameter values. Using standard modeling assumptions in Appendix B, we
find that the effect of low discount rates dominates the effect of underestimated volatility
for the parameter values that are commonly used in the literature. Hence, the following
propositions hold for reasonable choice of parameters.
The model generates several results regarding capital structure and payout policies. Since
external securities seem expensive, an overconfident manager prefers to use internal cash
24

In a survey of CFOs, Graham and Harvey (2006) find that most executives believe that their firms’
equity is undervalued by the market.

21

first to finance the firm’s investment. Therefore, overconfident managers hoard cash by not
distributing cash dividends.
Proposition 4 (Fewer Dividends) Overconfident managers are less likely to pay out cash
dividends.
Furthermore, among external financing choices the manager chooses more debt as overconfidence increases. This happens because the manager perceives the firm’s equity as undervalued to a degree that intensifies with overconfidence. This also causes the manager to
borrow more in order to exploit the perceived mispricing by repurchasing shares.
Proposition 5 (High Leverage) Debt leverage increases with managerial overconfidence.
Proposition 6 (Share Repurchases) Overconfident managers engage in more share repurchases.

VI. Does Overconfidence Affect Corporate Policies?
A. The Effects of Overconfidence on Managerial Judgement
A.1. Do Overconfident Managers Underestimate Their Own Firms’ Cash Flow
Volatility?
Our tests examine the effects of managerial overconfidence on corporate policies. To do
so, we assume that our S&P 500 overconfidence variables are reasonable proxies for CFOs’
overconfidence about their own firms’ cash flows (Assumption (1)).25 We begin by testing
directly whether this is a reasonable assumption.
25

An extensive literature in psychology and in experimental economics examines whether biases like overconfidence spill over from one domain into others. West and Stanovich (1997) find that overconfidence
regarding motor skills is correlated with overconfidence regarding cognitive skills. Glaser and Weber (2007)
present a study in which overconfidence is measured in several ways, such as by different types of miscalibration questions. The authors find that respondents who exhibit overconfidence in stock market forecasts are
likely to exhibit overconfidence in general knowledge questions. Several studies document that individual
degrees of overconfidence are stable within tasks (forecasting, in our case), e.g., Glaser, Langer, and Weber

22

In the 2007Q2 survey, we ask CFOs to provide mean estimates and 10th and 90th percentiles for return distributions of their own firms’ investments in the following year:
“For the investments that your company makes this year, what do you expect
the internal rate of return (IRR) to be?
- There is a 1-in-10 chance that the actual IRR will be less than
- I expect the IRR to be

%

%

- There is a 1-in-10 chance that the actual IRR will be greater than

%”

In addition, we survey respondents about the degree to which they personally affect investment decisions in their firms on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 7 (a lot).
We transform the responses for the IRR question to an own-firm overconfidence measure
pursuing the same procedure as in Section II.B (OverconfidenceIRR ). As with the S&P 500based overconfidence variables, this variable reflects perceived volatility of own-firm returns,
controlling for the level of expected returns.
Next, we test whether OverconfidenceIRR is correlated with our S&P 500-based overconfidence variables. Such a correlation would suggest that our primary overconfidence variables
are reasonable proxies for own firm overconfidence. In Table VI, Panel A, column (1),
OverconfidenceIRR is regressed on the S&P 500-based short-term and long-term overconfidence variables, the S&P 500-based optimism variables, and industry controls. The results
indicate that firm-based overconfidence is significantly correlated with S&P 500-based overconfidence. IRR-based overconfidence has a sensitivity of 0.32 and 0.16 for short-term and
long-term S&P 500-based overconfidence, respectively (t = 7.7 and t = 2.5, respectively).
Hence, our S&P 500-based overconfidence variables appear to be reasonable proxies for own(2005), Klayman, Soll, Gonzáles-Vallejo, and Barlas (1999), Jonsson and Allwood (2003). These studies
show that although people sometimes exhibit different levels of overconfidence across domains, their relative
ranking varies as expected across domains. While many studies find that overconfidence spills over from
one domain to another, others find weak or no carryover effects. For example, Biais, Hilton, Mazurier, and
Pouget (2005) find that although in there is some evidence that overconfidence carries over across domains
(subjects that are classified as miscalibrated perform worse in a trading game), in other cases, the link does
not exist (there is no relation between miscalibration score and trading volume).
Carryover effects are found also in empirical economics. For example, Puri and Robinson (2007) find
that people with optimistic beliefs about their life-span also make optimistic economic decisions, e.g., they
are more likely to be self-employed and tilt their portfolios towards individual stocks.

23

firm managerial overconfidence. We use the S&P 500 overconfidence variables in the rest of
our analysis.

A.2. Do Overconfident Managers Use Low Discount Rates?
Assumption (2) postulates that overconfident managers use low discount rates to value future
cash flows. Graham and Harvey (2001) report that most firms invest when their company’s
expected IRR is greater than its discount/hurdle rate. It therefore follows that companies
with lower discount/hurdle rates will have lower average IRR on their portfolio of investments. Cross-sectionally, we expect IRR and discount rates to be positively correlated. We
therefore use the CFOs’ expected IRR from current investments as a proxy for the discount
rates that they use. This allows us to examine the reasonableness of Assumption (2) that
overconfident managers use low discount rates (i.e., low IRR) by regressing the self-reported
IRR on overconfidence and optimism variables, and on industry controls.
The results in Table VI, Panel A, columns (2) and (3), show that self-reported IRR is
significantly higher for optimistic managers and lower for overconfident managers. In column
(2), the entire sample is used in the regression, while in column (3) the sample is restricted
to respondents who report that they are involved in investment decisions (5, 6, or 7 on the
investment involvement question). As expected, managers who believe that the S&P 500
will perform well also predict that their firm’s IRR will be higher. A shift from the median
to the top decile of short-term optimism increases IRR by 1.0% (t = 3.5) to 1.4% (t = 2.1),
in columns (2) and (3), respectively.
Importantly, overconfident managers provide lower IRR forecasts, which we argue is reflective of overconfident managers using lower discount rates. When the entire sample is considered (column (2)), a shift from the median to the top decile of short-term overconfidence
is associated with IRR falling by 1.4% (t = −3.7). When only managers who are actively
involved in investment decisions are considered, the same shift in short-term overconfidence
results in IRR falling by 1.7% (t = −3.4), and a similar shift in long-term overconfidence
results in another decline of 1.0% in IRR (t = −1.3). Assuming that firms invest according to

24

a hurdle rate rule, and therefore own-firm IRR would be correlated with the firms’ discount
rate, these results are consistent with our modeling assumption that overconfident managers
use lower discount rates (Assumption (2)).

B. Investment Policy
The model predicts that corporate investment increases with managerial overconfidence, and
that marginal investments destroy value in the eyes of investors (Propositions (1) and (2)).
We test these propositions in Table VI, Panel A, columns (4) to (6).26
Overall, firms with overconfident managers invest more in capital expenditures in general (column (4)), and make more acquisitions in particular (column (5)). Both capital
expenditures and acquisition intensity increase with long-term overconfidence (t = 3.0 and
t = 2.4, respectively) but not with short-term overconfidence, possibly because investments
are generally long-term decisions. To quantify the effect, moving from the median to the top
decile of long-term overconfidence increases capital expenditures by about 1.5% (the mean
of capex intensity across sample firms is 8.0%). Note that no optimism-related variable is
statistically significant, highlighting the importance of our overconfidence measure in the
decision making process.
We further investigate the relation between CFO overconfidence and the characteristics
of mergers executed by their firms. In column (6) of Table VI, we analyze market reaction to
merger announcements. For each observation in our sample we identify announced mergers
from Thomson SDC Platinum (minimum size $1m) according to the date nearest to the
survey date, restricting the date-difference to, at most, two years. The regression includes
controls for the method of payment (stock or cash), whether the merger is diversifying or
26
All our corporate policy regressions contain a similar set of controls for the known determinants of such
policies. Specifically, our controls include collateral (measured as the portion of tangible assets out of total
assets), logged firm value, asset market-to-book, book leverage, profitability, five-year past sales growth,
12-month past returns, a dividend-payer dummy, industry fixed effects, and survey date fixed effects. In
addition, we include the S&P 500 optimism variables and firm and U.S. optimism variables. We believe that
these variables control for common determinants of corporate policies, including for growth opportunities
that could be correlated with overconfidence. Furthermore, to maintain consistency with the corporate
finance literature, we exclude utilities and financial firms from the sample. In a robustness test, we confirm
that our results qualitatively hold for the entire sample of firms.

25

not (according to whether the acquirers’ 2-digit SICs match the targets’ 2-digit SICs), and
the log of transaction value.
Our results show that merger plans by firms with overconfident managers are negatively received by the market. We find that firms with overconfident CFOs experience lower
announcement returns (3-day cumulative returns) at an economically and statistically significant magnitude. A shift from the median to the top decile of long-term overconfidence
reduces bidder announcement returns by −1.3% (t = −2.1) (mean announcement returns
are 0.8%).27
Overall, the results indicated in Table VI, Panel A, support the main assumption and
propositions of the model, and are consistent with overconfident managers using lower discount rates, and investing more on average. Their acquisitions are also poorly received by
the market.28

C. Dividend Policy
The model implies that overconfident managers distribute fewer cash dividends because
they prefer using internal resources to finance investments (Proposition (4)). We test this
proposition in Table VI, Panel B, columns (1) and (2). In column (1), we test whether
dividends are lower for firms with overconfident managers. We perform a probit regression
of a dividend payer dummy on the overconfidence and optimism variables, in addition to the
usual controls. Consistent with Proposition (4), the results in column (1) indicate that firms
with overconfident managers are less likely to distribute dividends. The effect is statistically
significant and economically important. A shift for the average firm from the median of the
27

Malmendier and Tate (2007) report a similar effect on acquisition announcement returns for firms with
CEOs who do not exercise their executive options, and who are described as “optimistic” and “confident”
in the press. Our results are also consistent with Doukas and Petmezas (2007) who find that acquirers who
engage in a high number of acquisitions in a short period of time appear to destroy value.
28
In an untabulated analysis we test whether our results are stronger for firms with high market beta.
These firms should have stronger results, because S&P 500-based overconfidence should proxy better for
own-firm-based overconfidence among firms with cash flows that vary more closely with the market. The
estimated signs of the interactions of overconfidence and market beta match the predicted signs for most
part, and they are generally statistically significant. The results are available upon request.

26

distribution of overconfidence to the top decile results in a 10.5% decrease in the propensity
to distribute dividends.
In column (2), we test the link between investments and dividends, as implied by Proposition (4). In particular, the proposition implies that overconfident managers are less likely to
pay dividends because they hoard cash for future investments. Hence, the effect of overconfidence on dividend policy should be particularly evident as it interacts with investment decisions. We test this conjecture by regressing the dividend payer indicator on an interaction of
capex intensity with overconfidence variables. The results show that the main effect of longterm overconfidence is no longer significant, and almost the entire effect of overconfidence
on dividends is due to the interaction between capital expenditures and overconfidence.29
Hence, this result is consistent with the hypothesis that firms with overconfident managers
do not distribute dividends so that they can instead use internal cash to fund investments.

D. Leverage and Debt Maturity
The model predicts that overconfident managers are predisposed to high leverage (Proposition (5)). To test this proposition, we regress book-leverage on a set of right-hand side
variables similar to those used in the previous tests. The results in Table VI, Panel B,
column (3), indicate that short-term and long-term overconfidence variables are positively
related to debt leverage (t = 2.7 and t = 0.5, respectively), consistent with Prediction (5).
To illustrate the economic magnitude of the effect, a shift from the median to the top decile
of short-term overconfidence increases debt leverage ratios by about 2.3% (average leverage
in our sample is 21.8%). This result provides a possible explanation for Frank and Goyal’s
(2007) finding that CFOs have individual preferences for their corporations’ debt leverage.
29

To ensure that the effect we document is not driven by a mechanical relationship between dividend
payout and investments (paying dividends means that there are less funds for investments), we repeat this
test with a repurchases dummy as a left hand variable. Consistent with our model but inconsistent with a
mechanical explanation, we find that there is no significant relation between repurchase policy and investment
policy interacted with overconfidence variables. Results are untabulated due to brevity and are available
upon request.

27

In addition, we examine how debt maturity varies with overconfidence. If future cash
flows are perceived as safe, then managers may be willing to commit to longer debt maturities.
We test this hypothesis in column (4). We construct a variable that measures the portion of
long-term debt (above one year in maturity) out of total debt (LT debt/Total debt) and use it
as the dependent variable. The coefficients on both overconfidence variables are positive and
statistically significant. An increase from the median to the top decile in each overconfidence
variable is associated with a higher share of long-term debt by 3.2% (t = 2.0) and 4.7%
(t = 2.8), for short-term and long-term overconfidence, respectively. (The mean proportion
of long-term debt out of total debt is 76.8%.) Thus, overconfidence is associated with
committing more heavily to debt, and in particular, to long-term debt.

E. Share Repurchases
According to the model, overconfident managers repurchase shares when they perceive that
equity is undervalued by the market (Proposition (6)). In Table VI, Panel B, column (5), we
use probit regressions to test whether repurchases are associated with CFO overconfidence.
The table indicates that firms with overconfident managers are more likely to repurchase
shares than are firms with less confident managers. The effect is statistically and economically significant. A shift for the average firm from the median of the distribution of long-term
overconfidence to the top decile results in an increase of 6.5% in the propensity to engage in
repurchases. (The average propensity to repurchase shares is 41.6%.)

VII. Conclusion
We provide new evidence and novel insights about the relation between the behavioral biases
of managers and corporate policies. Our study is based on a unique data set of stock market
predictions by top financial executives collected over a span of more than six years. Our
survey measures overconfidence as the degree of miscalibration of beliefs, a method that has
been exclusively used before in laboratory experiments. Our data set is distinct because we

28

have direct measures of both overconfidence and optimism for a large number of top U.S.
executives, and because we can link our estimates to archival data and thus examine the
relation between overconfidence and corporate actions.
We find that CFOs are miscalibrated on average: only 38% of stock market realizations
fall within the 80% confidence intervals that executives provide. Confidence intervals are
especially narrow following high stock market returns because managers condition their
lower confidence bound on past stock market performance. Moreover, our results indicate
that miscalibration depends on personal traits (skill), in addition to corporate characteristics.
Our analysis links managerial overconfidence (measured as miscalibration) to corporate
policies. First, we argue that a first-order effect of overconfidence on corporate decision
making is that overconfident managers use low discount rates when valuing future cash
flows. We find that overconfident managers do indeed invest in projects with lower IRRs.
Second, we find a strong correlation between overconfidence based on S&P 500 forecasts
and overconfidence based on own-firm IRR forecasts. These results support our use of S&P
500-based overconfidence variables as reasonable proxies for own-firm overconfidence, and is
consistent with the psychology and economics literature about the spillover of biases from
one domain to another.
While previous research provides evidence that behavioral biases exist, we show these biases are prevalent even among top corporate decision makers. More importantly, we establish
a link between behavioral biases and corporate financial actions. Firms with overconfident
CFOs invest more and engage in more acquisitions. Moreover, overconfident managers are
less likely to pay dividends, instead using the funds to make investments. We also find a
relation between managerial overconfidence and capital structure: firms with overconfident
CFOs have higher debt ratios and rely more heavily on long-term debt.
There is no role for overconfidence in standard models of firm behavior. Our evidence
that overconfidence impacts a wide range of corporate policies implies that it is time to
consider overconfidence as an integral modeling assumption, rather than just an interesting
psychological curiosity.

29

References
Alba, Joseph A., and J. Wesley Hutchison, 2000, Knowledge calibration: What consumers know
and what they think they know, Journal of Consumer Research 27, 123–156.
, and John G. Lynch, 1991, Memory and decision making, in Handbook of Consumer
Research . pp. 1–49 (Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ) eds. Thomas S. Robertson and Harold
H. Kassarjian.
Alpert, Murray, and Howard Raiffa, 1982, A progress report on the training of probability assessors, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, ed.: Judgement under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge).
Anderson, Evan W., Lars Peter Hansen, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2000, Robustness, detection and
the price of risk, University of Chicago working paper.
Arkes, Hal R., Robyn M. Dawes, and Caryn Christensen, 1986, Factors influencing the use of a
decision rule in a probabilistic task, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 37,
93–110.
Arnold, Jasper H., 1986, Assessing capital risk: You can’t be too conservative, Harvard Business
Review 64, 113–121.
Bar-Yosef, Sasson, and Itzhak Venezia, 2006, An experimental study of overconfidence in accounting
numbers predictions, Hebrew University Working Paper.
Basak, Suleyman, and Domenico Cuoco, 1998, An equilibrium model with restricted stock market
participation, Review of Financial Studies 11, 309–341.
Baumann, Andrea O., Raisa B. Deber, and Gail G. Thompson, 1991, Overconfidence among
physicians and nurses: The micro-certainty, macro-uncertainty phenomenon, Social Science &
Medicine 32, 167–174.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of managers on
firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.
Biais, Bruno, Denis Hilton, Karine Mazurier, and Sébastien Pouget, 2005, Judgmental overconfidence, self-monitoring and trading performance in an experimental financial market, Review of
Economic Studies 72, 287–312.
Cagetti, Marco, Lars Peter Hansen, Thomas Sargent, and Noah Williams, 2002, Robustness and
pricing with uncertain growth, Review of Financial Studies pp. 363–404.
Camerer, Colin, and Dan Lovallo, 1999, Overconfidence and excess entry: An experimental approach, American Economic Review 89, 306–318.
Christensen-Szalanski, Jay J., and James B. Bushyhead, 1981, Physicians’ use of probabilistic
information in a real clinical setting, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance 7, 928–935.
Cooper, Arnold C., Carolyn W. Woo, and William C. Dunkelberg, 1988, Entrepeneurs’ perceived
chances for success, Journal of Business Venturing 3, 97–108.
Daniel, Kent D., David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and
security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839–1885.

30

Davidson, L. B., and D. O. Cooper, 1976, A simple way of developing a probability distribution of
present value, Journal of Petroleum Technology September, 1069–1078.
Deaves, Richard, Erik Lüders, and Guo Ying Lou, 2003, An experimental test of the impact of
overconfidence and gender on trading activity, Working paper, McMaster University.
Deaves, Richard, Erik Lüders, and Michael Schröder, 2005, The dynamics of overconfidence: Evidence from stock market forecasters, Centre for European Economic Research Working Paper.
den Steen, Eric Van, 2004, Rational overoptimism (and other biases), American Economic Review
94, 1141–1151.
Doukas, John A., and Dimitris Petmezas, 2007, Overconfident managers and self-attribution bias,
European Financial Management p. forthcoming.
Einhorn, Hillel J., and Robyn Hogarth, 1978, Confidence in judgement: Persistence in the illusion
of validity, Psychological Review 85, 395–416.
Epstein, Larry G., and Martin Schneider, 2002, Ambiguity, risk, and asset returns in continuous
time, Econometrica 70, 1403–1443.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The equity premium, Journal of Finance 57,
637–659.
Fama, Eugene F., and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests, Journal
of Political Economy 81, 607–636.
Frank, Murray Z., and Vidhan K. Goyal, 2007, Corporate leverage: How much do managers really
matter?, University of Minnesota and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology working
paper.
Gervais, Simon, and Itay Goldstein, 2007, The positive effects of biased self-perceptions in firms,
Review of Finance forthcoming.
Gervais, Simon, J.B. Heaton, and Terrance Odean, 2007, Overconfidence, investment policy and
manager welfare, Working Paper.
Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconfident, Review of Financial
Studies 14, 1–27.
Glaser, M., L. Langer, and M. Weber, 2005, Overconfidence of professionals and lay men: Individual
differences within and between tasks, Working Paper, University of Manheim.
Glaser, Markus, and Martin Weber, 2007, Overconfidence and trading volume, Geneva Risk and
Insurance Review forthcoming.
Goel, Anand M., and Anjan V. Thakor, 2008, Overconfidence, CEO selection, and corporate governance, Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance:
Evidence from the field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187–243.
, 2006, The Duke/CFO Business Outlook survey, http:\\www.cfosurvey.org.
, and Manju Puri, 2007, Managerial attitudes and corporate actions, Duke University
working paper.

31

Hackbarth, Dirk, 2007, Managerial traits and capital structure decisions, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Studies forthcoming.
Hansen, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2001, Robust control and model uncertainty, American
Economic Review 91, 60–66.
Heaton, J.B., 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate finance, Financial Management 31, 33–45.
Hilary, Gilles, and Lior Menzly, 2006, Does past success lead analysts to become overconfident?,
Management Science 52, 489–500.
Hribar, Paul, and Holly Yang, 2006, CEO overconfidence, management earnings forecasts, and
earnings management, Working paper, Cornell University.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
Economic Review 76, 323–329.
Jonsson, Anna-Carin, and Carl Martin Allwood, 2003, Stability and variability in the realism
of confidence judgments over time, content domain, and gender, Personality and Individual
Differences 34, 559–574.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Dan Lovallo, 1993, Timid choices and bold forecasts: A cognitive perspective on risk taking, Management Science 39, 17–31.
Keefer, Donald L., and Samuel E. Bodily, 1983, Three-point approximations for continuous random
variables, Management Science 29, 595–609.
Kidd, John B., 1970, The utilization of subjective probabilities in production planning, Acta Psychologica 34, 338–347.
Klayman, Joshua, Jack B. Soll, Claudia Gonzáles-Vallejo, and Sema Barlas, 1999, Overconfidence:
It depends on how, what, and whom you ask, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 79, 216–247.
Koriat, Asher, Sarah Lichtenstein, and Barauch Fischoff, 1980, Reasons for confidence, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 6, 107–118.
Kruger, Justin, and David Dunning, 1999, Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 77, 1121–1134.
Lichtenstein, Sarah, and Barauch Fischoff, 1977, Do those who know more also know more about
how much they know?, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 20, 159183.
Lichtenstein, Sarah, Baruch Fischoff, and Lawrence Phillips, 1982, Calibration of probabilities:
The state of the art to 1980, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, ed.: Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases . pp. 306–334 (Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge).
Maenhout, Pascal J., 2004, Robust portfolio rules and asset pricing, Review of Financial Studies
17, 951–983.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005a, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment,
Journal of Finance 60, 2661–2700.

32

, 2005b, Does overconfidence affect corporate investment? CEO overconfidence measures
revisited, European Financial Management 11, 649–659.
, 2007, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market’s reaction, Journal
of Financial Economics forthcoming.
, and Jun Yan, 2006, Corporate financial policies with overconfident managers, Working
Paper, UC Berekely and UC Los Angeles.
March, James G., and Zur Shapira, 1987, Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking, Management Science 33, 1404–1418.
Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates,
International Economic Review 29, 449–470.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semidefinite, heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance-matrix, Econometrica 55, 703–708.
Oskamp, Stuart, 1965, Overconfidence in case study judgements, Journal of Consulting Psychology
29, 261–265.
Paese, Paul W., and Michael A. Feuer, 1991, Decisions, actions, and the appropriateness of confidence in knowledge, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 4, 1–16.
Puri, Manju, and David T. Robinson, 2007, Optimism and economic choice, Journal of Financial
Economics forthcoming.
Rubinstein, Mark E., 1973, A mean-variance synthesis of corporate financial theory, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Studies 8, 61–69.
Russo, J. Edward, and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, 1992, Managing overconfidence, Sloan Management
Review 33, 7–17.
Shefrin, Hersh, 2001, Behavioral corporate finance, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 14, 113–
124.
, 2005, A Behavioral Approach to Asset Pricing (Elsevier Academic Press: Burlington,
Massachusetts) first edn.
Soll, Jack B., and Joshua Klayman, 2004, Overconfidence in interval estimates, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 30, 299–314.
Spense, Mark T., 1996, Problem-problem solver characteristics affecting the calibration of judgments, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 67, 271–279.
Sporer, Seigfried Ludwig, Steven Penrod, Don Read, and Brian Cutler, 1995, Choosing, confidence,
and accuracy: a meta-analysis of confidence-accuracy relation in eye-witness identification studies, Psychological Bulletin 118, 315–327.
von Holstein, C. Staël, 1972, Probabilistic forecasting: An experiment related to the stock market,
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 8, 139–158.
West, Richard F., and Keith E. Stanovich, 1997, The domain specificity and generality of overconfidence: individual differences in performance estimation bias, Psychonomic Bulletin and Review
4, 387–392.

33

Appendix A: Variable Definitions
Variables from CFO Survey
Raw short-term forecast
Raw long-term forecast
Raw lower (upper) bounds

abs(forecast error)
Individual volatility
Disagreement volatility

Optimism ST

Optimism LT

Overconfidence ST

Overconfidence LT

Optimism firm

Optimism U.S.

IRR
OverconfidenceIRR

Survey response of expected one-year S&P 500 return.
Survey response of expected ten-year S&P 500 return.
Survey response for the level of S&P 500 returns for which
there is a 1-in-10 chance of being lower (greater). Applies to
short-term (one-year) and long-term (ten-year) returns.
Absolute value of the forecast error (forecasted returns minus
realized returns).
(Raw upper bound - raw lower bound) / 2.65. Applies to
short-term (one-year) and long-term (ten-year) forecasts.
Standard deviation of mean forecasts (expected returns) within
survey date. Applies to short-term (one-year) and long-term
(ten-year) forecasts.
Decile ranking of individual short-term expected returns
within each survey date. Orthogonalized with respect to
Overconfidence ST . Variable is scaled between 0 and 1.
Decile ranking of individual short-term expected returns
within each survey date. Orthogonalized with respect to
Overconfidence ST and Optimism ST . Variable is scaled between 0 and 1.
Decile ranking of individual volatility of short-term forecasts
within each survey date and forecast decile (i.e., double sorting
on short-term optimism). Ranking is scaled between 0 and 1,
and sorted in descending order so that 0 (1) reflects the decile
of least (most) overconfident managers.
Decile ranking of individual volatility of long-term forecasts
within each survey date and forecast decile (i.e., double sorting
on raw long-term optimism). Orthogonalized with respect to
Overconfidence ST . Ranking is scaled between 0 and 1, and
sorted in descending order so that 0 (1) reflects the decile of
least (most) overconfident managers.
Raw response to a question about how optimistic managers are
about their firms’ financial future (responses range from 0 to
100). Variable is decile-ranked within survey date and scaled
between 0 and 1.
Raw response to a question about how optimistic managers are
about the future of the U.S. economy (responses range from
0 to 100). Variable is decile-ranked within survey date and
scaled between 0 and 1.
Internal rate of returns (IRR) as predicted by survey respondents (in 2007 Q2 survey). Measured in percentage points.
Decile ranking of individual volatility derived from IRR forecasts within each IRR forecast decile (i.e., double sorting on
IRR levels). Ranking is scaled between 0 and 1, and sorted in
descending order so that 0 (1) reflects the decile of least (most)
overconfident managers.

34

Variables from CRSP
Age
12-month cumulative returns
Merger announcement
turns (-1,1)

re-

Firm age in years. Calculated as years elapsed since first
appearance on CRSP.
Cumulative value-weighted monthly returns over 12
months. Applied to market and firm returns.
Cumulative three-day returns of acquirers around merger
announcements. Announcement dates are from Thomson
SDC Platinum.

Variables from The Chicago Board Options Exchange
Volatility Index (VIX)

An index for the implied volatility on 30-day options. The
index is constructed by the Chicago Board Options Exchange
(CBOE) from a wide range of wide range of S&P 500 (S&P 100
until August 2003) index options (both calls and puts). The
index reflects the anticipated volatility in the next 30 days. See
http://www.cboe.com/micro/vix/vixwhite.pdf for further
details.

Variables from Annual Compustat
Sales
Annual sales in millions of USD (item 12).
5-year Sales growth
Annualized 5-years sales (item 12) growth.
Book leverage
Total debt / total assets at book values = (long-term debt
(item 9) + debt in current liabilities (item 34)) / total assets
at book value (item 6).
Asset Market-to-book (M/B)
Total assets at market values / total assets at book values =
(share price (item 199) * #shares (item 54) + debt in current
liabilities (item 34) + long-term debt (item 9) + preferredliquidation value (item 10) - deferred taxes and investment
tax credit (item 35)) / total assets (item 6).
LT debt / Total debt
Profitability
Collateral

Dividends
Repurchases
Capital expenditures (capex)
intensity

Acquisitions intensity

Portion of long-term debt (item 9) out of total debt (item 9 +
item 34).
Operating profit (item 13) / lag(total assets (item 6)).
Tangible assets / total assets at book values = (plant property
& equipment (item 8) + inventory (item 3)) / total assets (item
6).
1 if declared dividends (item 21), and 0 otherwise.
1 if purchase of common and preferred stock (item 115) is
greater than 1% of equity, and zero otherwise.
Net investments / lag(total assets at book values) = (capital
expenditures (item 128) + increase in investments (item 113) +
acquisitions (item 129) - sales of property, plant and equipment
(item 107) - sale of investments (item 109)) / lag(total assets
(item 6)).
Acquisitions (item 129) / lag(total assets (item 6)).

35

Appendix B: Model of Overconfidence and Corporate
Policies

A. Investment Decision
In the model, an overconfident manager decides on the number of projects that his firm will
invest in. Each project requires a $1 investment and produces gross return Ri in the next
period. Project returns are diminishing in their order, so that project i + 1 is less profitable
than project i: E[Ri ] ≥ E[Ri+1 ]. For simplicity, we assume that project realizations are
independent. Furthermore, we assume that there are no frictions such as taxes, agency
costs, bankruptcy costs, or transaction costs. Therefore, the manager chooses the number
of projects that maximizes his current shareholders’ wealth:

max
I

s.t.

I
X
E[Ri ]

1 + r̂
I≥0 ;

−I

(1)

i=1

E[Ri ] ≥ E[Ri+1 ],

where I is the total investment in projects and r̂ is the discount rate that the manager uses.
(Investors use r > r̂ to discount the cash flows.)
Because overconfident managers use lower discount rates, they invest in more projects.
Given that project outcomes are uncorrelated and expected returns are diminishing, the last
ˆ satisfies E[R ˆ] ≥ 1 + r̂. Since the
project that the overconfident manager chooses (project I)
I
overconfident manager uses lower discount rates r̂ < r and since projects’ expected returns
are diminishing with the number of projects E[Ri ] ≥ E[Ri+1 ], the overconfident manager
invests at least as much as an unbiased manager would. In other words, the overconfident
manager believes that some negative NPV projects are actually profitable and as a result
invests in them:
Proposition 1 (Overinvestment) Overconfident managers invest more than less confident managers.
36

The manager disagrees with the market not only about the optimal number of projects,
but also about their cumulative fair value. The total value of the Iˆ projects, according to
the manager’s perception, is higher than the total value of projects that investors perceive:
ˆ

ˆ =
V̂ (I)

I
X
E[Ri ]
i=1

1 + r̂

ˆ

− Iˆ >

I
X
E[Ri ]
i=1

1+r

ˆ
− Iˆ = V (I),

ˆ and V (I)
ˆ represent the value of the firm with overinvestment, as perceived by
where V̂ (I)
the overconfident manager and by investors, respectively.
Proposition 2 (Overvaluation) Overconfident managers perceive the value of investment
projects as being higher than outside investors perceive them to be.

B. Financing Decision
Given that the overconfident manager decides to invest Iˆ in projects, he next decides about
the capital structure of the firm. At the outset, the firm’s balance sheet is composed of cash
(B) and equity (allocated into s shares). Projects can be financed with b cash (out of B
available to the firm), with newly issued debt with face value F and market value D(F ),
and with s0 newly issued shares. Since the manager and outside investors disagree about the
value of the firm’s financial claims, the manager maximizes current shareholder value and
attempts to profit from market perceived mispricings, subject to raising sufficient funds to
finance the projects:
max0
b,F,s

s.t.

D(F ) − D̂(F ) +


s0 
E(F
)
−
Ê(F
)
s + s0

(2)

s0
E(F ) ≥ Iˆ
s + s0
0 ≤ b ≤ B ; F ≥ 0 ; s0 > −s,

b + D(F ) +

where D and E are market values of the debt and equity claims, respectively. D̂ and Ê
represent these values as perceived by the manager.

37

Because the overconfident manager always perceives his firm’s assets (i.e., the current
value of the project) to be more valuable than investors believe them to be, he prefers to
use internal funds first, i.e., b = B. Also he would use external funds to the extent that
his misperception of the projects’ net present value outweighs his misperception of security
mispricing. Therefore, he raises the minimum funds necessary, but not more than that. The
minimum financing constraint is hence binding: B + D +

s0
E
s+s0

ˆ
= I.

After substituting the constraint into the objective function and using the accounting
identity V = D + E, the manager’s problem can be restated as:30

max
F

s.t.

 

Ê(F )  ˆ
ˆ − Iˆ + B
V (I) − Iˆ + B − V̂ (I)
E(F )
F ≥ 0.

(3)

The only variables in the objective function that are affected by the choice of the face
value F are the equity valuations Ê and E. Thus, the debt level that maximizes perceived
shareholder value occurs when the ratio

Ê(F )
E(F )

is maximized. In other words, at the chosen

capital structure, the manager believes that the market undervalues the firm’s equity the
most.
To determine in what situations the manager perceives the value of the equity as undervalued by the market in absolute terms, i.e.,

Ê(F )
E(F )

> 1, we put more structure on the

problem and calibrate the model. We assume that both the overconfident manager and
outside investors use the Merton (1974) framework to value corporate claims.31 However,
the investors use different parameters to value corporate claims than does the overconfident
ˆ and
manager. Outside investors believe that the current value of the firm’s assets is V (I)
that the volatility of cash flows is σ. Conversely, the manager uses parameters based on his
ˆ and σ̂, respectively, i.e., higher asset value and lower
perception of cash flow volatility: V̂ (I)
cash flow volatility.
30

Full mathematical derivation is available upon request.
In Merton’s model the firm’s equity is priced as a call option on the firm’s assets, and zero-coupon debt
is priced as a riskless bond minus the value of a put option on the firm’s assets. There are no frictions such
as taxes, agency costs, bankruptcy costs, or transaction costs.
31

38

In the Merton model, equity is valued as a call option on the firm’s assets with a strike
equal to the face value of debt. Lower volatility has two effects on the price of equity in this
framework. First, volatility has a direct effect through the volatility component of the call
option, i.e., lower volatility means a lower call option price. Second, lower volatility increases
the value of the option indirectly, through the value of the underlying asset. Lower volatility
results in lower discount rates, which in turn increase the present value of discounted cash
flows, i.e., the option’s underlying asset worth is more.
The ratio

Ê(F )
E(F )

is therefore greater than 1 when the indirect effect of low volatility is

greater than its direct effect. While other option parameters matter (such as interest rates
and duration), we find that this ratio is mostly sensitive to the degree in which volatility
affects discount rates. If volatility is assumed not to have an effect on discount rates (as in
Hackbarth (2007)), then

Ê(F )
E(F )

is less than 1, i.e., the manager believes that the stock market

overvalues his firm’s equity. However, even a weak positive relation between volatility and
discount rates causes

Ê(F )
E(F )

to be greater than 1, since the valuation of call options is very

sensitive to the value of the underlying asset.
In the calibration we assume that the firm can invest any amount I in projects with
linearly diminishing returns E[Ri ] = 5 − i.32 The investment required for each project is
$1.00. For simplicity, we assume that the firm can also invest in fractional projects. The
volatility of cash flows is σ = 0.60,33 although, the overconfident manager perceives the
volatility as lower by a factor of 3, as documented earlier in this paper, i.e., σ̂ = 0.20.
We follow the traditional asset pricing models and assume that volatility is related to
discount rates in a linear fashion: r = λσ, where the market price of risk, λ, is set to be
0.37.34 Therefore, the overconfident manager discounts cash flows with r̂ = 0.07 instead of
r = 0.22. Additional assumptions are that the risk free rate is rf = 0.05, the investment
horizon is one year, and the firm’s assets initially consist of $1.00 cash (B).
32

This is an arbitrary linear functional form. Linear functions facilitate the calculation, but should not
affect the generalization of the results.
33
Volatility of individual firms typically range between 50% to 100% per annum.
34
Fama and French (2002) estimate the market price of risk (Sharpe ratio) as 0.31 for 1872 to 2000 and
0.44 for the period of 1951 to 2000. In our calibration we use the estimate employed by Basak and Cuoco
(1998).

39

Using these parameters, we calculate that the manager invests more than an unbiased
manager optimally would (by 2.9%)35 and that he overvalues the projects by 10.0% more
than the market does.36 The manager finances the investment first with cash, and raises debt
in order to cover the remainder of the investment and to repurchase shares. The manager
chooses the leverage that maximizes the perceived gains from exploiting perceived market
mispricings, i.e., the chosen debt face value ($4.91) maximizes the discrepancy in valuations
between investors’ valuation and his private valuation of issued securities (Equation 2). At
this debt face value, the manager perceives the firm’s equity as the most undervalued by
the market (Equation 3),
market,

D̂(F )
D(F )

Ê(F )
E(F )

= 1.21. The issued debt is only mildly undervalued by the

= 1.05.

With this set of parameters, we find that as long as the price of risk, λ, is above 0.01,
the ratio

Ê(F )
E(F )

is greater than 1, i.e., the manager perceives the firm’s equity as undervalued

by the market:37
Proposition 3 (Overvaluation of Equity) Overconfident managers believe that their firms’
equity is undervalued by the market.
Since external financing seems expensive, the overconfident manager prefers to finance
investments with internal cash, and therefore does not distribute dividends before investing
in the project.
Proposition 4 (Fewer Dividends) Overconfident managers are less likely to pay out cash
dividends.
Figure A1 presents the manager’s value function from issuing securities (Equation 2) as
ˆ The different curves represent overconfidence degrees
a function of debt leverage (D/V (I)).
ranging from σ̂ = 0.60 (unbiased) to σ̂ = 0.10 (extremely overconfident); an overconfidence
While the overconfident manager overinvests Iˆ = $3.93, an unbiased manager invests I ∗ = $3.78.
ˆ = $9.76, while the market
The overconfident manager perceives the gross value of the investment as V̂ (I)
ˆ
values it at V (I) = $11.10.
37
Debt is perceived undervalued by the market as long as λ > 0, although to a lesser extent than equity
is (see discussion of calibration charts below).
35

36

40

level of σ̂ = 0.20 is represented with a black marked line. The figure shows that while
the value function of unbiased managers (σ = 0.60) is insensitive to debt leverage, optimal
leverage increases with managerial overconfidence (optimal leverage is marked with small
open black circles). While a manager with a mild overconfidence level of σ̂ = 0.50 chooses
an optimal leverage 0.32, a manager who is more overconfident, σ̂ = 0.20, chooses an optimal
leverage 0.46.
Furthermore, the figure shows that although overconfident managers are predisposed
to higher leverage, at some point additional leverage is perceived to be value-decreasing.
This happens because at high leverage, market valuation of equity is not perceived as being
undervalued, while debt is perceived to be undervalued by the market. Therefore, the optimal
leverage for overconfident managers is within the middle range, even without an explicit
offsetting effect (e.g., bankruptcy costs).
Figure A2a shows the discrepancy between the manager’s subjective valuation and the
market valuation of equity, as a function of debt leverage. The figure demonstrates that the
chosen leverage is set at the point in which the discrepancy in equity valuations between
the manager and the market is the greatest (Equation (3)). Figure A2b shows a similar
chart for debt. At the optimal leverage ratio, the overconfident manager believes that debt
is undervalued by the market, although to a lesser extent than equity.
The calibration yields two additional results. The manager chooses debt leverage that
increases with the level of overconfidence. The intuition is that at low and medium leverage
levels, the overconfident manager believes that investors undervalue his firms’ equity more
than they undervalue his firms’ debt. Since the manager tries to exploit market mispricing,
as overconfidence increases, he wishes to borrow more in order to repurchase more seemingly
undervalued shares.
Proposition 5 (High Leverage) Debt leverage increases with managerial overconfidence.

Proposition 6 (Share Repurchases) Overconfident managers engage in more share repurchases.
41

In a robustness test we find that Propositions (5) and (6) depend on the relation between
volatility and discount rates. In particular, we find that these propositions hold, as long as
the market price of risk, λ, is greater than 0.09. Since this value is far below all estimations
of the market price of risk in the literature, we believe that Propositions (5) and (6) are
generalizable. When λ > 0.09, and as overconfidence increases, the overconfident manager
believes that his firm’s equity is undervalued by the market to a greater extent. This happens
because the positive effect of low perceived volatility on the equity valuation (lower discount
rates) dominates its negative effect (safer assets).

42

Figure A1. Perceived Value from Issuing Securities and Optimal Leverage

Manager's value function: Perceived
value to shareholders
by overconfident manager ($)

Value derived from issuing securities as perceived by overconfident managers, as a function
of debt leverage. Optimal leverage is marked with circles.
0.2

0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

-0.2

σ-hat = σ = 0.6, r-hat = 0.22
σ-hat = 0.5, r-hat = 0.19
σ-hat = 0.4, r-hat = 0.15
σ-hat = 0.3, r-hat = 0.11
σ-hat = 0.2, r-hat = 0.07
σ-hat = 0.1, r-hat = 0.04

-0.4

-0.6

Market Leverage = Debt (D) / Firm Value (V(I-hat))

Figure A2. Securities Overvaluation by Overconfident Managers
Figure A2a. The ratio of the value of equity as perceived by overconfident managers to
the value of equity as perceived by the market, as a function of debt leverage.
Undervaluation of equity by the
market as perceived by the
manager: Equity-hat / Equity

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8
0.0

σ-hat = σ = 0.6, r-hat = 0.22
σ-hat = 0.5, r-hat = 0.19
σ-hat = 0.4, r-hat = 0.15
σ-hat = 0.3, r-hat = 0.11
σ-hat = 0.2, r-hat = 0.07
σ-hat = 0.1, r-hat = 0.04

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Market Leverage = Debt (D) / Firm Value (V(I-hat))

Undervaluation of debt by the
market as perceived by the manager:
Debt-hat / Debt

Figure A2b. The ratio of the value of debt as perceived by overconfident managers to the
value of debt as perceived by the market, as a function of debt leverage.
1.4

σ-hat = σ = 0.6, r-hat = 0.22
σ-hat = 0.5, r-hat = 0.19
σ-hat = 0.4, r-hat = 0.15
σ-hat = 0.3, r-hat = 0.11
σ-hat = 0.2, r-hat = 0.07
σ-hat = 0.1, r-hat = 0.04

1.2

1.0

0.8
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Market Leverage = Debt (D) / Firm Value (V(I-hat))

43

0.7

0.8

Table I

Summary Statistics
The table presents descriptive statistics of the sample firms. Panel A presents summary statistics for the
variables used in the study. Panel B presents an industry and size breakdown according to the CFOs’
own reporting. Panel C compares the distribution of key attributes of the sample firms to those from the
Compustat universe from 2001 to 2006. The columns represent Compustat quintiles, and the numbers
report the percentage of sample observations that fall within each quintile. Variable definitions are provided
in Appendix A.

Panel A: Summary Statistics
Survey Variables (Full Sample)
Obs Mean Std Dev
Min Median Max
Raw forecasts ST (%)
6901 6.40
3.82 -15.00
6.00 25.00
Individual volatility ST (%)
6901 4.89
3.57 0.38
3.77 26.42
Confidence interval ST (%)
6901 13.02
9.78 0.09
10.00 100.00
Optimism ST
6901 0.50
0.31 0.00
0.56
1.00
Overconfidence ST
6901 0.50
0.31 0.00
0.56
1.00
Raw forecasts LT (%)
6280 7.68
2.73 1.00
8.00 40.00
Individual volatility LT (%)
6280 3.33
2.09 0.38
3.02 19.25
Confidence interval LT (%)
6280 8.98
6.97 0.04
8.00 125.00
Optimism LT
6280 0.50
0.32 0.00
0.56
1.00
Overconfidence LT
6280 0.50
0.32 0.00
0.56
1.00
abs(forecast error ST) (%)
5158 8.52
8.11 0.00
6.35 66.00
S&P 500 realization within confidence interval 5158 0.40
0.49 0.00
0.00
1.00
Optimism firm
5360 0.51
0.32 0.00
0.56
1.00
Optimism U.S.
5403 0.51
0.31 0.00
0.56
1.00
IRR
316 13.19
6.17 2.00
12.00 40.00
OverconfidenceIRR
316 0.48
0.30 0.00
0.44
1.00
Firm Characteristics (for sample firms that can be linked to Compustat)
Profitability
1142 0.13
0.12 -1.60
0.13
0.46
log(Sales)
1144 7.66
1.95 0.82
7.63 11.05
Asset Market-to-Book
1144 1.48
0.89 0.21
1.18
6.63
Collateral
1144 0.38
0.22 0.01
0.38
0.93
5yr Sales growth
1108 0.09
0.17 -0.32
0.07
1.42
Book leverage
1143 0.22
0.18 0.00
0.22
1.17
LT debt / Total debt
1061 0.77
0.28 0.00
0.88
1.00
Dividends
1149 0.58
0.49 0.00
1.00
1.00
Repurchases
1149 0.42
0.49 0.00
0.00
1.00
Capex intensity
1143 0.08
0.11 -0.21
0.05
1.23
Acquisitions intensity
1086 0.04
0.09 -0.02
0.00
1.03
Firm Characteristics (for sample firms that can be linked to CRSP)
Age (years)
1149 32.45
22.27 2.50
25.92 81.33
Firm 12-month past returns
1147 0.18
0.49 -0.91
0.13
5.23
Beta (βM KT )
1133 1.13
0.86 -0.48
0.94
4.49
Merger announcement returns (%)
375 0.83
5.16 -15.12
0.86 18.74

44

Table I: Summary Statistics (Cont.)
Panel B: Distribution of Responses by Industry and Size
Industry
Retail / Wholesale
Mining / Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation / Energy
Communications / Media
Tech (Software / Biotech)
Banking / Finance / Insurance
Service / Consulting
Healthcare / Pharmaceutical
Other
Total

Full
Sample
815
254
1904
380
316
471
995
597
291
774
6797

Identified
Sample
197
52
473
144
88
156
333
119
67
170
1799

Revenues
Less than $24m
$25 - 99m
$100 - 499m
$500 - 999m
$1 - 4.999bn
More than $5bn

Total

Full
Sample
894
1423
1929
669
1059
578

Identified
Sample
63
138
365
283
552
411

6552

1812

Panel C: Distribution of sample firms across Compustat quintiles
Variable
Age (years)
Sales
Asset Market-to-Book
Profitability
5-year Sales growth
Collateral
Book leverage
LT debt / Total debt
Capex intensity

Q1
5.9
0.3
13.5
1.3
8.5
10.7
10.6
7.9
10.5

Compustat quintiles
Q2
Q3
Q4
9.1 16.5 18.9
3.7 12.0 22.4
28.9 24.4 23.9
13.2 29.4 32.0
28.7 32.0 20.6
22.5 25.4 25.2
20.0 30.1 30.4
17.6 27.5 26.5
19.4 26.9 25.9

45

Q5
49.7
61.7
9.3
24.2
10.3
16.2
8.9
20.6
17.4

46

Survey date
13 Mar 2001
11 Jun 2001
10 Sep 2001
3 Dec 2001
12 Mar 2002
4 Jun 2002
17 Sep 2002
3 Dec 2002
17 Mar 2003
12 Jun 2003
15 Sep 2003
4 Dec 2003
18 Mar 2004
9 Jun 2004
8 Sep 2004
1 Dec 2004
22 Feb 2005
24 May 2005
28 Aug 2005
15 Nov 2005
23 Feb 2006
23 May 2006
29 Aug 2006
21 Nov 2006
1 Mar 2007
1 Jun 2007
Average

Obs
138
146
136
188
173
315
351
276
182
350
151
216
202
175
180
284
271
308
315
337
264
477
453
383
373
395
271

One-year forecasts
Avg
Avg
Avg
Avg
Dislower expected upper individual agreement
bound return bound volatility volatility
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
n/a
5.3
n/a
n/a
6.7
-2.7
6.0
13.6
6.1
3.8
-5.0
4.6
12.9
6.8
5.9
-4.3
6.9
14.8
7.2
5.3
-0.4
7.4
12.6
4.9
3.6
-3.3
5.1
10.6
5.2
3.6
-4.2
5.0
10.9
5.7
4.2
-2.0
6.8
12.5
5.5
4.0
-6.9
4.6
11.3
6.9
4.3
-1.6
7.9
14.4
6.1
4.9
1.1
7.7
12.6
4.3
3.8
1.1
9.2
15.0
5.2
3.8
-0.9
7.4
13.7
5.5
4.4
-0.4
7.1
12.3
4.8
3.6
-0.6
6.7
12.0
4.7
3.8
-0.2
6.6
11.4
4.4
3.1
-0.6
6.2
11.1
4.4
3.2
-0.9
5.3
9.9
4.1
2.6
-0.7
5.6
10.2
4.1
3.0
-0.8
5.5
10.2
4.2
3.0
-0.6
6.4
11.4
4.5
3.2
-0.1
6.2
10.8
4.1
3.3
-0.9
5.7
10.2
4.2
3.2
-0.1
6.7
11.8
4.5
3.2
0.4
7.0
11.8
4.3
3.4
0.2
7.4
12.3
4.6
3.5
-1.4
6.4
12.0
5.1
3.9
Obs
141
145
136
188
173
308
344
271
178
344
147
212
198
172
174
281
269
299
309
329
258
470
436
374
364
384
266

Ten-year forecasts
Avg
Avg
Avg
Avg
lower expected upper individual
bound return bound volatility
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
n/a
9.4
n/a
n/a
n/a
9.2
n/a
n/a
n/a
9.1
n/a
n/a
n/a
8.8
n/a
n/a
3.7
8.4
12.7
3.3
3.0
8.2
12.2
3.5
3.2
8.0
12.1
3.4
3.4
7.9
11.9
3.2
2.0
7.4
11.5
3.6
1.9
7.6
12.2
3.9
3.3
7.4
10.6
2.8
3.4
8.2
12.1
3.3
2.9
7.8
11.8
3.3
3.1
8.0
11.5
3.1
2.7
7.6
11.1
3.2
3.2
7.6
11.1
3.0
3.2
7.5
11.3
3.1
2.6
7.3
11.3
3.3
2.3
7.2
10.9
3.2
2.3
6.9
11.0
3.3
2.1
7.2
11.1
3.4
3.1
7.7
11.8
3.3
2.6
7.7
11.7
3.4
2.9
7.9
12.1
3.5
2.8
7.8
11.7
3.4
3.1
7.9
11.6
3.2
2.9
7.9
11.6
3.3

Market data
DisRealized
agreement one-year Realized
volatility returns volatility VIX
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(10)
(11)
(12) (13)
3.0
-3.6
20.4 27.6
2.4
-19.2
18.8 24.0
2.6
-16.7
24.1 31.8
2.5
-18.5
25.9 25.8
2.4
-31.0
26.5 19.6
2.6
-5.2
27.1 23.9
2.4
17.5
21.8 38.0
2.7
15.6
17.6 28.3
2.3
28.7
14.5 31.8
2.6
13.8
12.5 20.4
1.9
11.2
11.6 19.3
2.3
11.4
11.2 16.3
2.1
6.0
10.8 18.5
2.8
6.2
10.7 15.8
2.9
10.3
10.2 14.1
2.6
6.2
10.4 13.0
2.7
9.2
10.4 13.1
3.3
5.4
9.5
12.7
2.2
8.0
10.8 13.7
2.1
13.6
10.0 12.2
2.3
12.7
9.6
11.9
2.5
21.1
10.5 18.3
4.0
12.2
12.1 12.3
3.4
9.9
2.7
15.8
2.2
12.8
2.6
5.0
15.1 19.5

The table presents summary statistics by survey date. Avg lower bound (%) is the average CFO 10th percentile for one-year (column (1)) or ten-year
(column (6)) S&P 500 returns. Avg one-year S&P 500 expected return (%) is the average CFO forecasts for one-year (column (2)) or ten-year (column
(7)) S&P 500 returns. Avg upper bound (%) is average CFO 90th percentile for one-year (column (3)) or ten-year (column (8)) S&P 500 returns.
One-year (Ten-year) Individual volatility(%) is the individual volatility imputed from respondents’ confidence intervals for the one-year (ten-year)
S&P 500 forecasts. One-year (Ten-year) Disagreement volatility (%) is the standard deviation of point estimates for the one-year (ten-year) S&P
500 forecasts across respondents. Realized one-year S&P 500 return (%) is the realized one-year S&P 500 return following the survey date. Realized
volatility is the annual volatility of the S&P 500 over the year following the survey date measured with daily returns. VIX is the Chicago Board of
Options Exchange (CBOE) volatility index, which reflects the average of imputed volatility across traded options on the S&P 500 (S&P 100 before
August 2003) futures index.

Table II: S&P 500 Return Forecasts and Confidence Intervals

Table III

One-Year S&P 500 Return Forecasts vs. Realizations
The table compares survey forecasts with S&P 500 realizations by survey date. Average forecast error (%) is
defined as Average one-year S&P 500 expected return (%) minus Realized one-year S&P 500 return (%) (see
definitions in Table II). S&P 500 realizations: % below 10th percentile is the percentage of respondents for
whom the realized one-year S&P 500 return is below their 10th percentile predictions. S&P 500 realizations:
% between 10th and 90th percentiles is the percentage of respondents for whom the realized one-year S&P
500 return is between their 10th percentile and 90th percentile predictions. S&P 500 realizations: % above
90th percentile is the percentage of respondents for whom the realized one-year S&P 500 return is above
their 90th percentile predictions.

Survey date
13 Mar 2001
11 Jun 2001
10 Sep 2001
3 Dec 2001
12 Mar 2002
4 Jun 2002
17 Sep 2002
3 Dec 2002
17 Mar 2003
12 Jun 2003
15 Sep 2003
4 Dec 2003
18 Mar 2004
9 Jun 2004
8 Sep 2004
1 Dec 2004
22 Feb 2005
24 May 2005
28 Aug 2005
15 Nov 2005
23 Feb 2006
23 May 2006
29 Aug 2006
Average

Average
forecast error
(%)
(1)
9.0
25.2
21.2
25.2
38.2
10.3
-12.5
-8.8
-24.1
-4.8
-3.5
-2.2
1.5
1.0
-3.7
0.4
-2.9
-0.1
-1.8
-8.1
-6.3
-14.9
-6.6
1.4

S&P
% below
10th
percentile
(2)
n/a
96.6
89.0
91.0
100.0
73.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
11.9
5.1
0.0
4.9
0.0
3.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.6

47

500 realizations. . .
% between
% above
th
th
10 and 90
90th
percentiles
percentile
(3)
(4)
n/a
n/a
3.4
0.0
11.0
0.0
9.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.0
0.0
14.0
86.0
19.9
80.1
2.7
97.3
50.3
49.7
53.6
46.4
68.5
31.5
83.2
5.0
86.9
8.0
47.2
52.8
78.9
16.2
61.3
38.7
82.5
13.6
56.5
43.5
19.9
80.1
31.8
68.2
3.8
96.2
23.4
76.6
37.9
40.4

Table IV

Determinants of Forecasts and Individual Volatilities
The table explores the determinants of CFO forecasts of the one-year ahead S&P 500 return and individual
volatilities. Panel A presents regressions of lower bounds, expected returns, upper bounds, and individual
volatilities on future S&P 500 returns and past returns, where standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted
for autocorrelation using the Newey and West (1987) procedure with 7 lags. Observation units in Panel A
are the means of survey responses within a given quarter. Panel B presents results from Fama and MacBeth
(1973) regressions, where standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for autocorrelation using the Newey
and West (1987) procedure with three lags. In Panel B, the independent variables are past firm returns. In
both panels, dependent variables are expressed as decimals (not percentage points). Variable definitions are
provided in Appendix A. *, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Regressions of average forecasts on S&P 500 returns

Lower
bound
(1) FM
12-months future S&P return
12-months past S&P return
Intercept

Observations
R2

One-year forecasts (%)
Expected
Upper
Individual
return
bound
volatility
(2) FM
(3) FM
(4) FM

-0.64
(1.27)
11.36***
(1.49)
-1.54***
(0.13)

-1.38
(0.90)
4.44***
(1.01)
6.37***
(0.29)

-3.96**
(1.94)
0.52
(2.05)
12.12***
(0.46)

-1.25
(1.06)
-4.09***
(1.12)
5.16***
(0.19)

22
0.75

23
0.38

22
0.14

22
0.49

Panel B: Regressions of forecasts on own-firm returns (Fama-MacBeth)

Lower
bound
(1) FM
12-months past firm return
Intercept

Average number of observations
Number of regressions
Average R2

One-year forecasts (%)
Expected
Upper
Individual
return
bound
volatility
(2) FM
(3) FM
(4) FM

0.47**
(0.17)
-1.81**
(0.70)

0.37***
(0.10)
6.29***
(0.20)

0.13
(0.29)
11.92***
(0.32)

-0.10
(0.12)
5.18***
(0.33)

80
22
0.01

83
23
0.01

80
22
0.02

80
22
0.02

48

Table V

Skill and Overconfidence
The table explores the relation between CFO overconfidence and skill. Column (1) presents the results of a
regression of absolute forecast errors (in percentage) on overconfidence measures (based on a Fama-MacBeth
regression). Column (2) presents the results of a regression where the dependent variable is an indicator
variable that receives the value 1 if the S&P 500 realization is within the 10th and 90th percentiles provided
by CFOs, and 0 otherwise (Fama-MacBeth regression). Standard errors are adjusted for autocorrelation of
three lags using the Newey and West (1987) procedure. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A.
*, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. All regressions have
intercepts that are not presented.

abs(forecast error)
(%)
(1) Fama-MacBeth
Overconfidence ST
Overconfidence LT

Realization
within 10th and 90th and
percentiles (0/1) ×100
(2) Fama-MacBeth

-0.58***
(0.17)
-0.71***
(0.20)

-51.01***
(3.45)
-5.80***
(1.84)
-6.01***
(0.66)

268
18
0.02

273
18
0.35

abs(forecast error) (%)

Average number of observations
Number of regressions
Average R2

49

Table VI

Overconfidence and Corporate Policies
The table presents results about the relation between managerial overconfidence and corporate policies. The
dependent variables in Panel A are overconfidence based on self-reported IRR (column (1)), self-reported
IRR (columns (2) and (3)), capex intensity (%) (column (4)), acquisitions intensity (%) (column (5)), and
3-day merger announcement returns (-1, 1) (column (6)). The dependent variables in Panel B are book
debt
leverage (column (1)), TLT
otal debt (column (2)), dividend payer dummy (columns (3) and (4)), and stock
repurchase dummy (column (5)). All regressions are OLS apart from regressions (3) to (5) in Panel B,
which are probit regressions (marginal effects for the average firm are reported). Independent variables in all
regressions include Overconfidence ST , Overconfidence LT , Optimism ST , Optimism LT , Optimism firm,
Optimism U .S . The regression in Panel A, column (3), is restricted to respondents who reported that they
take an active role in the investment decision making process (5 or more out of 7). Columns (4) to (6)
in Panel A and all the columns in Panel B include firm characteristics controls: book leverage (except for
in Panel B, column (1)), collateral, log(sales), asset M/B, profitability, dividends indicator (except for in
Panel B, column (3)), 5-year sales growth, and 12-month past returns. All regression include industry and
survey fixed effects. Industry fixed effects are based on nine broad industry classifications (provided by
respondents) in Panel A, columns (1) to (3), and on 2-digit SIC elsewhere. The regressions in Panel B,
columns (3) and (4), include a repurchase dummy and a capex intensity control. The regression in Panel
B, column (5) includes a dividend payer dummy. Utilities and financial firms are excluded from the sample.
Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. *, **, *** denote two-tailed significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the 2-digit SIC level.

Panel A: Discount Rates and Investment Decisions
IRR (%)
Capex
Acq’s
Merger ann.
Involved in intensity intensity returns (-1, 1)
investments
(%)
(%)
(%)
(2) OLS (3) OLS
(4) OLS (5) OLS
(6) OLS
All

OverconfidenceIRR
(1) OLS
Overconfidence ST
Overconfidence LT

Optimism ST
Optimism LT
Optimism firm
Optimism U.S.

Observations
Adj. R2

0.32***
(0.04)
0.16**
(0.07)

-2.72***
(0.74)
-0.28
(1.24)

-3.30***
(0.98)
-1.93
(1.48)

-1.27
(1.12)
2.94***
(0.98)

-1.03
(1.01)
2.32**
(0.98)

-0.58
(1.19)
-2.56**
(1.20)

0.03
(0.07)
0.03
(0.05)
0.04
(0.06)
0.06
(0.05)

2.81***
(0.80)
-1.02
(0.74)
1.52
(0.96)
1.96
(1.50)

2.03*
(0.95)
-0.66
(1.42)
0.92
(1.18)
2.57
(1.64)

-0.09
(1.22)
-0.47
(0.97)
-0.12
(0.67)
0.99
(1.27)

-0.06
(0.95)
-0.87
(1.08)
-0.59
(0.57)
1.07
(1.35)

-0.35
(1.17)
2.23*
(1.11)
0.70
(0.92)
-1.81
(1.34)

313
0.17

313
0.09

198
0.15

1104
0.21

1051
0.17

369
0.36

50

Table VI: Overconfidence and Corporate Policies (Cont.)
Panel B: Dividends, Capital Structure, and Repurchases

Overconfidence ST

Dividends
0/1
(1) probit

Dividends
0/1
(2) probit

0.06
(0.07)

0.10
(0.09)
-0.64
(0.65)

-0.21**
(0.10)

(%)
(4) OLS

4.62***
(1.69)

6.39**
(3.15)

-0.04
(0.08)

-0.08
(0.13)
-2.02***
(0.68)

0.84
(1.57)

9.41***
(3.35)

0.13**
(0.06)

-0.03
(0.07)
-0.01
(0.08)
0.02
(0.08)
0.09
(0.07)

-0.02
(0.06)
0.01
(0.09)
0.03
(0.08)
0.08
(0.07)

0.78
(1.67)
0.55
(1.88)
-0.44
(1.73)
-1.92
(1.54)

-4.87
(2.95)
-3.46
(3.18)
3.41
(2.93)
-0.73
(2.40)

0.00
(0.10)
-0.11*
(0.07)
0.10
(0.06)
-0.13*
(0.08)

1027
0.38

1027
0.38

1104
0.37

1023
0.27

1050
0.29

× Capex intensity

Optimism ST
Optimism LT
Optimism firm
Optimism U.S.

Observations
Adj. R2 (Pseudo-R2 )

LT debtq
T otal debtq−1

Repurchases
0/1
(5) probit

× Capex intensity

Overconfidence LT

Book
leverage
(%)
(3) OLS

51

20
01
/
20 Q2
01
/
20 Q3
01
/
20 Q4
02
/
20 Q1
02
/
20 Q2
02
/
20 Q3
02
/
20 Q4
03
/
20 Q1
03
/
20 Q2
03
/
20 Q3
03
/
20 Q4
04
/
20 Q1
04
/
20 Q2
04
/
20 Q3
04
/
20 Q4
05
/
20 Q1
05
/
20 Q2
05
/
20 Q3
05
/
20 Q4
06
/
20 Q1
06
/
20 Q2
06
/Q
3

% of Confidence Intervals that
Contain S&P 500 Realizations

Figure 1. Time-Series of CFO Miscalibration

Figure 1. The percentage of CFOs for whom S&P 500 realized returns fall in the 80%
confidence interval, by survey quarter

80%

0%

Survey Quarter

52

Figure 2. Distribution of One-Year S&P 500 Volatilities

Figure 2a. Historical distribution of S&P 500 one-year volatility (1950-2006)

Relative Frequency

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

1-Year Historical Volatility (%)

Figure 2b. One-year volatility imputed from survey confidence intervals

Relative Frequency

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
0

5

10

15

20

1-Year Survey Individual Volatility (%)

53

25

30

Figure 3. Distribution of Ten-Year S&P 500 Volatilities

Figure 3a. Historical distribution of S&P 500 ten-year volatility (1950-2006)

Relative Frequency

30%

20%

10%

0%
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

10-Year Historical Volatility (Annualized %)

Figure 3b. Ten-year volatility imputed from survey confidence intervals

Relative Frequency

30%

20%

10%

0%
0

5

10

15

20

25

10-Year Survey Individual Volatility (Annualized %)

54

30

Figure 4. Expected Returns, Confidence Bounds, and Realized Returns

Figure 4. Means of expected returns, 80% confidence bounds (means of lower and upper
confidence bounds), and one-year ahead realized S&P 500 returns, by survey quarter

20%
10%
0%
20
00
20 /Q
00 1
20 /Q
00 2
20 /Q
00 3
20 /Q
01 4
20 /Q
01 1
20 /Q
01 2
20 /Q
01 3
20 /Q
02 4
20 /Q
02 1
20 /Q
02 2
20 /Q
02 3
20 /Q
03 4
20 /Q
03 1
20 /Q
03 2
20 /Q
03 3
20 /Q
04 4
20 /Q
04 1
20 /Q
04 2
20 /Q
04 3
20 /Q
05 4
20 /Q
05 1
20 /Q
05 2
20 /Q
05 3
20 /Q
06 4
20 /Q
06 1
20 /Q
06 2
20 /Q
06 3
20 /Q
07 4
20 /Q
07 1
/Q
2

Forecasted 1-Year Returns (%)
or Realized 1-Year Returns (%)

30%

-10%
-20%
-30%

Forecasted 1-Year Returns (mean)
Realized 1-Year Returns
Forecasted 10th/90th Percentiles (mean)

-40%

Survey Quarter

55

