NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GENDER DIFFERENCES IN COMPETITION:
EVIDENCE FROM A MATRILINEAL AND A PATRIARCHAL SOCIETY
Uri Gneezy
Kenneth L. Leonard
John A. List
Working Paper 13727
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13727

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

University of California-San Diego, University of Maryland, and University of Chicago and NBER.
We thank our research team for aiding in the collection of these data, especially Steffen Andersen.
David Levine was instrumental in guiding us toward a much improved manuscript, both in content
and in style. Four anonymous reporters also provided quite useful comments, as did seminar participants
at the Canadian Economic Association, Australasian Econometric Society meetings, Western Economics
Association, and several universities. Any errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Uri Gneezy, Kenneth L. Leonard, and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence from a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society
Uri Gneezy, Kenneth L. Leonard, and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 13727
January 2008
JEL No. C9,C91,C93,J15,J16
ABSTRACT
This study uses a controlled experiment to explore whether there are gender differences in selecting
into competitive environments across two distinct societies: the Maasai in Tanzania and the Khasi
in India. One unique aspect of these societies is that the Maasai represent a textbook example of a
patriarchal society whereas the Khasi are matrilineal. Similar to the extant evidence drawn from experiments
executed in Western cultures, Maasai men opt to compete at roughly twice the rate as Maasai women.
Interestingly, this result is reversed amongst the Khasi, where women choose the competitive environment
more often than Khasi men, and even choose to compete weakly more often than Maasai men. We
view these results as potentially providing insights into the underpinnings of the factors hypothesized
to be determinants of the observed gender differences in selecting into competitive environments.

Uri Gneezy
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
ugneezy@gsb.uchicago.edu
Kenneth L. Leonard
1032 International Affairs Building
Columbia University
Mail Code 3308, 420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
KL206@columbia.edu

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu

I. Introduction
Although women have made important strides in catching up with men in the
workplace, a gender gap persists both in wages and in prospects for advancement.
Commonly cited explanations for such disparities range from charges of discrimination to
claims that women are more sensitive than men to work-family conflicts and therefore
are less inclined to make career sacrifices.1 Combining results from psychology studies
(see Campbell (2002) for a review) with recent findings in the experimental economics
literature (e.g., Gneezy, Niederle, and Rustichini (2003); Gneezy and Rustichini (2004),
Niederle and Vesterlund (2005)), an alternative explanation arises:

men are more

competitively inclined than women.2 A stylized fact in this literature is that men and
women differ in their propensities to engage in competitive activities, with men opting to
compete more often than women, even in tasks where women are more able. Such data
patterns might provide insights into why we observe a higher fraction of women than
men among, for example, grammar school teachers, but the reverse among CEOs.
An important puzzle in this literature relates to the underlying factors responsible
for the observed differences in competitive inclinations. One oft-heard hypothesis is that
men and women are innately different (Lawrence (2006)). For example, in discussions
concerning why men considerably outnumber women in the sciences, several high profile
scholars have argued that men are innately better equipped to compete (see, e.g., BaronCohen (2003), Lawrence (2006), and the citations in Barres (2006)). An empirical
regularity consistent with this notion is the fact that substantial heterogeneity exists in the

1

See Altonji and Blank (1999); Blau and Kahn (1992; 2000); Blau, Ferber, and Winkler (2002).
See also Vandegrift, Yavas, and Brown (2004); Gneezy and Rustichini (2005); and Datta, Poulsen, and
Villeval (2005).

2

1

competitiveness of individuals raised in quite similar environments--see, for example, the
discussion of the tendency to compete in bargaining (Shell, 1999).
Nevertheless, the role of nurture, or the fact that culture might be critically linked
to competitive inclinations, is also an important consideration. More than a handful of
our male readership can likely recall vividly their grammar school physical education
teacher scorning them with the proverbial “you’re playing like a girl” rant to induce
greater levels of competitive spirit. Clearly, however, the explanations might not be
competing; rather the nature/nurture interaction might be of utmost importance, either
because nurture enables the expression of nature (Ridley 2003, Turkheimer 1998, 2003),
or because nature and nurture co-evolve (Boyd and Richerson 1985, 2005).
Our goal in this study is to provide some insights into the underpinnings of the
observed differences in competitiveness across men and women using a simple
experimental task. One approach to lending insights into the source of such preference
differences is to find two distinct societies and observe choices that provide direct
insights into the competitiveness of the participants.

After months of background

research, we concluded that the Maasai tribe of Tanzania and the Khasi tribe in India
provided interesting natural variation that permitted an exploration into the
competitiveness hypothesis. As explained in greater detail below, while several other
potentially important factors vary across these societies, the Maasai represent a
patriarchal society whereas the Khasi are a matrilineal and matrilocal society.
Our experimental results reveal interesting differences in competitiveness: in the
patriarchal society women are less competitive than men, a result consistent with student
data drawn from Western cultures. Yet, this result reverses in the matrilineal society,

2

where we find that women are more competitive than men. Perhaps surprisingly, Khasi
women are even slightly more competitive than Maasai men, but this difference is not
statistically significant at conventional levels under any of our formal statistical tests. We
view these results as providing potentially useful insights into the crucial link between
culture and behavioral traits that influence economic outcomes.3 Such insights might
also have import within the policy community where targeting of policies can be
importantly misguided if the underlying mechanism generating the data is ill-understood.
The remainder of our study proceeds as follows. The next section provides an
overview of the two societies and our experimental design. We proceed to a discussion
of the experimental results in Section III. Section IV concludes.
II. Societal background and experimental design
“We are sick of playing the roles of breeding bulls and baby-sitters.”
--A Khasi man (Ahmed, 1994)
“Men treat us like donkeys”
--A Maasai woman (Hodgson, 2001)
Brief Societal Backgrounds
The Maasai and the Khasi represent, respectively, a patriarchal and a
matrilineal/matrilocal society. Originally, we attempted to find two societies in which the
roles of men and women were mirror images, but this approach found little success.
Indeed, the sociological literature is almost unanimous in the conclusion that truly
matriarchal societies no longer exist (Goldberg 1993).4

In addition, even ordinal

classification of societies on any dimension is dangerous, as culture and society are not
3

As we discuss below, this result might be due to learning or an evolutionary process whereby the selection
effects across societies generate natural differences. We argue that in either case culture has an influence.
4
Campbell (2002) summarizes as follows: “there are societies that are matrilineal and matrilocal and where
women are accorded veneration and respect—but there are no societies which violate the universality of
patriarchy defined as a ‘a system of organization…in which the overwhelming number of upper positions
in hierarchies are occupied by males’ (Goldberg, 1993, p. 14).”.

3

static fixtures handed down from pre-history.

Certain reports of extreme female

domination in the Khasi or strong male domination amongst the Maasai are somewhat
exaggerated and subject to charges of ethnocentrism.5
A. The Khasi
The Khasi of Meghalaya, India are a matrilineal society and inheritance and clan
membership always follow the female lineage through the youngest daughter. Family
life is organized around the mother’s house headed by the grandmother who lives with
her unmarried daughters, her youngest daughter (even if she is married), and her
youngest daughter’s children.

Additionally, her unmarried, divorced, or widowed

brothers and sons reside in the home. Even in cases when married men reside with their
wife’s family they spend much, if not most, of their time in the mother’s or sisters’
household (Van Ham, 2001, Nakane 1967). Women are therefore raised from infancy in
their mother’s or grandmother’s home.
Importantly, the youngest daughter never leaves and eventually becomes the head
of the household, whereas older daughters usually form separate households adjacent to
their mother’s household. Further, women never join the household of their husband’s
family and some men leave their mother’s household to join their wife’s household. In
some cases, men will practice duolocal marriage (in which they live in both their
mother’s and wife’s households).
Though Khasi women do not generally assume the roles held by men in
patriarchal societies (they do not become warriors or hunters, for example) they always
live in households in which they or their mother have authority over most household

5

About the Maasai in particular, there is a vigorous debate on the current and historical role of women (see
Hodgson 2000a, 2001 and Spencer 1965, 1994).

4

decisions. Men, and in particular husbands, on the other hand frequently hold roles that
seem to mirror those of women in patriarchal societies. The Khasi husband dwells in a
household in which he has no authority or property, is expected to work for the gain of
his wife’s family, and has no social roles deemed important. His role is summarized by
Nakane (1967, p. 125):
“When we visited the Khasi household of a youngest daughter, if a man
(obviously the husband) came first to greet us, he always said ‘please wait, my
wife (or mother-in-law) is coming.’ And it was the wife who entertained us...
while her husband remained silent in the corner of the room, or in the next room.”
The status of men in Khasi society has even lead to the formation of a men’s rights
movement (Ahmed, 1994; Van Ham, 2000; Nonbgri, 1988).
Perhaps the most important economic feature of Khasi society is that the return to
unverifiable investment in the human capital of girls is retained within the household,
whereas in other cultures only the verifiable component of investment can be retained
through bride price or dowry. In other words, Khasi families can choose to raise exactly
the daughter they would like to keep in their household, not the daughter most likely to
be preferred by other households.
B. The Maasai
Age and cattle dominate the Maasai social structure.

The most important

distinctions between men are age based, and almost all wealth is in cattle. The age
structure prevents men from marrying until they are roughly 30 years old and polygamy
is the most common form of marriage. Therefore, the average Maasai woman is married
to a much older man who typically entertains multiple wives (Spencer, 2003).
The plight of women among the Maasai is such that wives are said to be less
important to a man than his cattle. For example, daughters are not counted in response to

5

the question “how many children do you have?” and a Maasai man will refer to his wife
and children as “property.” When their husband is absent, most Maasai women are
required to seek permission from an elder male before they travel any significant
distance, seek health care, or make any other important decision. Although traditionally
few Maasai receive any formal education, women receive even less education than men.
Their restricted roles and authority combined with the inequality of age in marriage
noticeably influence the view that married women have of their roles in society. Of
Samburu women (who are part of the larger Maa family of tribes and are very similar to
the Maasai), Spencer (1965, p. 231) notes:
On the whole I found women were quite ignorant of many aspects of the total
society and usually unhelpful as informants. Outside the affairs of their own
family circle they often showed certain indifference. They were less inquisitive
than the males and less quick to grasp situations. They found it harder to
comprehend my remarks and questions. I had the impression that they had never
been encouraged to show much initiative on their own, and this was a quality
which they simply had not developed; any inborn tendencies to this had been
baulked by the strictness of their upbringing. Their demeanor was sometimes
listless and frequently sour. They often lacked the general conviviality and
warmth that typified the adult males and it was only with ameliorating
circumstances of middle-age that they tended to acquire it -- and many never did.
Below we provide more thorough descriptions of these two societies in light of the
data patterns that we observe in our experiment.
Before moving to the experimental design, however, it is worthwhile drawing
some similarities between the two societies. Khasi men enjoy certain powers in their
sisters’ households, and Maasai women can enjoy prestige and power in their roles as
widows (if they have sons).6 Despite the fact that the Khasi elevate the importance of
women, and the historical evidence that they invest significantly in the human capital of

6

See Hodgson (2000a, 2001) for a more nuanced discussion of the Maasai and Samburu and Lesorogol
(2003) for more evidence of the attitudes of the Samburu in an experimental context.

6

their daughters,7 many important decisions in Khasi society remain the domain of men.
Women do not participate in politics, civil defense, or justice and priesthood is a male
profession (Nongbri, 2003). Additionally, there is evidence that women who attempt to
speak about such domains are chastised.8
Experimental Design
To provide insights into whether there are gender differences in competitive
choices across these two societies, we design an experiment that is identical in the two
environments (in the parlance of Harrison and List, 2004, our experiment would be
deemed an artefactual field experiment). In each session we recruited the participants in
advance and asked each potential subject to arrive at a central place in the village (either
the school or the clinic) at a given time. This attenuated selection problems since
everyone was interested in participating in the experiment after they were made aware of
the pecuniary incentives involved. The experiment with the Maasai was conducted in
two villages in the Arumeru district in the Arusha region of Tanzania. The experiment
with the Khasi was conducted in the Meghalaya region of India. Upon arrival at each
experimental site, participants were directed into one of two groups randomly. These
groups were separated for the entire experiment.
Similar procedures were used across the societies to ensure comparability. For
example, in a representative session amongst the Maasai, the actual experiment was
conducted around a small house with four sides, called side 1, 2, 3, and 4. The structure
was such that each side of the house was private, and could not be observed from any of
7

A report from the Agro-economic research centre for North East India (1969) notes the very high levels
of school attendance among the Khasi, and particularly the fact that almost all girls were in school at a time
when few girls from other tribes ever attended school.
8
“A woman who dares to voice her opinion on public affairs is regarded as a ‘hen that crows’—a freak of
nature.” (Nongbri, 2003, pp. 187)

7

the other sides. Subjects in each group were seated on two different sides of the small
house: group 1 was seated on side 1 and group 2 was seated on side 2. One by one we
privately called participants—one from each group—to the experimental area. Members
of group 1 were called to side 3 and members of group 2 were called to side 4.
Participants did not know the identities of participants in the other group. On each of
those sides was an experimenter awaiting the participants. In a second Maasai session,
we were able to use four empty classrooms, similarly isolated from each other. The setup
was otherwise identical. The Khasi sessions were run similarly in a classroom setting.
When a participant moved to the area where the experiment was being conducted,
he/she met an experimenter who explained the task. Instructions used in the Khasi
sessions are reproduced in Appendix A; the Maasai instructions are identical (both sets of
original instructions are available at www.arec.umd.edu\kleonard). The instructions were
translated from English to the local language (either Maasai or Khasi) and were checked
by having a different person translate them back into English. The instructions were read
aloud to the individual participant by the experimenter. In each session we had one male
and one female experimenter to control for possible gender effects of the experimenter,
and we balanced the gender of the participants to have an equal ratio of male and female
participants per experimenter.
The experimental task was to toss a tennis ball into a bucket that was placed 3
meters away. They were informed that they had 10 chances. A successful shot meant
that the tennis ball entered the bucket and stayed there. The task was chosen because it
was simple to explain and implement, and no gender differences in ability were expected
(as was found in a pilot experiment and reinforced in the results discussed below).

8

Further, we are aware of no other popular task in these societies that is similar to the ball
games that we implemented. Indeed, the Khasi are known archers and the Maasai are
known lancers, but since our task can only be completed with an under-hand toss, the
traditional skills do not advantage men over women. In this spirit, our data represent
signals of initial competitive inclinations.
Participants, which numbered 155 in total, were told that they were matched with
a participant from the other group who was performing the same task at the same time in
another area. For example, in the Maasai representative session discussed above, a group
1 member on side 3 was anonymously paired with a group 2 member on side 4, and both
subjects were informed that their identities would remain anonymous. The only decision
participants were asked to make concerned the manner in which they would be paid for
their performance. They made this choice before performing the task, but only after they
fully understood the instructions and the payment schemes. The two options participants
were asked to choose between were:

a) X per successful shot, regardless of the

performance of the participant from the other group with whom they were randomly
matched, or b) 3X per successful shot if they outperformed the other participant. They
were told that in case they chose the second option and scored the same as the other
participant they would receive X per successful shot. We set X to equalize payments in
terms of the prevailing exchange rates, and to approximate the average one day wage rate
for laborers.9
After choosing the incentive scheme, participants completed the task and were
told how the other participant performed. Then, they were asked to proceed to another
location where they provided personal information in an exit survey (see Appendix B for
9

X was 500 Tanzanian Shillings in Tanzania and 20 Rupees in India.

9

the experimental survey) and were paid their earnings in cash. As promised, participants
were never given the opportunity to learn with whom they were paired.
III. Results
Summary data from the post-experimental survey are presented in Table 1.10 We
present all information drawn from the survey, which includes queries on gender, age,
years of education, income, marital status, wage earning activities, and relation to head of
household. Our average subject was in the 30-40 age range, but the Maasai sample had
slightly older subjects. Average educational attainment is roughly similar across the two
groups—about four years of education—but is slightly higher for women (men) among
the Khasi (Maasai). Income levels show similar patterns: Khasi women earn more than
Khasi men, and the qualitative nature of this result is reversed among the Maasai.
Considering purchasing power, the Khasi earn more than the Maasai, though if we delete
one extreme Khasi outlier the numbers are similar. Activities across the societies, marital
status, and relation to head of household differences are consonant with past
anthropological evidence.

For example, as suggested above, the Khasi tribe is a

monogamous group whereas polygamy is practiced amongst the Maasai. In addition,
Khasi women hold more prominent places in their households than Maasai women.
The differences in observable characteristics across gender, both intra- and intersociety, highlights that it is important to control for as many of these factors as possible
when examining the data. For example, variables such as income might importantly
influence play and relationship to head of household might provide an indication of
control over income. Even after this is done, however, there might remain a critical

10

The Maasai sample does not sum to 75 (34 women and 40 men). This is because one participant failed to
complete the survey after the task. This person chose not to compete and had one success.

10

vector of other variables (whether gambling is condoned, wealth, etc) that might vary
between the societies other than the role of women. Clearly, this issue is central to
inference made from data gathered across any distinct groups, and highlights that care
should be taken when making inference from the data patterns observed herein.
Ultimately, what is necessary to shed light on these issues is to build on our work by
studying other matrilineal societies.
The top panel in Table 2 provides a summary of competitive choices, balls
successfully tossed in the bucket, and earnings across gender and societies. Figure 1
complements these summary data with an ocular depiction of the observed choices. In
terms of task proficiency, subjects made roughly 25 percent of their attempts, and the
rates of success are similar across societies and genders within each society. More
importantly for our purposes, roughly half of the Khasi subjects opted to compete
whereas only 39 percent of the Maasai chose to compete. When broken down by gender,
the underlying force behind the competitiveness differences across the two societies
becomes clear.
In the Maasai data, the gender result that we oftentimes observe in the literature is
evident: whereas 50 percent of men choose to compete, only 26 percent of women select
to compete. Alternatively, as Figure 1 highlights, Khasi women choose to compete more
often than Khasi men—whereas 54 percent of Khasi women choose to compete, only 39
percent of Khasi men select the competitive incentive scheme. Perhaps even more
surprisingly, the Khasi women select the competitive environment more often than the
Maasai men (54% versus 50%).

11

Although the raw data summary provides some evidence that behavior varies
across the two societies, there has been no attempt to control for observables—such as
age, education, and income—that might influence behavior. To rectify this situation, we
use the individual observations to estimate a regression model in which we regressed the
individual choice to compete on a dummy variable for society, a dummy variable for
gender, their interaction, the observables collected from our survey detailed in Table 1,
and the gender of the experimenter. Due to the dichotomous nature of the regressand, we
present estimates from a probit model.
Empirical results from several specifications are contained in Table 3.

The

leftmost regression models in Table 3 pool the Khasi and Maasai data, and provide a
sense of the data patterns across the two societies. The rightmost columns split the data
by society, permitting the controls to have a heterogeneous effect in the two societies.
Specification (1) can be considered the parsimonious specification, including only
variables that provide the unconditional effect of gender on competition and a control for
the gender of the experimenter (male exp. = 1 for male experimenter, 0 for female
experimenter). Specification (2) adds the individual level variables to specification (1)—
age, education, and income—that might be most expected to influence competitive
tendencies. Specification (3) augments specification (2) by including the full set of
controls—work activities, marital status, and relationship to head of household.11

11

Given that many of the cells are not well populated for these other controls (see Table 2), we i) made the
activity variable binary: farmer/non-farmer, ii) split the marital status variable to also be binary:
single/married, where single includes divorced and widowed, and iii) split the relation to head of household
variable as binary: either head of household or spouse. In the pooled regression models these distinctions
never matter; these changes are necessary to yield parameter estimates for the models with Khasi or Maasai
data only (rightmost columns). We also experimented with higher order age terms but they were never
significant.

12

Regardless of which specification is preferred, empirical results suggest that
females (males) compete more often than males (females) in the Khasi (Maasai) society.
These data patterns are observed in the pooled data models in the leftmost columns,
where both the female variable and the Khasi*female interaction are significant at
conventional levels. These results suggest, for example, that amongst the Maasai, women
are roughly 25-32 percent less likely to compete than men. For the Khasi, women are
roughly 15 percent more likely to compete than Khasi men. In the pooled data, all of the
other control variables, including the gender of the experimenter, are not significant at
conventional levels.
Models that use only Khasi data, presented in the middle columns of Table 3,
reveal that the observed gender differences are marginally significant. In specification
(1), the differences are not significant at conventional levels, suggesting that
unconditionally there is not strong evidence that Khasi females compete more than Khasi
males. Yet, in the two models that include controls to condition on observables, the
female coefficient of 0.24 is significant at the p < .07 level. These estimates suggest that
upon properly controlling for observable differences across subjects, Khasi females are
24 percent more likely to compete than Khasi men. In the robustness tests discussed
below, we will find that in most of the empirical specifications this result strengthens.
In the rightmost columns, the specifications using the Maasai data show effects of
gender that are opposite to the Khasi data—in 2 of 3 models the female coefficient is
negative and significant at the p < .05 level, with the full-blown model causing the
estimate to be measured imprecisely. Amongst the Maasai, men are found to be 24-29

13

percent more likely to compete than women. In the robustness tests discussed below, the
Maasai results become less statistically significant in certain models.
Concerning impacts of the other regressors in the society specific models, in the
Khasi data we observe some evidence of an experimenter effect—in this case, both male
and female subjects are about 18 percent more likely to compete when the experimenter
was a male, an effect that is only marginally significant. In addition, those with higher
incomes opted to compete slightly more often, though again the effect is only marginally
significant. Interestingly, the only control variable that approaches statistical significance
in the Maasai data is the gender of the experimenter. In this case, subjects tend to
compete less when the experimenter is a male, and this effect approaches statistical
significance in specification 3.12
Robustness Tests
A. Group composition
One aspect of the experimental design that we chose to remain neutral was the
identity of the subject’s potential competitor. This choice was in the spirit of the recent
literature that begins with an exploration of the underlying subject preferences and leaves
the opponent’s gender ambiguous (see, e.g., Gneezy et al., 2003). While in and of itself
this choice does not present an inferential problem for our purposes, what is potentially
troubling is the fact that our samples are unbalanced across societies: 52 of 80 Khasi
subjects are female whereas only 34 of 74 Maasai subjects are female. If subjects
deduced the gender distribution of potential competitors, then our preferred interpretation
might be compromised. For example, if women are more likely to compete against other

12

We interacted gender of the experimenter with subject gender and this variable was never significant in
either society.

14

women regardless of whether they are from a matrilineal society, then we might be
simply observing a consequence of the subject pool rather than a fundamental preference
for competition.

Considering the literature on gender and self identity (Cross and

Medson (1977)), this is an important consideration.
As aforementioned, in each society we executed the treatments in sessions,
whereby the subjects in each session were split into one of two groups randomly. These
two groups were separated for the entire experiment. Similar procedures were used
across the societies to ensure that subjects were unaware of the identity of potential
competitors. Importantly for our purposes, in each society subjects were lined up to
participate and were called one by one to participate.

Whether, and how, subjects

deduced the gender composition of potential competitors is unknown, but it is plausible
that subjects made inference on the gender distribution in the experiment by what they
observed in their own surroundings.
Since we do not know exactly what subjects observed within their own group, we
use a broad array of sensitivity checks to model empirically the effect of group
composition. This is possible because we have data on the exact order in which subjects
completed the experiment within their session.

We proceed by exploring “nearest

neighbor” variables and systematically enlarge the set as active control variables in the
regression model estimated above (specification 3).
A first empirical augmentation simply includes a variable that depicts the gender
of the subject standing immediately in front of the person (where male =1). The next
empirical specification uses the arithmetic average of the gender identity of the directly

15

adjacent subjects.13 A third model uses the arithmetic average of the gender identity of
the four nearest subjects. A fourth model expands this variable to be the average of the
gender identity of the eight nearest subjects.

A fifth and final model is entirely

exhaustive—the arithmetic average of the gender identity of all others in the group.
Table 4 contains summary empirical results from estimation of these models. The
columns in Table 4 represent the various specifications of the group composition
variable. The three panels of Table 4 present the results for the pooled data, the Khasi
data, and the Maasai data, in a manner consonant with Table 3. Although all of the
controls of specification 3 are included, we present only the results of interest.
Most importantly, in the pooled data all of the previously discussed empirical
results hold across every model, suggesting that we are finding evidence of competitive
preference differences across gender, and not merely observing a consequence of the
subject pool. When we split the data by society, the results become stronger in certain
specifications. For example, in column 1 of the middle panel of Table 4, we find that in
the Khasi data women are 36 percent more likely to compete than men, a coefficient that
is significant at the p < .01 level. Although in this same empirical specification, the
Maasai gender result is not close to being significant at conventional levels, it gains
marginal significance as the group composition variable becomes more encompassing.
Concerning the effects of the group composition variable, which are only
marginally significant, we find a negative correlation in the pooled data. Yet, in the
Khasi data we observe a more consistent negative effect that gains statistical significance
in some of the specifications, particularly in the models that allow a broader scope of peer
13

This variable equals one for those subjects who are standing in line between two men, 0.5 for those
subjects standing in line between one man and one woman, and 0 for those subjects who are standing in
line between two women. Subjects at the front and end of each line have only one adjacent neighbor.

16

effects. The inference from these models is that as the proportion of males increases in
your group, the probability of choosing the competitive option decreases. The effect is
also found to be negative in most of the specifications using the Maasai sample, but the tratios on these coefficients never reach unity. Overall, if subjects were making inference
on potential competitors based on the mix they observed, then the effects reported in
Table 4 are consonant with the notion that women are more likely to compete against
other women, especially in matrilineal societies.
B. An exploration into who competes
Recall that our design was chosen to explore initial competitive inclinations,
rather than observe choices in games that were commonplace. In doing so, we aim to
capture insights into the primitive competitive preferences among agents rather than the
preferences bundled with stereotypes on task, societal expectations, and the like. In this
manner, it is interesting to examine the success rates among those who chose to compete
versus those who chose not to compete. Since the experimental game is like no other
game or task the agents in either society typically participate, we do not have strong
priors on whether those who are more efficient at task will choose to compete.
This is buttressed by the results in the literature that find even in those cases
where the subjects have just executed the task and received performance feedback, those
who perform well are not significantly more likely to compete, or to perform better if
they do choose to compete (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007; see also Datta et al. 2005).
The expected positive relationship between task proficiency and selection into the
tournament is further muddled if one considers results in Gneezy et al. (2003), which
suggest the competitive environment itself might induce differences in task proficiency.

17

Together, the literature teaches us that any effort to deduce selection is quite difficult,
even in experienced tasks. Our experimental game therefore represents a particularly
demanding task in which to find a positive correlation between the competitive choice
and success rates.
The raw statistics in the middle and bottom portions of Table 2 paint a picture
consonant with the literature—we find no evidence of any significant correlation in task
proficiency and the decision to compete. What is interesting in the data is that Khasi
women and Maasai men who chose to compete i) earned the highest amount of money in
their respective societies and ii) were most likely to win the competition. For instance,
the Khasi women won 13 times and lost 10, and their win rate represents the highest of
any of the four Khasi groups. Compared to Maasai women, Khasi women are more
likely to select correctly, perhaps because Khasi women have a more accurate sense of
their relative abilities.14 Similar data patterns are observed among Maasai men, where
those who chose to compete won 11 times and lost 7, a win rate that exceeded all the
other observed win rates. Furthermore, again we find that Maasai men seem to have a
better understanding of relative ability than Khasi men. Clearly, however, these data
patterns should be considered as only suggestive, as more work is necessary to further
our understanding of the sources of such differences.
C. Risk Aversion
One aspect of the results in Table 2 and the broader results reported in this study
that should be considered more carefully is whether risk aversion is playing an important
role in individual choices. We should stress that the manner in which we use the term
“competitiveness” in this study is meant to be a catch-all phrase that might be due to
14

We thank an anonymous referee for urging us to proceed in this direction.

18

deeper underlying preferences, such as risk aversion. Nevertheless, risk aversion might
explain the data patterns observed in Table 2 if those more able also happen to be the
most risk averse. In addition, the fact that a large portion of subjects did not choose to
compete even though with our payoff function subjects should enter the competition if
they believed that they would win with at least 33 percent probability, hints at some level
of risk aversion. This possibility is particularly possible in our experiments since they
might well be considered to be over large stakes (several days’ wages).
To lend insights into these issues, we conducted parallel risk aversion experiments
to explore whether the competitive differences might be driven by heterogeneous risk
postures across gender groups. To operationalize a simple procedure that measures the
propensity to take risks, we made use of a standard risk game (Gneezy and Potters, 1997
and Haigh and List, 2006) and followed the procedures in these studies as closely as
possible.15 Appendix C contains the experimental instructions.
Briefly, the risk experiment has subjects play a one-shot game in which they are
endowed with 100 units (40 rupees for the Khasi and 1000 Shillings for the Maasai). The
subject must decide what portion of this endowment [0, 100] she desired to bet in a
lottery that returned three times the bet with one-half probability and nothing with onehalf probability. As illustrated in the experimental instructions contained in Appendix C,
subjects were made aware of the probabilities, payoffs, and the fact that the lottery would
be played directly after choices were made. Subjects were therefore aware of the fact that
they could earn anywhere between 0 and 300 units from this task. Lastly, subjects were
informed that monies earned would be paid in private at the end of the experiment.

15

We also conducted a standard investment game (see, e.g., Fehr and List, 2004); we find no differences in
propensities to take invest across gender in either society. These results are available upon request.

19

A few noteworthy items should be mentioned before proceeding to the results
discussion. First, we chose the stakes to overlap with the stakes over which the ball
tossing game would be played.16 Second, experimental subjects for the risk aversion task
are again drawn randomly from the two societal populations, but the subject pool has no
overlap with the subject pool that played the ball tossing game. This was done to avoid
contamination effects while still providing a glimpse of gender differences in risk
preferences. Third, beyond using these data to dig deeper into the underlying mechanism
at work in this environment, these data might be interesting in their own right considering
the recent findings in Henrich and McElreath (2002). They report that there are no
systematic differences in the risk preferences of men and women in two traditional
societies, including the Sangu, who live just south of the Maasai in Tanzania.
Table 5 presents the summary choices, split by gender across the two societies. In
short, we report results consonant with Henrich and McElreath (2002): although the
Khasi and Maasai appear to have different risk preferences, there are no gender
differences observed in either society.17 Both male and female Khasi risk approximately
85% of their total endowment, whereas among the Maasai the average bet represents
approximately 60% of the total endowment. A two-sample t-test rejects the hypothesis
that the gambled amount for Khasi (Maasai) women is different from the gambled
amount for Khasi (Maasai) men at the p = 0.74 (p = 0.92) level.
Discussion
16

In each group, the initial amount is equivalent to the payment for two successes if the participant chose
piece rate and the maximum payoff is equivalent to the payment for two successes if the participant chose
competition and won.
17
We should highlight that in a document titled “Internet Enhancements for ‘Are peasants risk-averse
decision-makers,’” Henrich expands on the results from Henrich and McElreath (2002) by showing that
there are some differences between men and women in a pastoral Sangu village, but not between men and
women in an agricultural Sangu village. Among the predominantly pastoral Maasai, we find no such
difference.

20

Our data show that Khasi women are more likely to choose to compete than Khasi
men. Furthermore, the Khasi women compete more often than Maasai women or any
group of women in the various settings in which preferences for this type of behavior
have been elicited. In the very least, these findings represent existence results: it is not
universally true that the average female in every society avoids competition more often
than the average male in that society because we have discovered at least one setting in
which this is not true. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of
such reversal. In this section, we explore three possible explanations for this result:
nature, nurture, and the co-evolution of nature and nurture.
In an extreme sense, one can consider the nature hypothesis to be one whereby
women are inherently less competitive than men due to innate differences.18
Alternatively, the nurture hypothesis is that competitiveness differences are not due to
biological or evolutionary reasons, but rather to culture.19 Gender socialization begins at
the moment we are born, with the simple question “is it a boy or a girl?” (Gleitman,

18

This, of course, does not suggest that all women are less competitive than men, but rather there exists a
difference in the distribution of types. A large body of literature in evolutionary biology and socio-biology
documents differences in competitiveness between males and females, across a myriad of species. Such
differences in competitiveness are said to arise because of differences in the cost of reproduction and the
level of investment in offspring. Because the costs associated with raising offspring is higher for females
than it is for males, females will increase the fitness of their genes by insuring the survival of fewer
children. Males, on the other hand, increase their fitness by competing for access to the most fertile, or fit
females. Thus, for women, reproductive success is partially independent of the success of other females,
whereas for men, reproductive success comes at the cost of the success of other males. We direct the
interested reader to Knight (2002) or Tregenza and Wedell (2002) for recent overviews. The debate is a
classic in the field (see Darwin (1871), Bateman (1948) and Trivers (1972)).
19
An entertaining twist highlighting the power of this argument can be found in the 1988 movie Twins,
which starred Arnold Schwarzenegger, a physically perfect and innocent man, and his twin, Danny DeVito,
a short, overweight small-time crook. Such differences are suggested to have occurred because
Schwarzenegger was raised in a pristine environment whereas DeVito spent his childhood on the streets.

21

Friedlund, and Reisberg, 2000, p. 499). Our societal gender roles are taught to us by, or
learned through the imitation of, family, peers, and the media.20
The fact that Khasi women have different preferences than other women does not
prove that their behavior is not genetically determined. It is possible that some feature of
their environment caused the Khasi to follow a different evolutionary path, and therefore
to have different psychological profiles from other women. Were this true, matriliny and
matrilocal marriage may be outcomes, not causes of female competitiveness. However,
the evolution of behavioral characteristics is thought to take place on a scale that would
rule out such a process. Evolutionary psychologists maintain that the human mind was
formed by one million years of common evolution that ended only 12,000 years ago, and
it is therefore impossible that systematic psychological differences across populations of
humans can be caused by evolution (Daly and Wilson, 2003, Campbell, 2002).
At the opposite end of the scientific spectrum, there is the view of human
behavior as a “tabula rasa” (the mind as a blank slate). In such a view, culture (or the
environment) is the only source of preferences.

This view of human behavior has

suffered a setback over the past few decades as evidence of the genetic origins of
abnormal and normal behavior accumulates (Ilies, Avery and Bouchard, 2006). For
example, many personality traits have been shown to be highly hereditary in twin studies
(Turkheimer, 2004, Loehlin, 1993). Notwithstanding this evidence that many behavioral
20

Socialization and gender socialization begins at early childhood (Martin, Wood and Little, 1990) and is
taught by family and reinforced by culture (Burn, 1996; Basow, 1980; Crespi, 2003), teachers (Eisenberg
and Mussen 1989) and peers (Harris, 1998). Nothing in this process requires a view of culture as something
forced on children. Indeed, the human species is particularly adept at social learning and many see
enculturation as a process of voluntary imitation of successful individuals (Henrich and Gil-White, 2001).
The socialization base of gender differences is not limited to young ages. For example, Riley et al. (2004)
demonstrate the potential for backlash against assertive female negotiators in a hiring experiment. In their
experiment, participants judged female candidates who negotiated for benefits to be less employable than
females who did not negotiate, or than males in either condition. This, and related research (Babcock and
Laschever, 2003), show that women are treated differently than men when initiating negotiation.

22

traits are genetically determined, it is possible that preferences for competition are not
and therefore that features of the culture or environment determine the degree to which
females avoid or seek competition.
Recent literature reminds us that subtle differences in culture can lead to large
differences in behavior. Madsen (1967) and Shapira and Madsen (1969) find differences
in attitudes about cooperation versus competition between rural and urban children from
similar cultures in Mexico and urban and kibbutz children in Israel. Eisenberg and
Mussen (1989) suggest that “in poor agricultural communities, children must cooperate in
working with other members of their families to raise enough food for the family’s
survival.” There is an extensive literature on the methods by which children learn
behavior (Whitings, 1963; Eisenberg and Mussen, 1989 and Harris, 1998). Thus, any
number of subtle influences on children or adults can cause differences in attitudes to
competition.
Yet, the underlying cultural differences offer room for speculation. Khasi girls
are raised in the same household where they spend their whole lives (matrilocal), and as
heads of households, they enjoy significant authority over important decisions
(matriliny). Thus, the fact that women can be raised exclusively for the benefit of their
mothers’ and grandmothers’ households may mean that innate competitiveness does not
need to be discouraged, or competitiveness is encouraged. In addition, if pastoral groups
such as the Maasai have different attitudes towards competition than agricultural groups

23

such as the Khasi, this could help to explain the differences between Maasai men and
Khasi men.21
Boyd and Richerson (2005) argue that social learning is a more natural form of
cultural transmission than explicit training. Individuals may choose to copy successful
individuals as much if not more than common individuals, and certainly do not need to be
told that they should imitate. Whereas Maasai men are explicitly indoctrinated during the
transition to manhood, Khasi women are not indoctrinated, but may choose to imitate the
behavior of older women in their households or successful women in their social
circles—prestige-based learning.

Henrich and Gil-White (2001) suggest that freely

conferred deference (prestige) is an adaptation that allows potential imitators proximity to
individuals who represent models of successful behavior. This model of social learning
highlights the facts that individuals may choose who to imitate, that access and proximity
improve the fidelity of social learning, and that those who are imitated gains status from
being imitated.
The Khasi institutions of matrilocal residence and matrilineal inheritance may
perform a similar role in cultural transmission. The fact that women live in (or next to)
their maternal grandmother’s residence for their whole lives allows access and proximity
(though only to mothers, aunts, great-aunts and grandmothers).

In addition, Khasi

women are in a position to pass on accumulated wealth, and if competitiveness is
differentially rewarded, women who learn competitiveness from their mothers will
benefit both from their own efforts and from those of their mothers. In addition, female
heads of households, even if they do not gain status by being imitated by their daughters,
21

Henrich and McElreath (2002) suggest that risk preferences could vary between agricultural and pastoral
groups, opening the possibility that competitive preferences may also differ.

24

have an incentive to encourage success in their daughters. Unlike families in other
societies, the household can gain directly from the long-term success of their daughters.
Alternatively, a potential problem with the view that competitiveness can be
socially learned is that women have to actually learn to prefer competition (not just to
follow career paths that are competitive) because the experimental setting does not allow
women to imitate other women. Faced with a new task, Khasi men and women make a
choice for themselves, based on their own preferences. Would women who are imitating
competitive women choose to be competitive in an experimental setting? Henrich and
McElreath (2002) suggest that men and women in Sangu and Mapucha cultures are riskloving, but that imitation of successful men and women causes them to make choices in
their everyday lives that reflect risk-aversion. According to this view, the experimental
setting can reveal underlying preferences that are different from real world behavior. If
this view of the experimental setting is correct, Khasi women are not imitating the
successful strategies of women when they choose competition, they are displaying their
true preferences for competition.
Our data—and the possibility that the experimental task reveals true, not learned
preferences—are also consistent with a series of models that are intermediate between
those of nature and nurture. Such models in which both biology and society play a role in
forming preferences, and allow for the impact of current societal features to be less
important than the impact of past societal features. Those Khasi institutions that favor
the transmission of a behavior through social learning also favor the transmission of
genetically inherited characteristics, such as innate competitiveness. Many scholars
suggest that the view of the human mind as un-differentiated across cultures fails to take

25

into account the possibility that culture and genetics can interact. The study of geneculture co-evolution in mathematical modeling suggests that when a particular genetic
characteristic favors the transmission of a particular cultural feature, and the cultural
feature also increases the fecundity of the genetic characteristic, evolution can occur at a
much faster pace (Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981; Boyd and Richerson 1985, 2005;
Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza 1976; Laland and Brown, 2002; Mesoudi and Laland 2007).
The possibility of gene-culture co-evolution leads us to focus primarily on the
institutions of matrilocal residence and matrilineal inheritance. First, as we have noted
above, matrilocal residence creates a particular relationship between mothers,
grandmothers, and daughters that benefits all three women. Second, matrilineal
inheritance can reinforce any genetic tendency to competition by passing on both wealth
and genetic disposition to daughters. In an environment of high childhood mortality,
wealth can greatly increase the probability of survival.22 In addition, there is evidence
that genetic inheritance is different in cultures that practice matrilocal marriage. Oota et
al. (2001) find significant variation in Y-chromosome features but less variation in
maternal DNA for matrilocal tribes in Thailand, and the opposite for patrilocal groups in
the same location. In other words, the cultural choice to displace men or women from
their maternal homes, by itself, alters the process of genetic inheritance.
However, the very process that would favor genes linked to competitiveness (if
they exist), would also favor competitiveness learned from the imitation of successful
women. A model in which competitiveness improves the “evolutionary fitness” of the

22

Indian Census data from 1891-1911 suggests that only 50% of girls survived to the age of 15 (Mari Bhat,
1989). In addition, Pritchett and Summers (1996) estimate the short-term elasticity of child mortality with
respect to income at about -0.2.

26

institutions of matriliny and matrilocal marriage, and the institutions of matriliny and
matrilocal marriage increase the “evolutionary fitness” of competitiveness, does not
require biological evolution of DNA.

Girls who imitate the behavior of successful

competitive women are more likely to survive childhood and will inherit greater wealth if
those women are also their mothers or grandmothers. In turn, their wealth and success
make them more preferable as a model for younger girls (likely their daughters and
nieces) and more likely to have surviving children.
This process is subtly different from that outlined under the nurture hypothesis. If
competitiveness has evolved (biologically or socially) over time, it is not necessary that
matriliny and matrilocal marriage cause families to teach their daughters to be
competitive. Rather, the prevalence of competitiveness in the society could increase over
time due to the superior fitness of this personality trait within this institutional
environment, whether it is learned through imitation or inherited genetically. In addition,
this view suggests that current cultural features might be less important than past cultural
features in explaining current preferences; evolution of socially learned behavior is not
instantaneous.
V. Concluding Remarks
The link between gender and competition has been shown in several recent
experimental studies. The importance of these results should not be understated: in both
a positive and normative sense these insights have the potential to explain important
puzzles in economics and in social science more generally. In this study we use a real
experimental task to explore whether there are gender differences in selecting into
competitive environments across two distinct societies: the Maasai in Tanzania and the

27

Khasi in India. The societies are unique in that the Maasai represent an example of a
patriarchal society whereas the Khasi are matrilineal.
We observe some interesting data patterns. For example, Maasai men compete at
roughly twice the rate as Maasai women, evidence that is consistent with data from
Western societies that use different tasks and smaller relative stake levels. Yet, this data
pattern is reversed amongst the Khasi, where women choose the competitive environment
more often than Khasi men. We interpret these results as potentially providing insights
into the underlying sources of the observed gender differences. We should, however,
caution the reader that even though we find suggestive results, care should be taken when
making inference from the data patterns observed herein because several important
factors vary across the two societies. More research is certainly warranted.
Viewed through the lens of extant models, our results might have import within
the policy community. For example, policymakers often are searching for efficient
means to reduce the gender gap. If the difference in reaction to competition is based
primarily on nature, then some might advocate, for example, reducing the
competitiveness of the education system and labor markets in order to provide women
with more chances to succeed. If the difference is based on nurture, or an interaction
between nature and nurture, on the other hand, the public policy might be targeting the
socialization and education at early ages as well as later in life to eliminate this
asymmetric treatment of men and women with respect to competitiveness. Our study
suggests that there might be some value in this second avenue. We trust that future
research will refine this insight and more thoroughly explore the sources of gender
preference differences.

28

References
Ahmed, S. Z. (1994): “What do Men Want?,” The New York Times, Feb 15th, A21.
Allport, G. (1954) The Nature of Prejudice. New York: Doubleday Anchor Books.
Altonji, J.G. and R. Blank (1999) “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card, (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3c Elsevier
Science B.V., 3144-3259.
Babcock, L. and S. Laschever (2003) Women Don’t Ask. Princeton University Press: New
Jersey.
Baron-Cohen S. (2003) The Essential Difference. Men, Women, and the Extreme Male
Brain. London: Allan Lane, 256 p.
Barres Ben A. (2006) “Does Gender Matter?” Nature, 442, 13: 133-136.
Basow, S. A. (1980) Sex-Role Stereotypes: Traditions and Alternatives. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Bateman, A.J. (1948) “Intra-sexual Selection in Drosophila,” Heredity 2, pp. 349-368.
Blau, F.D. and L.M. Kahn (2000) “Gender Differences in Pay,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14, 75-99.
Blau, F.D., M. Ferber and A. Winkler (2002) The Economics of Women, Men and Work,
4th edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Blau, F.D. and L.M. Kahn (1992) “The Gender Earnings Gap: Learning from
International Comparisons,” American Economic Review 82, 533-538.
Boyd, R. and Richerson, P. J. (1985), Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago:
Chicago University Press.
Boyd, R. and Richerson, P.J. (2005), The Origin and Evolution of Cultures. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. Burn, S. M. (1996) The Social Psychology of Gender. New
York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Campbell, Anne, A., Mind of Her Own: The Evolutionary Psychology of Women,
(Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Cavalli-Sforza L.L. and Feldman, M.W. (1981) Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A
quantitative approach. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Crespi, I. (2003) “Gender socialization within the family: A study on adolescents and
their
parents
in
Great
Britain,”
http://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/bhps/
2003/docs/pdf/papers/crespi.pdf
Crocker, J. and B. Major (1989) “Social stigma and self-esteem: The self-protective
properties of stigma,” Psychological review, 96, 608 – 630.
Cross, S. E and Medson, L. (1977) Models of self: Self-construals and gender,”
Psychological Bulletin, 122, 1, 5-37.
Daly and Wilson (1983) Sex, Evolution and Behavior. Belmont CA: Wadworth.
Darwin, C. (1871) The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. John Murray,
London.
Datta Gupta, N., A. Poulsen and M.C. Villeval (2005) “Male and female competitive
behavior - experimental evidence.” http://ideas.repec.org/p/iza/izadps/dp1833.html.
Eisenberg, Nancy and Paul H. Mussen The Roots of Prosocial Behavior in Children,
1989, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

29

Fehr, Ernst and List, John A., "The Hidden Costs and Returns of Incentives—Trust and
Trustworthiness among CEOS, " Journal of the European Economic Association,
September 2004, 2(5), pp. 743-71.
Feldman M.W. and Cavalli-Sforza L.L. (1976) Cultural and biological evolutionary
process, selection for a trait under complex transmission. Theoretical Population
Biology 9: 238-59.
Freeman, S., and J. Herron (2004): Evolutionary Analysis. Pearson Prentice Hall, New
Jersey, 3 edition.
Gleitman, H., A.J. Fridlund and D. Reisberg (2000) Basic Psychology. New York, NY:
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Gneezy, U., M. Niederle and A. Rustichini (2003) “Performance in competitive
environments: Gender differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 10491074.
Gneezy, Uri, and Jan Potters, 1997, An Experiment on Risk Taking and Evaluation
Periods. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 631-645.
Gneezy, U. and A. Rustichini (2004) “Gender and competition at a young age,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May, 377-381.
Gneezy, U. and A. Rustichini (2005) “Executives versus teachers: Gender, competition
and selection.”
Goldberg S. (1993), Why men rule, a theory of male dominance, Peru, Illinois: Open
Court.
Haigh, Michael and John A. List (2005) "Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss
Aversion? An Experimental Analysis," Journal of Finance, 60(1), 523-535.
Harris, J. R. (1998) The Nurture Assumption: why Children Turn out the way they do,
Free Press.
Harrison, Glenn and John A. List. (2004). "Field Experiments," Journal of Economic
Literature, XLII (December): pp. 1013-1059.
Henrich, J. and F.J. Gil-White (2001) “The evolution of prestige: Freely conference
deference as a mechanism for enhancing the benefits of cultural transmission”
Evolution and Human Behavior, 22:165-196.
Henrich, J., and R. McElreath, (2002) “Are Peasants Risk-Averse Decision Makers,”
Current Anthropology, vol. 42 (1) pp. 172-181.
Hua, C. (2001): A Society Without Fathers or Husbands: The Na of China. Zone Books,
New York, Translated by Asti Hustvedt.
Hodgson, D. L. (2000a): “Gender, Culture and the Myth of the Patriarchal Pastoralist,” in
Hodgson (2000c).
Hodgson, D. L. (2000b): “Pastoralism, Patriarchy and History among the Maasai in
Tanganyika,” in Hodgson (2000c).
Hodgson, D. L. (2000c): Rethinking Pastoralism in Africa. James Currey, London.
Knight, J. (2002) “Sexual stereotypes,” Nature 415, pp. 254-256.
Laland, K.N. and G. Brown, (2002) Sense and Nonsense: Evolutionary Perspectives on
Human Behavior, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lawrence Peter A. (2006) “Men, Women, and the Ghosts in Science,” PLOS Biology,
January, 4,1: 13-15.
Lesorogol, C.K. (2003) Transforming Institutions among Pastoralists: Inequality and
Land Privatization, American Anthropologist 105; 531-541

30

Loehlin, J. (1993): ‘‘Nature, Nurture and Conservatism in the Australian Twin Study,’’
Behavior Genetics, 23, 287--290.
Mari Bhat PN. Mortality and Fertility in India, 1881 - 1961: A Reassessment. In: Dyson
T, editors. India's historical demography : studies in famine, disease and society.
London: Curzon, 1989; 1989; p. 73-118.
Martin, C. L., Wood, C. H. and Little, J. K. (1990) “The development of gender
stereotype components,” Child Development, 61, 1891-1904.
Madsen, M.C. (1967) “Cooperative and competitive motivation of children in Three
Mexican subcultures,” Psychological Reports, 20, 1307-1320.
Mesoudi, A and Laland K.N. (2007) Culturally transmitted paternity beliefs and the
evolution of human mating behaviour. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B 274, 1273-1278.
Mitchell, BR. (1998) “International Historical Statistics – Africa, Asia and Oceania 17501993” 3rd edition. (UK: Macmillan Reference)
Nakane, C. (1967): Garo and Khasi: A comparative Study in Matrilineal Systems.
Mouton & Co, Paris, The Hague.
Niederle, M. and L. Vesterlund (2005) “Do women shy away from competition? Do men
compete too much?” http://www.stanford.edu/~niederle/Women.Competition.pdf
Nongbri, T. (1988): “Gender and the Khasi Family Structure: The Meghalaya Succession
to Self-Acquired Property Act, 1984,” Sociological Bulletin, 7(1 and 2), 71–82.
Oota, Hiroki, Wannapa Settheetham-Ishida, Danai Twawech, Takafumi Ishida and Mark
Stoneking (2001) “Human mtDNA and Y-chromosome variation is correlated
with matrilocal versus patrilocal residence,” Nature Genetics 29:20-21
Pritchett, Lant and Summers, Lawrence H. “Wealthier is Healthier.” The Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 31, No. 4 (1996), pp. 841-866.
Ridley, M. (2003): Nature via Nurture. Harper Collins, New York.
Rilley Bowless, H., L. Babcock and L. Lai (2004) “It depends who is asking and who you
ask: Social incentives for sex differences in the propensity to initiate negotiation.”
http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/wappp/research/Bowles_Babcock_Lai.pdf
Sanday, P. R. (2002): Women at the Center: Life in a modern matriarchy. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca & London.
Shapira, A. and Madsen, M.C. (1969). Cooperative and competitive behavior of kibbutz
and urban children in Israel. Child Development, 40, 609-617.Shell, R.G. (1999)
Bargaining for Advantage. Penguin Books.
Spencer, P. (1965) The Samburu; A study of Gerontocracy in a Nomadic Tribe.
University of California Press, Berkeley.
(1994): “Becoming Maasai, being in time,” in Being Maasai: Ethnicity and Identity in
East Africa, ed. by T. Spear, and R. Waller. James Currey, London.
(2003): Time, Space and the Unknown: Maasai configurations of power and
providence. James Currey, London.
Steele, C.M. (1997) “A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance,” American Psychologist, 52, 613 – 629.
Steele, C.M. and J. Aronson (1995) “Stereotype vulnerability and the intellectual test
performance of African Americans,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
69, 797 – 811.

31

Tregenza, T. and N. Wedell (2002) “Polyandrous females avoid costs of inbreeding,”
Nature, 415, pp. 71-73.
Trivers, R.L. (1972) in Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man (ed. Campbell, B.) pp.
136-177, Aldine, Chicago.
Turkheimer, E. (1998): ‘‘Heritability and biological explanation,’’ Psychological Review,
105, 782--791.
Turkheimer, E. (2004): “Spinach and Ice Cream: Why Social Science is So Difficult” in
Behavior Genetics Principles: Perspectives in Development, Personality, and
Psychopathology, ed. by L. F. DiLalla. American Psychological Association,
Washington, D.C.
Turkheimer, E., A. Haley, M. Waldron, B. D’Onofrio, and I. I. Gottesman (2003):
‘‘Socioeconomic status modifies heritability of IQ in young children,’’ Psychological
Science, 14, 623--628.
Vandegrift, D., A. Yavas and P. Brown (2004) “Men, women and competition: An
experimental test of labor market behavior.” Mimeo.
Van Ham, P. (2000): The Seven Sisters of India: Tribal Worlds between Tibet and
Burma. Prestel Publishers, Munich, London & New York.
Whitings, B. B. (1963), Six Cultures: Studies of Child Rearing, New York: John Wiley
and Sons.

32

Appendix A. Experimental Protocol (Khasi sessions)
Welcome to this study of decision-making. The experiment will take about 15 minutes.
The instructions are simple, and if you follow them carefully, you can earn a considerable
amount of money. All the money you earn is yours to keep, and will be paid to you, in
cash, immediately after the experiment ends. In addition to any earnings you might have
in this task, you will be paid 20 rupees to participate.
The task that we ask you to perform today is throwing this ball into this bucket from this
line. (Show them the ball, bucket and line). You will have 10 tries.
We now ask you to choose one of two options according to which you will be paid in the
experiment.
Option 1:
If you choose this option you will get 20 Rupees for each time you get the ball in the
bucket in your 10 tries. So if you succeed 1 time, then you will get 20 Rupees. If you
succeed 2 times, then you will get 40 Rupees. If you succeed three times you will get 60
Rupees and so on.
Option 2:
If you choose this option you will receive a reward only if you succeed more times than
the person who is playing in the next room. If you succeed more than this person you will
be paid 60 Rupees for every time you succeed. So if you succeed 1 time, then you will
get 60 Rupees. If you succeed 2 times, then you will get 120 Rupees. If you succeed 3
times you will get 180 Rupees and so on. But you will only receive a reward if you are
better than the person in the next room. If you both succeed the same number of times
you will both get 20 Rupees for each success.
We now ask you to choose how you want to be paid: according to option 1 or option 2.
Now you may play. Record both their ID number and their choice.
Allow the participant to toss the balls and record the result on the back of their ID card.
You can record the result of each toss with a checkmark and X (check mark for success
and X for failure). At then end of the 10 tosses, write the total number of successes on the
back of the card and the money value of each toss (based on their choice). Also write
down whether they succeeded more than their opponent with and Y or N.
For example, √√X√XX√√√√ 7 X 20 Y
You do not need to write the total payment on the card. Tell them that they must go to the
person who will fill an exit survey. Once they have filled this survey they should take
their card and the survey to the “cashier” and they will receive their payment.
IF THEY ASK YOU WHAT TO DO:
Tell them that you cannot give them advice about what to choose and offer to read the
script to them again.

33

Appendix B: Individual Characteristics Survey (Used with Khasi and Maasai)
ID number
Household Demographic Composition
Interviewer

Page 1

Date

Name of the Head of Household
Relationship to Head of Household (circle
one)
head of
HH household
SP

spouse

SD

Son/daughter

FM

father/mother

BS

brother/sister

DS

servant

FS

foster child

OR

other relation

NR

no relation

Age
Gender (circle one)
M

male

F

female

Marital Status (circle one)
SG

single

MM

married monogomous

PM

married polygomous

WI

widow (er)

DI

divorced

OT

other

Years of Education
Activities
Activity

34

Days

Wage

tick one

per Week

Earned

d

w

m

y

Appendix C. Experimental Instructions for Risk Aversion Game (Khasi Sessions)
Welcome to this study of decision-making. The experiment will take about 15
minutes. The instructions are simple, and if you follow them carefully, you can earn a
considerable amount of money. All the money you earn is yours to keep, and will be
paid to you, in cash, immediately after the experiment ends. In addition to any earnings
you might have in this task, you will be paid 20 rupees to participate.
At the beginning of this experiment you will receive 40 rupees. You are asked to
choose the portion of this amount (between 0 and 40) that you wish to invest in a
risky option. The rest of the money will be accumulated in your total balance.
The risky investment: there is an equal chance that the investment will fail or
succeed. If the investment fails, you lose the amount you invested. If the investment
succeeds, you receive 3 times the amount invested.
How do we determine if you win? After you have chosen how much you wish to
invest, you will toss a coin to determine whether you win or lose. If the coin will
come up head, you win three times the amount you chose to invest. If it will come up
tail, you lose the amount invested.
Examples:
1. If you choose to invest nothing, you will get the 40 rupees for sure. That is, the
coin flip would not affect your profits.
2. If you choose to invest all the 40 rupees, then: if the coin comes up head, you win
120 rupees and if the coin comes up tail you win nothing and end up with 0.
3. If you choose to invest 20, then: if the coin comes up head, you win 80
(20+3*20). If the coin lends on tail, you win 20.

Do you have any questions?
**
Ask them how much they would like to invest.

35

Table 1 Participant Characteristics

Pooled
Individual Characteristics

Khasi

Maasai

Mean
(Std. dev.)
Women

Men

Pooled

Mean
(Std. dev.)
Women

Men

Age

30.9
(16.1)

32.1
(16.7)

28.8
(15.0)

37.8
(13.5)

36.5
(12.1)

38.9
(14.6)

Education

4.3
(3.6)

4.5
(3.6)

4.1
(3.5)

4.3
(3.9)

4.1
(4.4)

4.5
(3.5)

23569
(76088)

25794
(93429)

19437
(20585)

Activity
Farmer
Student
Teacher
Housewife
Other
Unemployed

0.60 (0.5)
0.23 (0.4)
0.05 (0.2)
0.01 (0.1)
0.05 (0.2)
0.06 (0.2)

0.60 (0.5)
0.21 (0.1)
0.06 (0.2)
0.00 (0.0)
0.06 (0.2)
0.08 (0.3)

0.61 (0.5)
0.25 (0.4)
0.04 (0.2)
0.04 (0.2)
0.04 (0.2)
0.04 (0.2)

0.73 (0.5)
0.00 (0.0)
0.00 (0.0)
0.17 (0.4)
0.07 (0.3)
0.00 (0.0)

0.53 (0.5)
0.00 (0.0)
0.00 (0.0)
0.38 (0.5)
0.06 (0.2)
0.00 (0.0)

Marital Status
Single
Marr. (mono.)
Marr. (poly.)
Widowed
Divorced

0.36 (0.5)
0.44 (0.5)
0.00 (0.0)
0.13 (0.3)
0.08 (0.3)

0.33 (0.5)
0.42 (0.5)
0.00 (0.0)
0.17 (0.4)
0.08 (0.3)

0.43 (0.5)
0.46 (0.5)
0.00 (0.0)
0.04 (0.2)
0.07 (0.3)

0.24 (0.4)
0.32 (0.5)
0.36 (0.5)
0.01 (0.1)
0.04 (0.2)

0.18 (0.4) 0.30 (0.5)
0.38 (0.5) 0.28 (0.5)
0.35 (0.5) 0.38 (0.5)
0.03 (0.2) 0.00 (0.0)
0.03 (0.2) 0.05 (0.2)

Relation to Head of Household
HH
0.38 (0.5) 0.39 (0.5)
Spouse
0.23 (0.4) 0.29 (0.5)
Son/Daughter 0.36 (0.5) 0.31 (0.5)
Brother/Sister 0.04 (0.2) 0.02 (0.1)
Father/Mother 0.00 (0.0) 0.00 (0.0)

0.36 (0.5)
0.11 (0.3)
0.46 (0.5)
0.07 (0.3)
0.00 (0.0)

0.53 (0.5)
0.32 (0.5)
0.09 (0.3)
0.00 (0.0)
0.03 (0.2)

0.18 (0.4) 0.85 (0.4)
0.71 (0.5) 0.00 (0.0)
0.03 (0.2) 0.15 (0.4)
0.00 (0.0) 0.00 (0.0)
0.06 (0.2) 0.00 (0.0)

28

75

Income

N

80

52

195040
154294 234550
(400538) (341903) (448855)

34

0.93(0.3)
0.00(0.0)
0.00(0.0)
0.00(0.0)
0.08(0.3)
0.00(0.0)

40

Age denotes chronological age in years.
Education denotes years of education.
Income denotes reported yearly income (Khasi in Rupees and Maasai in Tanzanian Shillings)
Marital Status denotes whether the individual is single, married (monogamous), married (polygamous),
widowed, or divorced.
Activity denotes the wage earning activities that subjects report.
Relation to Head of Household denotes whether the individual is the household head (HH), spouse,
son/daughter, brother/sister, or father/mother of the HH.
The Maasai women and men observations do not sum to the total observations because we failed to obtain
the gender of one participant.

36

Table 2 Participant Choices

Pooled
Experiment Summary

Khasi

Maasai

Mean
(Std. dev.)
Women

Men

Pooled

Mean
(Std. dev.)
Women

Men

Compete

0.49
(0.5)

0.54
(0.5)

0.39
(0.5)

0.39
(0.5)

0.26
(0.5)

0.50
(0.5)

Success

2.38
(1.5)

2.38
(1.6)

2.36
(1.4)

2.78
(1.6)

2.97
(1.7)

2.63
(1.5)

Earnings (X)

3.46
(3.9)

3.73
(4.2)

2.96
(3.3)

4.02
(4.3)

3.68
(4.0)

4.33
(4.5)

52

28

74

34

40

2.23
(1.5)

2.25
(1.5)

2.18
(1.5)

2.69
(1.6)

2.33
(2.2)

2.85
(1.3)

Won-loss-tie

16-14-9

13-10-5

3-4-4

14-13-2

3-6-0

11-7-2

Earnings (X)

4.46
(5.2)

4.75
(5.3)

3.72
(5.0)

5.86
(6.2)

5.00
(7.7)

6.25
(5.6)

N
80
Those who chose to compete
Success

Those who chose not to compete
Success

Won-loss-tie

2.51
(1.5)

2.54
(1.6)

2.47
(1.4)

2.84
(1.6)

3.20
(1.4)

2.40
(1.7)

18-20-3

11-11-2

7-9-1

19-18-8

9-9-7

10-9-1

5.42
(6.2)

4.29
(4.3)

5.42
(6.2)

5.60
(6.2)

5.20
(6.3)

Earnings if
4.95
choice reversed (X) (5.9)

Compete denotes whether the individual opted to compete in the experiment.
Success denotes the number of successful attempts in the experiment (out of 10 balls tossed).
Earnings denotes the units earned during the experiment, where the units = successes if the agent chose not
to compete, = 3*successes if the agent chose to compete and won, = successes if the agent chose to
compete and tied, and = 0 if the agent chose to compete and lost.
Earnings if choice reversed denotes the units foregone because the agent chose not to compete.

37

Table 3 Regression Results
Pooled Data
(1)
(2)
(3)

Khasi
(1)

(2)

Maasai
(3)

0.15
0.24
0.24
(0.11) (0.13) (0.13)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Female

-0.25 -0.29 -0.32
(0.12) (0.13) (0.15)

-0.24 -0.29 -0.27
(0.12) (0.12) (0.18)

Khasi

-0.11 -0.14 -0.15
(0.12) (0.13) (0.14)

---

---

---

---

---

---

Khasi*Female

0.39
0.43
0.46
(0.17) (0.17) (0.19)

---

---

---

---

---

---

Male Exp.

0.007 -0.02 -0.03
(0.08) (0.08) (0.08)

0.08
0.19
0.18
(0.11) (0.12) (0.12)

-0.07 -0.16 -0.21
(0.12) (0.12) (0.13)

Constant

-0.003 -0.03 -0.09
(0.09) (0.17) (0.20)

-0.14 -0.36 -0.34
(0.11) (0.20) (0.27)

0.03
0.14 -0.03
(0.09) (0.26) (0.31)

Age

---

0.002 0.002
((0.003) (0.003)

---

-0.003 -0.002
(0.004) (0.005)

---

0.001 0.002
(0.005) (0.005)

Education

---

0.005 0.009
(0.01) (0.01)

---

0.003 0.003
(0.02) (0.02)

---

-0.006 -0.004
(0.02) (0.02)

Income

---

-0.2e-6 -0.2e-6
(0.2e-6) (0.2e-6)

---

0.1e-4 0.1e-4
(0.4e-5) (0.4e-5)

---

-0.3e-6 -0.3e-6
(0.2e-6) (0.2e-6)

Other Controls

NO

Chi-square

N

NO

YES

7.3(4) 9.8(7) 12.6(10)

154

151

151

NO

NO

YES

2.0(2) 11.4(5) 11.9(8)

80

80

80

NO

NO

YES

4.7(2) 9.3(5) 12.9(8)

74

71

71

Notes:
1. Dependent variable is “compete” and takes on a value of 1 if the participant opted to compete,
and 0 otherwise.
2. Standard errors are in parentheses.
3. Estimates are partial derivatives computed at the sample means from Probit models.
4. Variables defined in Table 1 notes. “Male exp.” equals one if the experimenter was male, 0
otherwise. “Other controls” include all of the other variables defined in Table 2.

38

Table 4 Group Composition Robustness Tests
Specification
(In Front) (Adjacent 2) (Adjacent 4) (Adjacent 8)
Pooled Data
Female

(Group)

-0.38
(0.16)

-0.42
(0.16)

-0.41
(0.16)

-0.43
(0.16)

-0.38
(0.16)

Khasi

-0.25
(0.16)

-0.28
(0.16)

-0.25
(0.15)

-0.28
(0.16)

-0.23
(0.16)

Khasi*Female

0.60
(0.22)

0.65
(0.23)

0.56
(0.20)

0.58
(0.20)

0.53
(0.20)

Group
Composition

-0.16
(0.10)

-0.19
(0.12)

-0.28
(0.17)

-0.35
(0.21)

-0.23
(0.25)

YES
141
13.8(11)

YES
151
15.2(11)

YES
151
15.4(11)

YES
151
15.5(11)

YES
151
13.5(11)

0.36
(0.15)

0.34
(0.15)

0.24
(0.14)

0.25
(0.14)

---

Group
Composition

-0.28
(0.15)

-0.25
(0.18)

-0.68
(0.36)

-0.95
(0.51)

---

Other Controls
N
Chi-square
Maasai Data
Female

YES
78
16.1(9)

YES
80
13.9(9)

YES
80
15.6(9)

YES
80
15.6(9)

-------

-0.25
(0.20)

-0.27
(0.20)

-0.27
(0.19)

-0.31
(0.20)

-0.34
(0.20)

Group
Composition

0.09
(0.15)

-0.008
(0.17)

-0.007
(0.21)

-0.12
(0.25)

-0.20
(0.27)

Other Controls
N
Chi-square

YES
63
14.2(9)

YES
71
12.9(9)

YES
71
12.9(9)

YES
71
13.2(9)

YES
71
13.5(9)

Other Controls
N
Chi-square
Khasi Data
Female

Notes:
1. Dependent variable is “compete” and takes on a value of 1 if the participant opted to compete, and 0
otherwise. Each column represents a unique model that uses a different group composition regressors. “In
Front” is a variable that depicts the gender of the subject standing immediately in front of the person
(where male =1). “Adjacent n” uses the arithmetic average of the gender identity of the directly adjacent n
subjects. “Group” is entirely exhaustive—the arithmetic average of the gender identity of all others in the
group—this model is not estimable using the Khasi data alone because each group had an identical
composition.
2. Standard errors are in parentheses.
3. Estimates are partial derivatives computed at the sample means from Probit models.
4. Variables defined in Table 1 notes. “Other controls” include all of the other variables defined in Table

39

Table 5. Raw Data Summary for Risk Aversion Game

Average Bet
(Standard deviation)

Proportion Bet

Khasi
Women

Khasi
Men

Maasai
Women

Maasai
Men

86.5 (3.3)

85.0 (4.0)

60.7 (4.1)

61.3 (4.2)

Amount in the cell is average (standard deviation) amount bet of 100. A two-sample t-test
(assuming equal variances) rejects the hypothesis that the bets for Khasi women are different from
the bets for Khasi men (p-value 0.74) and rejects the hypothesis that the bets for Maasai women
are different from the bets for Maasai men (p-value 0.92).

Figure 1: Competitiveness Across Societies
0.6

Proportion

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Maasai

Group

Khasi

Male
Female

Note: Figure depicts a summary of competitive choices across gender in the two societies.

40

