                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LIQUIDITY, INSTITUTIONAL QUALITY AND THE COMPOSITION OF INTERNATIONAL
                           EQUITY OUTFLOWS

                                            Itay Goldstein
                                             Assaf Razin
                                               Hui Tong

                                        Working Paper 13723
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13723


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




We acknowledge insightful comments by Rui Albuquerque, Samuel Bentolila, Francesco Caselli,
Robert Flood, Olivier Jeanne, Jean Imbs, Philip Lane, Enrique Mendoza, Christopher Pissarides, Danny
Quah, Rafael Repullo and seminar participants at the IMF, LBS, LSE, the 2007 CEPR Conference
on International Adjustment, and the 2008 ASSA annual meeting. This paper represents the views
of the authors and should not be thought to represent those of the International Monetary Fund or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Itay Goldstein, Assaf Razin, and Hui Tong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity, Institutional Quality and the Composition of International Equity Outflows
Itay Goldstein, Assaf Razin, and Hui Tong
NBER Working Paper No. 13723
January 2008
JEL No. F2,F23,F3,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the choice between Foreign Direct Investment and Foreign Portfolio Investment at the
level of the source country. Based on a theoretical model, we predict that (1) source countries with
higher probability of aggregate liquidity crises export relatively more FPI than FDI, and (2) this effect
strengthens as the source country’s capital market transparency worsens. To test these hypotheses,
we apply a dynamic panel model and examine the variation of FPI relative to FDI for 140 source countries
from 1985 to 2004. Our key variable is the probability of an aggregate liquidity crisis, estimated from
a Probit model, as proxied by episodes of economy-wide sales of external assets. Consistent with our
theory, we find that the probability of a liquidity crisis has a strong effect on the composition of foreign
equity investment. Furthermore, greater capital market opacity in the source country strengthens the
effect of the crisis probability.


Itay Goldstein                                       Hui Tong
Wharton School                                       Research Department
University of Pennsylvania                           IMF Washington DC
Philadelphia, PA 19104                               htong@imf.org.
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu                              hui.tong@imf.org

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
1        Introduction

The liberalization of international capital markets gave rise to large amounts of international equity
flows in recent years, reaching 781 billion US dollars in 2006. These flows seem to have had a major
impact on the cost of capital, on the volatility of capital markets, and even on economic growth.
Representative studies establishing such results include: Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Errunza and
Miller (2000), Henry (2000), Chari and Henry (2004), and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005).1
        In assessing the costs and benefits of the globalization of international equity markets, it is
important to take account of the composition of international equity flows. These flows generally
take two forms: Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) — that usually involve a control position by
the foreign investor — and Foreign Portfolio Investments (FPI) — that do not involve a control
position. It is well known that these two forms of investment generate very diﬀerent implications
for the stability of international capital markets and of host countries. For example, during financial
crises, FPI investors usually rush to liquidate their investments, whereas FDI is much more resilient
and thus contributes to the stability of the host country (see: Frankel and Rose, 1996; Lipsey, 2001;
and Sarno and Taylor, 1999).
        Despite the importance of the distinction between FDI and FPI, not much is known about the
factors that guide the choice of international investors between them. Traditionally, Multinationals
engaged in FDI, while collective investment funds— private equity funds, mutual funds and hedge
funds — engaged in FPI. In such a world, investors seeking international exposure had to choose
between investing in multinationals or in investment funds. This choice influenced the composition
of equity flows between FDI and FPI. More recently, the choice between FDI and FPI has become
even more direct, as collective investment funds became sources of FDI and started competing with
traditional multinationals in acquiring foreign companies.2
        The goal of this paper is to shed empirical light on the factors that aﬀect the choice between
FDI and FPI at the level of the source country. Our focus is on the eﬀect of liquidity. The basic
idea is that FDI investments are illiquid and more diﬃcult to sell, and thus FPI investments become
    1
        Stulz (2005) reviews the development of financial globalization and its limitations.
    2
        According to the latest 2006 World Investment Report, collective investment funds have become growing sources
of FDI. These funds raised a record amount of $261 billion in 2005, from institutional investors, such as banks,
pension funds and insurance companies. About half of the funds raised were then used towards FDI. Moreover, their
main type of FDI, cross-border M&As, reached $135 billion and accounted for as much as 19% of total cross-border
M&As in 2005.




                                                           1
more desirable in the face of expected liquidity needs. To develop this hypothesis formally, we start
with a model that is based on the recent work of Goldstein and Razin (2006). In the model, the
illiquidity of FDI is derived endogenously as a result of the informational advantage possessed by
FDI investors.
    More specifically, Goldstein and Razin (2006) highlight a key diﬀerence between FDI and FPI:
FDI investors are in eﬀect the managers of the firms under their control; whereas FPI investors
eﬀectively delegate decisions to managers. Consequently, direct investors are more informed than
portfolio investors regarding the prospects of their projects. This information enables direct in-
vestors to manage their projects more eﬃciently. This informational advantage, however, comes
at a cost. If investors need to sell their investments before maturity because of liquidity shocks,
the price they can get will be typically lower when buyers know that they have more information
on the fundamentals of the investment project. A key implication of the model is that the choice
between FDI and FPI will be linked to the likelihood with which investors expect to get a liquidity
shock.
    To provide better link to the data, we extend the Goldstein and Razin (2006) model by making
the more realistic assumption that liquidity shocks to individual investors are triggered by some
aggregate liquidity shock. We are trying to capture the idea that individual investors are forced to
sell their investments early particularly at times when there are aggregate liquidity problems. In
those times, some individual investors have deeper pockets than others, and thus are less exposed
to the liquidity issues. Thus, once an aggregate liquidity shock occurs, some individual investors
will need to sell, but they will get a low price because buyers do not know if they have deep pockets
and sell because of adverse information or because they are truly aﬀected by the aggregate liquidity
crisis.
    The main prediction of the extended model is that countries with a high probability of an
aggregate liquidity crisis will be the source of relatively more FPI and less FDI. Another prediction
is that the eﬀect of the probability of liquidity shocks on the shares of FDI and FPI is driven by
lack of transparency about the fundamentals of the investment. If the fundamentals were publicly
known, then liquidity shocks would not be that costly for direct investors, as the investors would be
able to sell the investment at fair price without bearing the consequences of the lemons problem.
Hence, the second empirical prediction is that the eﬀect of a liquidity shock on the ratio between
FPI and FDI decreases in the level of transparency in the source country.
    We take these predictions to the data. A main advantage of the new specification of the model


                                                 2
is that it can be taken directly to macro data. We use negative purchase of external assets as
an indicator of an aggregate liquidity crisis. As frequently done, we estimate the probability of
a liquidity shock by using a Probit specification. Our sample covers 140 countries from 1985 to
2004. And our measures of FDI and FPI are based on source countries’ stocks of external assets
as compiled by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). Then, we use the dynamic panel model approach
to examine the eﬀect of the crisis probability. We find strong support for our model: a higher
probability of a liquidity crisis in the source country indeed has a significant positive eﬀect on the
ratio between FPI and FDI.
       We further introduce a set of proxies for capital market opacity to capture the degree of asym-
metric information in the source country, including PricewaterhouseCoopers (2001) overall and
accounting opacity indexes, CIFAR (1995) accounting disclosure score, and the Global Competitive-
ness Report (1999) financial disclosure index. We interact the opacity measure with the likelihood
of a liquidity crisis and confirm that greater capital-market opacity in the source country strength-
ens the eﬀect of the crisis probability on the ratio between FPI and FDI. This illustrates that a
channel for strong institutions to aﬀect capital flows is through the mitigation of the consequence
of potential liquidity shocks.3
       Our results have strong implications for the future of FDI investments by collective investment
funds. These funds have expanded significantly in the past few years due to historically low interest
rates, high liquidity of investors and the good performance of private equity funds. However,
events such as the recent subprime market turbulence and the resulting credit crunch could lead to
diﬃculties for the private equity funds in conducting FDI investments. Our results are also relevant
for the going debate on the transparency requirements for collective investment funds.4 Initiatives
to improve these funds’ transparency may increase funds’ ability to engage in FDI, as they will
then be less likely to suﬀer from the lemons problem during liquidity crises. This can be beneficial
to investment funds, as FDI engagement, in the long run, is likely to generate higher returns than
FPI, due to the management eﬃciency.
       Our paper is related to the vast empirical literature on international equity flows. Several
papers study the determinants of FDI (including cross-border M&As) emphasizing factors such as
wealth and credit constraints, governance, mispricing, and fire sales. They include: Froot and Stein
   3
       Earlier works have emphasized the importance of host country institution on capital inflow. For instance, Al-
faro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych (2007) document that the low institutional quality, measured by host country’s
political risk, is the leading explanation of the lack of capital flow from rich to poor countries.
   4
     See http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601100&sid=aMS8oOJlJp0I&refer=germany


                                                          3
(1991), Klein, Peek, and Rosengren (2002), Rossi and Volpin (2004), Aguiar and Gopinath (2005),
Albuquerque, Loayza, and Serven (2005), and Baker, Foley, and Wurgler (2007). Other papers
(e.g., Griﬃn, Nardari, and Stulz, 2004; Gelos and Wei, 2005; Ferreira and Matos, 2007; and Leuz,
Lins, and Warnock, 2007) study the determinants of FPI. Albuquerque (2003) studies the ratio of
FDI to FPI at the level of the host country, emphasizing expropriation risk. None of these papers
examines the eﬀect of potential liquidity crises or considers the determinants of the composition
between FDI and FPI at the level of the source country.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the theoretical model
underlying our empirical predictions. In Section 3, we describe the data and the econometric model
used for the empirical analysis. In Section 4, we present the results of the empirical analysis. Section
5 concludes.


2     Model

2.1     Goldstein and Razin (2006): Idiosyncratic Liquidity Shocks

We start by describing the model of Goldstein and Razin (2006), with which they study a trade oﬀ
between FDI and FPI based on the existence of idiosyncratic liquidity shocks.


2.1.1    Eﬃciency of FDI

A small economy is faced by a continuum [0, 1] of foreign investors. Each foreign investor has
an opportunity to invest in one investment project. Foreign investment can occur in one of two
forms: either as a direct investment (FDI) or as a portfolio investment (FPI). A direct investor
eﬀectively acts like a manager, whereas in case of a portfolio investment, the project is managed by
an "outsider". Investors are risk neutral, and thus choose the form of investment that maximizes
(ex-ante) expected payoﬀ.
    There are three periods of time: 0, 1, and 2. In period 0, each investor decides whether to make
a direct investment or a portfolio investment. In period 2, the project matures. The net cash flow
from the project is denoted by R(K, ε):

                                                        1
                                    R(K, ε) = (1 + ε)K − AK 2 ,                                     (1)
                                                        2

where ε is an idiosyncratic random productivity factor, which is independently realized for each
project in period 1, and K is the level of capital input invested in the project in period 1, after

                                                   4
the realization of ε. The productivity shock ε is distributed between −1 and 1 with mean 0. The
cumulative distribution function is G(·), and the density function is g(·) = G0 (·). The parameter A
reflects production costs.
   In period 1, after the realization of the productivity shock, the manager of the project observes
ε. Thus, if the investor owns the project as a direct investment, she observes ε, and chooses K, so
as to maximize the net cash flow:


                                                          1+ε
                                              K d (ε) =       .                                     (2)
                                                           A
   Then, the ex-ante expected net cash flow from a direct investment, if held until maturity, is:
                                                ³         ´
                                               E (1 + ε)2
                                                              .                                     (3)
                                                    2A
   In case of a portfolio investment, the owner is at arms length relationships with the manager,
and thus she cannot observe ε. In this case, the manager follows earlier instructions as for the level
of K. Following the logic described in Goldstein and Razin (2006), we assume that the ex-ante
instruction is chosen by the owner so as to maximize the expected return absent any information
on the realization of ε, and is based on the ex-ante 0 mean. Thus, the manager will be instructed
                             1
to choose K p = K d (0) =    A.   Then, the ex-ante expected payoﬀ from a portfolio investment, if held
until maturity, is:


                                                     1
                                                       .                                            (4)
                                                    2A
   Comparing (3) with (4), we see that if the project is held until maturity, it yields a higher payoﬀ
as a direct investment than as a portfolio investment. This reflects the eﬃciency that results from
a hands-on management style in the case of a direct investment.


2.1.2   Costs of FDI

As in Goldstein and Razin (2006), there are also costs to direct investments. We specify two types
of costs. The first type, reflects the fixed initial cost that an FDI investor has to incur in order
to acquire the expertise to manage the project directly. We denote this cost, which is exogenously
given in the model, by C. The second type, which is derived endogenously in the model, results
from the possibility of liquidity shocks occurring in period 1.



                                                     5
   Specifically, in period 1, before the value of ε is observed, the owner of the project might
get a liquidity shock. With the realization of a liquidity shock, the investor is forced to sell the
project immediately. We assume that the number of foreign investors is fixed. We denote by λ the
probability of liquidity shocks, and assume that there are two types of foreign investors: half of
the investors face a liquidity need with probability λH , whereas the other half face a liquidity need
                                            1
with probability λL , where 1 > λH >        2   > λL > 0, and λH + λL = 1. Investors know their type ex
ante, but this is their own private information.
   In addition to liquidity-based sales, there is a possibility that an investor will liquidate a project
in period 1 if she observes a low realization of ε. Because portfolio investors do not observe ε in
period 1, only direct investors sell their investment project at that time when a liquidity shock is
absent. Then, using Bayes’ Law, the price that buyers are willing to pay for a direct investment
that is being sold in period 1 is:
                                            R εD     (1+ε)2              R1   1+2ε
                                (1 − λD )       −1     2A g(ε)dε  + λD −1      2A g(ε)dε
                       P1,D =                                                              .         (5)
                                                     (1 − λD ) G(εD ) + λD
   Here, εD is a threshold level of ε, set by the direct investor; below which the direct investor is
selling the project in absence of a liquidity shock; λD is the probability, as perceived by the market,
that an FDI investor gets a liquidity shock. In (5), it is assumed that if the project is sold due to
a liquidity shock, that is, before the initial owner observes ε, the value of ε is not recorded in the
firms before the sale. Therefore, the buyer does not know the value of ε. However, if the project is
sold for low-profitability reasons, the owner will know the value of ε after the sale.
   Of course, the threshold εD is determined in equilibrium. The initial owner sets the threshold
level εD , such that given P1,D , when observing εD , she is indiﬀerent between selling and not selling
the project in absence of a liquidity shock. Thus:


                                                          (1 + εD )2
                                                P1,D =               .                               (6)
                                                             2A
Equations (5) and (6) together determine P1,D and εD as functions of the market-perceived prob-
ability λD . We denote these functions as: εD (λD ) and P1,D (λD ).
   The period-1 price of a portfolio investment is easier to determine. Essentially, when a portfolio
investor sells the projects in period 1, everybody knows she does it because of a liquidity shock.
Thus, the price she gets for the project is given by:


                                                                1
                                                      P1,P =      .                                  (7)
                                                               2A

                                                           6
     Comparing the price of FDI, which is determined by (5) and (6), with the price of FPI, which
is determined by (7), we see that the resale price of a direct investment in period 1 is always lower
than the resale price of a portfolio investment in that period (see Goldstein and Razin (2006)).
The intuition is that if a direct investor prematurely sells the investment project, the market price
must reflect the possibility that the sale originates from inside information on low prospects of this
investment project. This constitutes the second cost of FDI.


2.1.3    The Decision between FDI and FPI

With probability λi (i = H, L), the direct investor gets a liquidity shock, and sells the project in
                                    (1+εD (λD ))2
period 1 for a price P1,D (λD ) =       2A        .   With probability 1 − λi , the direct investor does not
get a liquidity shock. She sells the project if the realization of ε is below εD (λD ), but she does not
sell it if the realization of ε is above εD (λD ). In addition, the direct investor has to incur a fixed
cost of C. The (ex-ante) expected net cash flow for an FDI investor is thus:
                                                    ⎡ R                               ⎤
                                                        εD (λD ) (1+εD (λD ))2
                                                                               g(ε)dε
                 EVDirect (λi , λD , A) = (1 − λi ) ⎣ −1 R            2A              ⎦
                                                             1       (1+ε)2
                                                        + ε (λD ) 2A g(ε)dε
                                                                   D

                                                      (1 + εD (λD ))2
                                                +λi                   − C.                                 (8)
                                                            2A
     Similarly, when the investor holds the investment as a portfolio investment, the (ex-ante) ex-
pected net cash flow is simply given by:


                                                                  1
                                           EVP ortf olio (A) =      .                                      (9)
                                                                 2A
                                                                                                     1
This is because, regardless whether the investor gets a liquidity shock or not, her payoﬀ is        2A .

     We denote the diﬀerence between the expected value of FDI and the expected value of FPI by:


                       Dif f (λi , λD , A) ≡ EVDirect (λi , λD , A) − EVP ortf olio (A).               (10)

Then, investor i will choose FDI when Diff (λi , λD , A) > 0; will choose FPI when Diff (λi , λD , A) <
0; and will be indiﬀerent between the two (that is, may choose either FDI or FPI) when Dif f (λi , λD , A) =
0.
     As is shown in Proposition 2 of Goldstein and Razin (2006), investor i is more likely to choose
FDI when the FDI cost (C) is lower; the production cost (A) is lower; the probability of getting a
liquidity shock (λi ) is lower; and the market-perceived probability λD of a liquidity shock for FDI
investors is higher.

                                                         7
2.1.4    FDI and FPI in Equilibrium

To complete the description of equilibrium, it remains to specify how λD , the market perceived
probability that an FDI investor will get a liquidity shock, is determined. Assuming that rational
expectations hold in equilibrium, λD has to be consistent with the equilibrium choice of the two
types of investors between FDI and FPI. The equilibrium condition is:


                                           λH λH,F DI + λL λL,F DI
                                    λD =                           ,                               (11)
                                             λH,F DI + λL,F DI
where λH,F DI is the proportion of λH investors who choose FDI in equilibrium and λL,F DI is the
proportion of λL investors who choose FDI in equilibrium.
   Goldstein and Razin (2006) show that five cases can potentially be observed in equilibrium:
   Case 1: All investors choose FDI.
   Case 2: λL investors choose FDI; λH investors split between FDI and FPI.
   Case 3: λL investors choose FDI; λH investors choose FPI.
   Case 4: λL investors split between FDI and FPI; λH investors choose FPI.
   Case 5: All investors choose FPI.
   Equilibrium outcomes then depend on λH and A in a way that is depicted by Figure 1. (See
Proposition 3 in Goldstein and Razin (2006).)
   As we can see in the figure, the equilibrium patterns of investment are determined by the
parameters A and λH . Since λH + λL = 1, the value of λH also determines λL , and thus can be
interpreted as a measure for the diﬀerence in liquidity needs between the two types of investors.
In the figure we can see that there are four thresholds — A∗ , λ∗H (A), λ∗∗          ∗∗∗
                                                                         H (A), and λH (A) — that

are important for the characterization of the equilibrium outcomes. These thresholds are defined
in Goldstein and Razin (2006). Overall, we can see that as the production cost A increases, we
are more likely to observe FPI and less likely to observe FDI in equilibrium. As the diﬀerence in
liquidity needs between the two types of investors increase, we are more likely to see a separating
equilibrium, where diﬀerent types of investors choose diﬀerent forms of investment.


2.2     Aggregate Liquidity Shock

So far we followed the model in Goldstein and Razin (2006), which assumes that liquidity shocks to
individual investors are completely idiosyncratic, i.e., there is no correlation between the realization
of a liquidity shock for one investor and that for other investors. A more realistic assumption is


                                                   8
                        λH

                          1




                                                               λ*H** ( A)
                                    λ ( A)
                                     **
                                     H




                               Case 1, 2, 3     Case 3               Case 5

                                    λ*H ( A)


                                    Case 1
                           1
                           2
                                                       A*                     A


                                     Figure 1: Equilibrium Outcomes


that liquidity shocks to individual investors are triggered by some aggregate liquidity shock.
   Suppose now that an aggregate liquidity shock occurs in period 1 with probability q. Once
the shock occurs, it becomes common knowledge. Conditional on the realization of the aggregate
liquidity shock, individual investors may be subject to a need to sell their investment at period 1
with probabilities as in the previous section. That is, if a liquidity shock occurs (with probability
q) then half of the investors need to sell in period 1 with probability λH and half with probability
λL . Conditional on the realization of an aggregate liquidity shock, the realizations of individual
liquidity needs are independent of each other. With probability (1 − q), an aggregate liquidity
shock does not occur. In this case individual investors never have a liquidity need that forces them
to sell at period 1.
   This specification of the model is admittedly simple. The idea that we are trying to capture
with this specification is that individual investors are forced to sell their investments early at times
when there are aggregate liquidity problems. In those times, some individual investors have deeper
pockets than others, and thus are less exposed to the liquidity issues. Thus, once an aggregate
liquidity shock occurs, λL investors, who have deeper pockets, are less likely to need to sell than
λH investors.
   The analysis of the model under the extension to aggregate shocks is simple given the analysis


                                                   9
of the model in the previous subsection. If an aggregate liquidity shock does not occur, then it is
known that no investor needs to sell in period 1 due to liquidity needs. This implies that the only
reason to sell at that time is adverse information on the profitability of the project. As a result,
the market breaks down due to the well-known lemons problem (see Akerlof (1970)). Thus, when
an aggregate liquidity shock does not occur, no investor sells her investment at period 1. Investors
                                                   E ((1+ε)2 )
wait till the maturity of the investment, and get      2A      in case they hold a FDI (see (3)) and
 1
2A   in case they hold a FPI (see (4)). On the other hand, if a liquidity shock does happen, the
expected payoﬀs from FDI and FPI are exactly the same as in the previous section; see (8) for FDI
and (9) for FPI. Essentially, the model in the previous section corresponds to the case of q = 1.
     Using these arguments, we can write the ex-ante expected net cash flow from FDI in the new
model as (we use the superscript Ext to denote expected values in the extended model:
                                             Z 1
            Ext                                  (1 + ε)2
         EVDirect (λi , λD , A, q) = (1 − q)              g(ε)dε
                                              −1    2A
                                        ⎡           ⎡ R                               ⎤ ⎤
                                                        εD (λD ) (1+εD (λD ))2
                                                                               g(ε)dε
                                        ⎢ (1 − λi ) ⎣ −1 R            2A              ⎦ ⎥
                                        ⎢                    1       (1+ε)2             ⎥
                                     +q ⎢               + ε (λD ) 2A g(ε)dε             ⎥ − C.   (12)
                                        ⎣                     D
                                                                         2
                                                                                        ⎦
                                                             (1+εD (λD ))
                                                        +λi       2A

The ex-ante expected net cash flow from FPI in the new model is as before:


                                                                 1
                                          EVPExt
                                              ortf olio (A) =      .                             (13)
                                                                2A
Then, the diﬀerence between the expected value of FDI and the expected value of FPI is:


                  Diff Ext (λi , λD , A, q) ≡ EVDirect
                                                Ext
                                                       (λi , λD , A, q) − EVPExt
                                                                              ortf olio (A).     (14)

As before, investor i will choose FDI when Dif f Ext (λi , λD , A, q) > 0; will choose FPI when
Dif f Ext (λi , λD , A, q) < 0; and will be indiﬀerent between the two (that is, may choose either FDI
or FPI) when Diff Ext (λi , λD , A, q) = 0.
     Our main goal in introducing the aggregate liquidity shock is to be able to generate a testable
empirical prediction on the relation between liquidity variables and the choice of investors between
FDI and FPI. In the original model by Goldstein and Razin (2006), the probabilities of idiosyncratic
liquidity shocks, λH and λL , aﬀected the equilibrium allocation between FDI and FPI. The problem,
however, is that idiosyncratic liquidity shocks are not observable to econometricians. The big
advantage of the current model is that λH and λL are now linked to q — the probability of an


                                                     10
aggregate liquidity shock, which is observable. Thus, our main interest is to derive a prediction on
the eﬀect that q has on the ratio of FPI to FDI and then to test it.
       Repeating the analysis in Proposition 3 of Goldstein and Razin (2006) for the extended model,
one can see that the equilibrium outcomes depend on the thresholds A∗ , λ∗H (A), λ∗∗
                                                                                  H (A), and

λ∗∗∗
 H (A), just as before. The diﬀerence is that these thresholds now depend on q. In particular,

A∗ , λ∗H (A), and λ∗∗                                ∗∗∗
                   H (A) are decreasing in q, while λH (A) is increasing in q. This implies that as

the probability of an aggregate liquidity shock q increases, there will be more FPI and less FDI in
equilibrium.5 Thus, the ratio of FPI to FDI will increase. The intuition is that as the probability
of an aggregate liquidity shock increases, agents know that they are more likely to need to sell the
investment early, in which case they will get a low price since buyers do not know whether they
sell because of an individual liquidity need or because of adverse information on the productivity
of the investment. As a result, the attractiveness of FDI decreases. The empirical prediction is
that countries with a higher probability of liquidity shocks will be source of a higher ratio of FPI
to FDI.


2.3       The Role of Opacity

The eﬀect of liquidity shocks on the composition of foreign investment between FDI and FPI is
driven by lack of transparency about the fundamentals of the direct investment or liquidity situation
of the firms. If the fundamentals or liquidity situation were publicly known, then liquidity shocks
would not be that costly for direct investors, as the investors would be able to sell the investment
at fair price without bearing the consequences of the lemons problem.
       More precisely, suppose that the source country imposes disclosure rules on its investors that
ensure the truthful revelation of investment fundamentals to the public. In such a case, FDI
investors will have to reveal the realization of ε once it becomes known to them. Then, since
potential buyers know the true value of the investment, direct investors will be able to sell their
                  (1+ε)2
investment at        2A . Thus, whether or not a direct investor sells the investment, he is able to extract
              (1+ε)2                                                         E ((1+ε)2 )
the value       2A , and so the expected value from investing in FDI is          2A      − C. The expected
                                        1
value from investing in FPI is         2A   as before. This is because the kind of disclosure requirements
   5
       Note that there is a delicate point about this result, which comes from the fact that q does not have an unam-
biguous eﬀect on the function Diff Ext . The eﬀect depends on the relation between λi and λD . The result comes
from the fact that Dif f Ext is decreasing in q when λi ≥ λD and the thresholds A∗ , λ∗H (A), λ∗∗          ∗∗∗
                                                                                               H (A), and λH (A) are

all derived for situations where λi ≥ λD . More details are available from the authors upon request.



                                                          11
we describe here do not aﬀect the value of portfolio investments. These are requirements that are
imposed by the source country, and thus apply only for investments that are being controlled by
source-country investors.6
        Analyzing the trade oﬀ between FDI and FPI under this perfect source-country transparency,
we can see two things. First, with transparency, FDI becomes more attractive than before. Second,
with transparency, the decision between FDI and FPI ceases to be a function of the probability of
a liquidity shock. This leads to our second empirical prediction: the eﬀect of the probability of a
liquidity shock on the ratio of FPI and FDI increases in the level of opacity in the source country.


3        Data and Empirical Model

3.1        Data on FPI and FDI

In the empirical application, we use the recently available data on a country’s external assets and
liabilities, as compiled by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) assemble
a comprehensive dataset on the external assets and liabilities of 140 developed and developing
countries for the period 1970—2004. They distinguish four types of international assets: foreign
direct investment, portfolio equity investment, oﬃcial reserves, and external debt. The convention
for distinguishing between portfolio and direct investment is to see whether the ownership of shares
of companies is above or below a ten percent threshold. If it is above the threshold, then it is
classified as direct investment.7
        For most countries, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) use as a benchmark the oﬃcial Interna-
tional Investment Position (IIP) estimates. However, only very few countries have consistently
reported their IIP over the period 1970—2004, with the majority of countries starting to report in
the early 1990s. For earlier years, they then work backward with data on capital flows, together
with calculations for capital gains and losses, to generate estimates for stock positions. In their
    6
        Note that this type of transparency is diﬀerent from the one studied in Goldstein and Razin (2006). In that
paper the transparency was based on host-country rules, and thus aﬀected the information investors could learn on
their portfolio investments.
   7
     There is the problem of "borderline" cases where it is diﬃcult to classify an investment as FDI or FPI. In
countries where FPI is liberalized, a portfolio investor might buy more than 10 percent of the shares of companies
without having a "lasting interest" to control the companies. And yet that investor’s investment can be classified as
FDI. Using the control interest as a dividing line, there are circumstances where FDI can turn into FPI through the
dilution of ownership and loss of control. Conversely, FPI can be transformed into FDI, if the investor decides to
have a management interest in the companies whose assets he had earlier purchased as FPI.


                                                          12
estimation, due to cross-country variation in the reliability of the data, they also employ a range of
valuation techniques to obtain the most appropriate series for each country. Particularly, they use
similar valuation adjustment for FPI and FDI (see the Appendix for more details). In our following
estimation, we use the data from 1985 to 2004 as the sample period.
       Our sample includes developing countries as source countries for outward FPI and FDI. New
sources of FDI are emerging among developing and transition economies, which has been a marked
phenomenon for the past ten years. Meanwhile, multinationals from these economies are emerging
as major regional - or sometimes even global - players. The new global links these multinationals
are forging will have far-reaching repercussions in shaping the world economic landscape of the
coming decades (UNCTAD: World Investment Report 2006).
       Table 1 lists the countries covered in the sample from 1985 to 2004, as a source for FPI and FDI.
We can see that developed countries have more observations on average than developing economies
do, due to the fact that developed countries engage in more foreign investment than their developing
counterparts. Table 1 also shows that developed countries tend to have higher ratio of FPI/FDI,
which may reflect factors other than liquidity. In the following estimation sections we will focus on
the eﬀects of the probability of liquidity crises, and the degree of country specific transparency, on
the composition of the source country external assets. We will control for standard determinants
of FPI/FDI, as well as for unobservable country fixed eﬀects.8


3.2       Econometric Model

We investigate the eﬀect of a country-level liquidity shock on the FPI/FDI ratio for source countries.
The latter variable is the dependent variable in the following reduced form equation:

                ln (F P I/F DI)it = αXit + β Pri,t (Liquidity Shocki,t+1 ) + γY eart + ui + εit                       (15)

for source country i at time t. ui stands for country fixed eﬀect, while εit follows an i.i.d normal
distribution.
       We take the log of the FPI/FDI ratio to reduce the impact of extreme values. Our selection
of control variables Xit is motivated by Faria et al (2007), where they examine the composition
of country external liabilities. They survey a set of explanatory variables, including country size,
   8
       In principle, there could be a two-stage decision process as follows. In stage 1, a potential investor has to decide
whether to engage in foreign investment. In stage 2, in what form to do it (FDI or FPI). Some missing observations
may indicate situations where these countries did not cross the threshold for foreign investment, hence a Heckman
selection model could be desirable.


                                                             13
economic development level, trade openness and financial reform. They find that only country size
has some explanatory power on the distribution of equity liabilities between direct investment and
portfolio equity. As no work has explicitly examined the composition of external assets, we will then
use the control variables in Faria et al (2007) as our starting point. First, we include two variables —
the log of the population and the log of GDP per capita in constant US dollars — to capture market
size and the level of economic development. We then also include trade openness, as measured by
imports plus exports over GDP, to control for the connection between trade and FDI. Furthermore,
we add the one-year lag of stock market capitalization over GDP to capture the development level
of stock market. On the one hand, a more developed stock market may have more established
professional asset management (mutual funds and hedge funds, for instance), which could help
domestic investors to enter international stock markets and therefore increase FPI outflow. But on
the other hand, a more developed domestic stock market may provide more opportunities at home
and hence reduce the incentive for portfolio investors to go abroad. It is then an empirical question
which eﬀect will dominate.9
       Moreover, the lagged FPI/FDI may aﬀect the current FPI/FDI.10 Hence we estimate, alterna-
tively, the following dynamic panel regression.

ln (F P I/F DI)it = φ ln (F P I/F DI)i,t−1 + αXit + β Pri,t (Liquidity Shocki,t+1 ) + γY eart + ui + εit
                                                                                                                   (16)
There is a complication in estimating equation (16). That is, if εit is not i.i.d, but serially-correlated,
then ln (F P I/F DI)i,t−1 will be correlated with εit , and thus create an endogeneity problem. To
correct this problem, we will then use the Arellano-Bond dynamic GMM approach to estimate
equation (16).
   9
       One may argue that stock market capitalization can be aﬀected by stock return and might be endogenous. Hence,
we take the one-year lag to reduce potential endogeneity. Also in robustness checks, we use an alternative measure of
stock market development, the number of listed domestic stocks, which is less sensitive to contemporary stock return
movement. And we get similar results.
 10
    Arguably, in our model, investors can rebalance their portfolio of assets every period. Thus, the stocks of external
assets rather than the flows are consistent with the model. But the choice of the stock at time t may need to use
the information set conveyed in the stock at time t − 1. Therefore, empirically, we may need to allow for the lagged
dependent variable in the equation to control for the dynamics of the information set.




                                                          14
3.3       Probability of Liquidity Crisis

The crux of our theory is that a higher probability of an aggregate liquidity shock (the variable
q) increases the share of FPI, relative to FDI. Therefore we include in equation (15) a variable,
Pri,t (Liquidity Shocki,t+1 ), to proxy for this probability, as perceived in period t.11 We emphasize
that we look at the probability of such a shock to occur irrespective of whether such a shock actually
occurs.
       We define the liquidity crisis as an episode of negative purchase of external assets. The intuition
is that economy wide liquidity crises in source countries will generate a sale of many types of
external assets, such as foreign reserves, loans and equities. Hence negative purchase of external
assets can be a reasonable proxy of liquidity crises. The flow data on external assets is from
the International Financial Statistics’s Balance of Payments dataset, where assets include FDI,
FPI, other investments and foreign reserves. We thus define the liquidity crisis episodes as sales of
external assets, which has a frequency of 13% in our sample of 140 countries from 1985 to 2004. The
Balance of Payments data do not control for the valuation eﬀect. Therefore, they could capture the
notion of the quantity of investment liquidations in our model. Table 2 lists the countries and years
when there is a negative purchase of external assets. It shows that besides developing countries,
some developed economies, such as Denmark, Japan, New Zealand and Spain, also experienced
liquidity crises in the sample period.
       To estimate the probability of liquidity crises, we apply the following Probit model:
                                                           ⎧
                                                           ⎨ 1 if y ∗
                                                                    i,t+1 > 0
                           Ii,t (Liquidity Crisisi,t+1 ) =                     ,
                                                           ⎩ 0 if y ∗     ≤0   i,t+1

       ∗
where yi,t+1 , a latent variable, is a function of the following independent variables:

                                                  ∗
                                                 yi,t+1 = Zit0 λ + η i,t+1 ,                                         (17)

where ηi,t+1 follows a standard normal distribution.
       The vector Zit0 is motivated by the literature on financial crises (e.g., Frankel and Rose, 1996).
It covers control variables from equation (15): the log of population, the log of GDP per capita,
trade openness, and stock market development. Moreover, it also includes US real interest rate,
source country political risk index, current account surplus over GDP or budget balance over GDP
  11
       The inclusion of the liquidity shock probability is in the spirit of Razin and Rubinstein (2006), where they stress
the importance of including the probability of currency crisis in estimating the relationship between exchange rate
regime and economic growth.


                                                             15
or Standard & Poor’s sovereign debt rating. Political risk index, from the International Country
Risk Guide, is based mainly on government stability, socioeconomic conditions, investment profile,
internal conflict, external conflict, corruption, and bureaucracy quality.12 It has been linked to finan-
cial crises in earlier literature, with higher political risk making the economy vulnerable to capital
flow reversals (e.g. Gelos and Wei (2005), and Broner, Gelos and Reinhart (2006)).13 Standard &
Poor’s sovereign rating reflects the future ability and willingness of sovereign governments to service
their commercial financial obligations in full and on time. It is based on country’s political risk,
income and economic structure, economics growth prospects, fiscal flexibility, general government
debt structure, oﬀshore and contingent liabilities, monetary flexibilities, external liquidity, and ex-
ternal debt burden. Hence it can be regarded as a summary of other control variables in Zit0 .
When sovereign rating declines, the country will have diﬃculty in borrowing and hence a potential
liquidity crunch.
       To identify β in equation (15), the exclusion restriction needs to be satisfied. That is, there needs
                                                     ∗
to be at least one variable that is correlated with yi,t+1 in equation (17) but uncorrelated with εit in
equation (15). We argue the following variables can satisfy the exclusion restriction: political risk
index, current account surplus over GDP, and budget surplus over GDP. Our theory does not suggest
their inclusion in equation (15). And we are not aware of other models where they directly influence
the composition of capital outflows. In earlier literatures, institutional factors, such as political
risks, have been applied to the host country FDI confiscation considerations (Albuquerque (2003)
and Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych (2007)). These confiscation considerations, however,
is more about host country than about source country. Current account or budget surplus may
indirectly aﬀect the FPI/FDI composition through aﬀecting exchange rate, which may generate
some wealth eﬀect and influence FDI and FPI asymmetrically as in Froot and Stein (1991). Froot
and Stein (1991) model operates via a wealth eﬀect in the host country. Because of frictions in
control that exist in FDI but not in FPI, wealth is important only for FDI. Thus a rise in host-
country wealth, from the appreciation of its real exchange rate, will increase its FDI inflow, while
having no impact on its FPI receipts. One could potentially extend their model to source countries
with the prediction that real exchange rate appreciation may increase FDI outflow, relative to FPI
outflow. Hence we will include a control variable for the wealth eﬀect in equation (15), i.e., the
  12
       See http://www.prsgroup.com/commonhtml/ methods.html# _International_Country_Risk.
  13
       Lower political risk has also been shown to reduces the cost of capital (e.g. Harvey (2004)) and the credit spread
(e.g. Eichengreen, Kletzer, and Mody (2003)).




                                                            16
lagged real exchange rate appreciation.14 With the wealth eﬀect controlled for, there is unlikely
to be a correlation between εit and current account or budget surplus, and β can be unbiasly
estimated.


4         Empirical Findings

4.1         Probit

We use the pooled specification to predict the liquidity crisis as in the literature on financial
crises (e.g., Frankel and Rose, 1996), because Probit models with fixed eﬀects do not provide
consistent estimators due to the incidental parameters problem (Greene, 2002).15 Table 3 presents
the Probit estimations. Case1 (Column 1) examines all countries from 1985 to 2004, subject to
data availability on control variables. We find that larger economic size, higher development level,
and trade openness all lower the occurrence of liquidity crises. Meanwhile, higher U.S. interest
rate, higher political risk and smaller current account surplus increase the probability of crises.16
The predicted crisis probability ranges between 0.01 and 0.57, with an average of 0.19.
         In Case 2, we focus on countries with stock markets, which are the main players behind foreign
portfolio investments. This shrinks our sample size by 45%. Still we find similar results as in
Column 1. The predicted crisis probability now ranges from 0.01 to 0.77, with an average of 0.11.
In Case 3, we substitute the current account surplus on the external side with the budget surplus
on the domestic side. We find that higher budget surplus is associated with smaller probability of
crisis. In Column 4, we use the Standard and Poor’s sovereign rating instead. When the sovereign
rating is poor, government, banks and non—financial firms will find it more expensive to borrow
abroad and therefore compete for domestic resources, creating upward pressure on interest rates.
The inclusion of sovereign rating reduces the sample size by 30%, owing to the smaller country
coverage. We find that higher sovereign rating significantly reduces the likelihood of crisis.17
    14
         We will examine it in more details in the section on sensitivity tests.
    15
         Probit models rely on Ti increasing for the fixed eﬀects to be consistently estimated.   But in our model, Ti is
both small and fixed. Hence, the estimated fixed eﬀects are not consistent estimators. However, the estimator of β
is a function of the estimators of the fixed eﬀects, which means that the estimation of β will not be consistent either.
   16
      The R-square of the Probit estimation is 0.09. Arguably, it is not large. We use Probit to test the hypothesis
that the probability of crises matters, but we are not too concerned about the degree of fitness of the Probit, as long
as it is an unbiased estimate of the probability.
  17
     We use the numeric representation of the rating, with smaller number corresponding to higher risk, i.e. worse
rating.



                                                             17
4.2   Ratio of FPI to FDI

With the predicted crisis probabilities from Table 3, we can now estimate equations (15) and (16).
The results are reported in Table 4. Columns 1 and 2 present the estimations with pure country
fixed eﬀects (i.e., no dynamic feedback). We start with the predicted probability as the only
explanatory variable. As our theory predicts, a higher probability of liquidity shocks significantly
increases the share of FPI outflow relative to FDI. A 1% rise of the crisis probability will increase
the ratio of FPI stock over FDI stock by 3%. Column 2, with more control variables, confirm the
results in Column 1. It also suggests that trade openness complements FDI outflow.
   Columns 3 and 4 report dynamic panel estimations. Dynamic estimation reduces the sample
size, but reassuringly, higher probability of liquidity shocks still increases FPI relative to FDI.
We also find that the lagged FPI/FDI ratio is associated with the current FPI/FDI ratio. The
coeﬃcient of the lagged FPI/FDI is 0.73, which suggests that there is no panel unit root process
for ln(FPI/FDI). Additional Arellano-Bond tests fail to reject the hypothesis of no second-order
autocorrelation. That is, the estimations in Columns 3 and 4 are valid estimations To examine
whether there is nonlinearity, we also add the square of the predicted probability as an additional
explanatory variable. The square term is not significant in either the pure fixed eﬀect estimation
or the dynamic panel estimation.
   The above results could also be consistent with models that are not based on information
asymmetry but on pure transaction cost or market depth. FPI tends to be easier to liquidate than
FDI. For example, to liquidate FDI, it may take longer to find buyers who know the sectors and are
willing to take over the management. But to liquidate FPI, it will not be diﬃcult to sell stocks to
other portfolio investors in a deep stock market. If an investor foresees a liquidity crisis and the need
to liquidate assets, he may then choose FPI instead. This argument is based on pure transaction
cost without involving information asymmetry. As our theoretical model is based on asymmetric
information, we have a second layer of testable predictions that the above counter arguments lack.
That is, liquidity shocks will interact with source-country capital market transparency to influence
the FPI/FDI composition. We now test this prediction.


4.3   Capital Market Opacity in Source Country

A key prediction of our theoretical model is that the higher is the opacity in the source country,
the higher is the impact of the probability of liquidity shocks on FPI/FDI. Hence, we estimate the



                                                   18
following equation



              ln (F P I/F DI)it = φ ln (F P I/F DI)i,t−1 + αXit + β 0 Pri,t (Liquidity Shocki,t+1 ) +

                                      β 1 Opacityi ∗ Pri,t (Liquidity Shocki,t+1 ) + γY eart + ui + εit            (18)

We expect to see a positive value of β 1 . Note that the opacity index itself is excluded as an
explanatory variable, as it is time-invariant and therefore imbedded in country fixed eﬀects. In this
section, we focus on countries where stock markets are present, hence our Probit prediction of crisis
is based on the coeﬃcients in Case 2 of Table 3, although results were similar if based on Case 1
of Table 3.
       In our theoretical model, the opacity is related to either the fundamentals of the project or the
liquidity situation of investors. We now introduce a rich set of indexes that capture the degree of
opacity about investors’ liquidity, and to some extent, the underlying projects. We start with the
disclosure score from Center for International Financial Analysis and Research (1995), which ex-
amines firm-level annual reports for the omission or inclusion of 90 accounting items in 41 countries
for the year of 1993. The score is related to firm’s incomes, cash flows and balance sheets, which
cover firm’s liquidity and operations. It ranges from 56 to 85, with higher score associated with
better corporate disclosure. It has been applied in prior studies (La Porta et al. (1998), Rajan
and Zingales (1998), and Bushman, Piotroski and Smith (2004)). We use 100 minus the original
CIFAR transparency index to arrive at the CIFAR opacity index (Appendix Table 1), and apply it
in equation (18). Again we estimate both the pure fixed-eﬀect model and the dynamic panel. We
find that the interaction term of opacity and crisis probability has a positive coeﬃcient (Columns
1 and 2 of Table 5), hence higher opacity increases the eﬀect of crisis probability on the FPI/FDI
composition.18
       Our second opacity index comes from Kurtzman, Yago and Phumiwasana (2004), which fol-
lows the methodology of PricewaterhouseCoopers (2001) Opacity Index but expands the country
coverage from 35 to 48. The index measures opacity based on five standards-related dimensions—
corruption, eﬃcacy of the legal system, deleterious economic policy, inadequate accounting and
governance practices, and detrimental regulatory structures. We use both its overall opacity index
(OPA) and its accounting subcomponent (ACC), with higher index associated with lower trans-
  18
       Sample sizes in Table 5 tend to be smaller than those in Table 4, as some source countries are not covered by the
various opacity indexes.


                                                            19
parency (Appendix Table 2).19 The original PricewaterhouseCoopers 2001 Opacity Index has been
applied in Gelos and Wei (2005), where the authors study how host country transparency aﬀects
international investors’ portfolio holdings. We report the estimation of equation (18) with the ac-
counting opacity index in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, and with the overall opacity in Columns 5
and 6. All the estimations suggest that higher opacity strengthens the eﬀect of the crisis probability
on the FPI/FDI choice.
       Our fourth proxy of opacity is from the Global Competitiveness Report (1999) published by
the World Economic Forum. The Report surveys over 3,000 executives about their perceptions of
the firm-level financial disclosure in the country where they operate. The respondents were asked
to assess the validity of the statement “The level of financial disclosure required is extensive and
detailed" with a score from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) for 58 countries. We use 8
minus the original value to construct our proxy of opacity (GCR, Appendix Table 3). This proxy for
corporate opacity has also been applied previously in Gelos and Wei (2005). The regression results
in Columns 7 and 8 of Table 5 again suggest that opacity increases the impact of the predicted
liquidity crisis.
       Hence, we confirm the importance of the interplay of asymmetry information and liquidity
shocks on the capital flow composition by applying a rich set of opacity proxies. Certainly, those
proxies are correlated, even though they are based on diﬀerent years and criteria (subjective or
objective). Appendix 4 list the correlations among them, with the correlations ranging from 0.24
to 0.78.
       So far, the predicted probability of crisis is based on the Probit estimation in Column 2 of
Table 3. Now, we use an alternative prediction of crisis probability based on Column 3 of Table
3, where we replace current account surplus with budget surplus in the Probit equation. The
regression results with the new crisis probability are reported in Table 6. Reassuringly, the pattern
of results in Table 5 still carry over, with similar signs and significance levels. We further apply
another measure of crisis probability based on Column 4 of Table 3, where Standard and Poor’s
sovereign rating replaces current account surplus. The new results are reported in Table 7. The
average sample size now is around 15% less than that in Table 5. But again, we find significant
  19
       Its accounting subcomponent is based on the following survey questions: Have exchanges established disclosure
requirements?Are large shareholders required to disclose ownership? Are annual reports available to the public on
demand? Are public corporations’ financial statements required to be reviewed by an external auditor? Are the
country’s accounting standards on disclosure in accordance with International Accounting Standards? And must
firms account for financial assets at fair market value?


                                                           20
impacts of opacity, similar to those in Table 5. Hence, these alternative crisis probabilities assure
us that our key results related to liquidity and opacity are not driven by a certain functional form
or specification of the Probit.


4.4   More Sensitivity Checks

In this section, we look at several variations of the panel estimation of equation (18). We start
with adding more variables into equation (18) to tackle potential omitted variable problems. Our
first addition is a variable controlling for the eﬀect of wealth on FDI. According to Froot and Stein
(1991), and Baker, Foley, and Wurgler (2007), higher source country’s wealth could significantly
boost FDI outflow, as it provides cheaper financing. Froot and Stein (1991) use the appreciation of
exchange rate to proxy for cheaper financing, while Baker, Foley, and Wurgler (2007) use the stock
market’s market to book ratio. As the data on exchange rate has more country coverage than the
market/book ratio, we will then use the real exchange rate to proxy for the wealth of source country.
We reexamine Table 5 and report the new results in Table 8. The sample size is now reduced by
around 10% in some cases. We find that the appreciation of the real exchange rate increases the FDI
more than for the FPI, consistent with Froot and Stein (1991). More importantly, our key results
on liquidity and opacity is still present. We also add the lagged real exchange rate appreciation
into the Probit estimation of crisis, but it turns out to be insignificant. Another control variable
we add is the Chinn and Ito (2007) measure of financial openness. We do not find a significant
eﬀect for it on either the crisis probability or the FPI/FDI composition.
   Secondly, we have so far excluded opacity itself as an explanatory variable, because time-
invariant opacity indicators are already imbedded in country fixed eﬀects. As a sensitivity check,
we drop country fixed eﬀects and add opacity indexes as control variables. We find that the
interaction term of opacity and crisis probability is still positive for all opacity indexes, and is
diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level for two indexes (OPA and GCR).
   Thirdly, we substitute the predicted probability of crisis with the actual occurrence of liquidity
crisis at t + 1. Evidently, this may create some endogeneity issues in estimation. But it can still
serve as useful checks, particularly if there is some concerns about the forecasting power of Probit
models. The dynamic panel estimation results are presented in Table 9, with four proxies of opacity
(OPA, ACC, CIFAR, and GCR). Again, there we find that the occurrence of liquidity crises at t + 1
increases the ratio of FPI to FDI. Moreover, the impact becomes larger for source countries with
opaque capital markets.


                                                 21
    Finally, we use the one-year lags of FPI stock (log) and FDI stock (log) as explanatory variables,
rather than the lag of the FPI/FDI ratio. We find that the lagged FPI is positively associated with
the FPI/FDI ratio, while the lagged FDI is negatively associated with the FPI/FDI ratio. More
importantly, the probability of crises still has significant impacts as in Table 5.


5    Conclusion

In this paper, we examine how the fear of liquidity shocks guides international investors in choosing
between FPI and FDI. We start by presenting a model in the spirit of Goldstein and Razin (2006).
In this model, FDI investors control the management of the firms; whereas FPI investors delegate
decisions to managers. Consequently, direct investors are more informed than portfolio investors
about the prospects of projects. This information enables them to manage their projects more
eﬃciently. However, if investors need to sell their investments before maturity because of liquidity
shocks, the price they can get will be lower when buyers know that they have more information on
investment projects. We extend the Goldstein and Razin (2006) model by making the assumption
that liquidity shocks to individual investors are triggered by some aggregate liquidity shock. A key
prediction then is that countries that have a high probability of an aggregate liquidity crisis will
be the source of more FPI and less FDI. Another prediction is that this eﬀect will be strong only
when the transparency in the source country is weak.
    To test this hypothesis, we apply a dynamic panel model to examine the variation of FPI
relative to FDI for 140 source countries from 1990 to 2004. We use episodes of negative purchase
of external assets as a proxy for liquidity crises. Using a Probit specification, we estimate the
probability of liquidity crises for each country and in every year of our sample. Then, we test
the eﬀect of this probability on the ratio between FPI and FDI generated by the source country.
We find strong support for our model: a higher probability of a liquidity crisis, measured by the
probability of episodes of negative purchase of external assets, has a significant positive eﬀect on
the ratio between FPI and FDI. Moreover, higher opacity in the source country accelerates the
eﬀect of the probability of liquidity shock on FPI/FDI. Hence, liquidity shocks seem to have strong
eﬀects on the composition of foreign investment, as predicted by our model.




                                                  22
References

 [1] Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath (2005), “Fire-Sale Foreign Direct Investment and Liquidity
    Crises”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 87, 439-452.

 [2] Akerlof, George. A. (1970), “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
    Mechanism”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 488-500.

 [3] Albuquerque, Rui (2003), “The Composition of International Capital Flows: Risk-Sharing
    through Foreign Direct Investment”, Journal of International Economics, 61(2), 353-383.

 [4] Albuquerque, Rui, Norman Loayza and Luis Serven         (2005), “World Market Integration
    through the Lens of Foreign Direct Investors”, Journal of International Economics, 66, 267-
    295.

 [5] Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych (2007), “Why doesn’t Capital
    Flow from Rich to Poor Countries : An Empirical Investigation”, Review of Economics and
    Statistics, forthcoming.

 [6] Baker, Malcolm, Fritz Foley, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler (2007), “Multinationals as Arbitrageures:
    The Eﬀect of Stock Market Valuations on Foreign Direct Investment”, Review of Financial
    Studies, forthcoming.

 [7] Bekaert, Geert and Campbell Harvey (2000), “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Mar-
    kets”, Journal of Finance, 55, 565-613.

 [8] Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad (2005), “Does Financial Liberal-
    ization Spur Growth?”, Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 3-55.

 [9] Broner, Fernando, Gaston Gelos and Carmen Reinhart (2006), “When in Peril, Retrench:
    Testing the Portfolio Channel of Contagion”, Journal of International Economics, 69, 203—
    230.

[10] Bushman, Robert, Joseph Piotroski and Abbie Smith (2004), "What Determines Corporate
    Transparency?”, Journal of Accounting Research, 42, 207—252.

[11] Center for International Financial Analysis and Research (1995), International Accounting and
    Auditing Trends, Volumes II. Princeton, NJ: Center for International Financial Analysis and
    Research.

                                               23
[12] Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry (2004), “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from
    a Natural Experiment”, Journal of Finance, 59, 1295-1324.

[13] Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito (2007), “A New Measure of Financial Openness”, University of
    Wisconsin mimeo.

[14] Eichengreen, Barry J., Kenneth M. Kletzer, and Ashoka Mody (2003), “Crisis Resolution:
    Next Steps”, IMF Working Paper No. 03/196.

[15] Errunza, Vihang and Darius Miller (2000), “Market Segmentation and the Cost of Capital in
    International Equity Markets”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 35, 577-600.

[16] Faria, André, Philip R. Lane, Paolo Mauro and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007), “The Shift-
    ing Composition of External Liabilities”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 5,
    480-490.

[17] Ferreira, Miguel and Pedro Matos (2007), “The Colors of Investors’ Money: Which Firms
    Attract Institutional Investors From Around the World?”, Journal of Financial Economics,
    forthcoming.

[18] Frankel, Jeﬀrey and Andrew Rose (1996), “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An Em-
    pirical Treatment”, Journal of International Economics, 41, 351-366.

[19] Froot, Kenneth A. and Jeremy C. Stein (1991), “Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct In-
    vestment: An Imperfect Capital Markets Approach”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106,
    1191-1217.

[20] Gelos, Gaston and Shang-Jin Wei (2005), “Transparency and International Portfolio Holdings”,
    Journal of Finance, 60, 2987-3020.

[21] Goldstein, Itay and Assaf Razin (2006), “An information-Based Tradeoﬀ between Foreign
    Direct Investment and Foreign Portfolio investment”, Journal of International Economics, 70,
    271-295.

[22] Greene, William (2002), Econometric Analysis (5th edition), Prentice Hall.

[23] Griﬃn, John, Federico Nardari, and Rene Stulz (2004), “Daily Cross-Border Flows: Pushed
    or Pulled?”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 641-657.


                                               24
[24] Harvey, Campbell (2004), “Country Risk Components, the Cost of Capital, and Returns in
    Emerging Markets”, Duke University, mimeo.

[25] Henry, Peter Blair (2000), “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
    Market Equity Prices”, Journal of Finance, 55, 529-564.

[26] Klein, Michael, Joe Peek, and Eric Rosengren (2002), “Troubled Banks, Impaired Foreign
    Direct Investment: The Role of Relative Access to Credit”, American Economic Review, 92,
    664-682.

[27] Kurtzman, Joel, Glenn Yago and Triphon Phumiwasana (2004), “The Global Costs of Opac-
    ity”, MIT Sloan Management Review, 46, 38—44.

[28] Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2006), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
    Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004”, IMF Working
    Papers 06/69.

[29] La Porta, Raphael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1997),
    “Legal Determinants of External Finance”, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

[30] Leuz, Christian, Karl Lins, and Francis Warnock (2007), “Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly
    Governed Firms?”, University of Chicago, mimeo.

[31] Lipsey, Robert (2001), “Foreign Direct Investors in Three Financial Crises,” NBER Working
    Paper, 8084.

[32] Razin, Assaf and Yona Rubinstein (2006), “Evaluation of Currency Regimes: the Unique Role
    of Sudden Stops”, Economic Policy, 21, 119-152.

[33] Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (1998), “Financial dependence and growth,” American
    Economic Review, 88, 559-586.

[34] Rossi, Stefano and Paolo Volpin (2004), “Cross-Country Determinants of Mergers and Acqui-
    sitions”, Journal of Financial Economics, 74, 277-304.

[35] Sarno, L. and M. P. Taylor (1999), “Hot Money, Accounting Labels and the Permanence of
    Capital Flows to Developing Countries: An Empirical Investigation”, Journal of Developments
    Economics, 59, 337-364.


                                               25
[36] Stulz, Rene (2005), “The Limits of Financial Globalization”, Journal of Finance, 60, 1595-
     1638.

[37] UNCTAD (2006), “FDI from Developing and Transition Economies: Implications for Devel-
     opment", World Investment Report 2006.


6    Appendix: The Valuation Adjustment for the Stock of FDI and
     FPI Assets

For FPI assets, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) use the following method to calculate the market
value of the stock at the end of year t (i.e, EQASt ):


                                                    pMS
                                                     t           pMS
                                                                   t
                              EQASt = EQASt−1        MS
                                                         + EQAFt
                                                    pt−1         p̄MS
                                                                   t
where EQASt−1 is the market value of the stock at the end of t − 1; EQAFt is the flow during the
year t; pMS
         t  is the Morgan Stanley Composite Index of world stock markets at the end of t; and
p̄MS
  t  is the average Morgan Stanley composite index during year t.
    For FDI assets, they use a diﬀerent method to account for the valuation eﬀect. The IMF’s
dataset of International Investment Position (IIP) provide book-value estimates of FDI stock for
the majority of countries, and market-value estimates for a relatively small number of countries.
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) complement the IIP dataset with valuation changes designed to
capture shifts in relative prices across countries. Here is how they do it:
    • For market-value series of FDI stock in IIP, they adjust stock positions for shifts in stock
market price indices (i.e, pMS
                            t ), same as their adjustment method for FPI. However, only France,

New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the U.S. provide market value series.
    • For book-value series of FDI stock in IIP, they mainly use this method: cumulative flows
adjusting outstanding holdings for fluctuations in real exchange rates. They first assume that the
investment pattern of a country reflects its trade pattern. Their adjustment then is to account
for the impact of changes in the exchange rates of the countries where the investment takes place
vis-a-vis the US dollar. Hence, their formula is


                                                         rerpct
                            F DIASt = F DIASt−1                  + F DIAFt
                                                        rerpct−1



                                                   26
where F DIASt−1 is the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006)’s adjusted market value of FDI stock at
the end of year t − 1; F DIAFt is FDI outflow during year t; and

                                                    cpipc epc
                                                           $
                                           rerpct =
                                                     cpius
where pc stands for partner countries, us for the U.S., cpix is the consumer price index of country
x and epc
       $ is the dollar / partner countries’ nominal exchange rate. Let us look at Italy’s FDI asset

as an example. Suppose that Italy only has FDI in Germany and France, then pc stands for the
combination of France and Germany, weighted by these two countries’ trade with Italy. One can
verify that rerpc actually is the ratio between the CPI-based real exchange rate of the country
(Italy) vis-a-vis the US and the CPI-based real eﬀective exchange rate (Italy vis-a-vis trading
partners).
   Hence, in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006), the adjustment for FDI in book value is diﬀerent
from the adjustment for FPI. Will this significantly aﬀect our estimation model in the main text?
It is unlikely, because:
   First, we are looking at source country rather than host country. For FPI assets, the adjustment
factor, pMS
         t , is the global stock return, which does not vary across source countries. Hence, as long

as we include year eﬀects, we will fully capture the eﬀect of pMS
                                                               t .

   Secondly, rerpct , essentially reflects the price relationship (CPI and exchange rate) between
Italy’s trading partners and the US. It is unlikely to be aﬀected much by the liquidity crisis in the
source country. That is, a crisis in Italy is unlikely to change much the relative price between the
combination of Italy’s trading partners (France, Germany, China, Canada, U.S., etc.) and the U.S.
Note that if the U.S. itself is a large trading partner of Italy, then rerpct will change very little. In
the extreme case where the U.S. is the only trading partner, rerpct will be equal to 1. And in the
case where there is a world-wide contagion, again it will be captured by our year dummies.




                                                   27
                        Table 1: Ratio of FPI to FDI: Summary Statistics
Country Name                 Obs       Mean                    Country Name                    Obs       Mean
United States                20        -0.88                   Hong Kong S.A.R.                7         -1.22
United Kingdom               20        -0.13                   India                           19        -0.73
Austria                      20        -0.30                   Indonesia                       4         -4.51
Denmark                      20        -0.78                   Korea                           20        -2.26
France                       20        -1.46                   Malaysia                        20        -2.15
Germany                      20        -0.48                   Pakistan                        3         -2.51
Italy                        20        -0.59                   Philippines                     20        -0.12
Netherlands                  20        -0.73                   Singapore                       20        0.04
Norway                       20        -0.94                   Thailand                        18        -3.21
Sweden                       20        -1.50                   Botswana                        11        -0.16
Switzerland                  20        -0.11                   Congo, Republic of              10        0.30
Canada                       20        -0.05                   Benin                           9         -3.63
Japan                        20        -0.72                   Gabon                           7         -2.98
Finland                      20        -2.54                   Côte d'Ivoire                   19        0.06
Greece                       19        -0.41                   Kenya                           20        -3.65
Iceland                      14        -0.24                   Libya                           20        2.91
Ireland                      20        0.97                    Mali                            8         -3.66
Malta                        11        -1.39                   Mauritius                       6         -1.38
Portugal                     20        -0.11                   Morocco                         3         -2.08
Spain                        20        -1.25                   Niger                           8         -5.38
Turkey                       17        0.73                    Rwanda                          6         -0.33
Australia                    20        -0.71                   Senegal                         20        -1.41
New Zealand                  17        -0.94                   Namibia                         14        0.65
South Africa                 20        -0.94                   Swaziland                       13        -3.94
Argentina                    20        0.44                    Togo                            17        -1.47
Brazil                       20        -3.25                   Tunisia                         20        2.20
Chile                        20        0.32                    Armenia                         8         -1.58
Colombia                     20        -0.86                   Belarus                         8         -1.13
Costa Rica                   10        -1.04                   Kazakhstan                      6         -0.28
Dominican Republic           9         -0.54                   Bulgaria                        8         -0.52
El Salvador                  4         0.58                    Moldova                         11        -3.99
Mexico                       20        -0.28                   Russia                          11        -4.40
Paraguay                     20        -3.24                   China,P.R.: Mainland            17        -3.25
Peru                         20        0.88                    Ukraine                         9         -0.37
Uruguay                      17        -0.22                   Czech Republic                  12        0.33
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.         20        -0.81                   Slovak Republic                 10        1.28
Trinidad and Tobago          10        -2.32                   Estonia                         11        -2.00
Bahrain                      20        0.58                    Latvia                          11        -1.20
Cyprus                       6         0.04                    Hungary                         14        -1.88
Israel                       20        -0.10                   Lithuania                       12        -1.47
Jordan                       8         1.79                    Croatia                         8         -3.11
Saudi Arabia                 13        -0.89                   Slovenia                        11        -2.79
Egypt                        8         -0.16                   Macedonia                       7         2.01
Bangladesh                   5         -3.17                   Poland                          7         -1.97
Cambodia                     8         -0.09                   Romania                         7         -2.86
Note: Table 1 presents the average of the log of FPI stock over FDI stock for 90 source countries for the period from 1985
to 2004. Obs is the number of non-missing observations for each source country. Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006).




                                                                28
          Table 2: Episodes of Sales of External Assets Since 1985
Algeria                     1987,1986,
Argentina                   2001,1989,1987,1986,
Bahrain                     2002,2001,1995,1993,1991,1990,1987,
Belarus                     2003,1998,1997,
Brazil                      1999,1997,1986,
Bulgaria                    1996,
Chile                       1993,1987,1986,
Colombia                    2002,1998,1995,
Costa Rica                  2002,1998,
Croatia                     1998,
Denmark                     1994,
Dominican Republic          2000,1996,
Egypt                       1999,1998,
Greece                      2001,2000,1997,1995,1992,1989,
Hong Kong S.A.R. of China   2001,1998,
Hungary                     1994,
Iceland                     1994,
India                       1995,1990,1989,1988,1987,1986,
Indonesia                   2001,
Israel                      1988,1987,
Japan                       1999,
Kazakhstan                  1998,
Kenya                       1997,1996,1995,1994,1990,1987,
Latvia                      1995,
Lebanon                     2004,2003,2002,
Libya                       1993,1991,1988,1987,
Lithuania                   1999,
Macedonia                   2002,
Malaysia                    1996,1995,1994,
Malta                       2001,1994,
Mauritius                   1998,
Mexico                      2002,2000,1994,1992,1988,
Moldova                     1998,
New Zealand                 1997,1992,1991,1988,
Niger                       2002,1998,1997,1996,
Pakistan                    2004,
Paraguay                    2002,2001,1997,1992,1988,1987,1986,
Peru                        2000,1999,1998,1990,1987,1986,
Philippines                 2001,2000,1997,1990,1987,
Poland                      1996,
Romania                     1999,1998,1995,
Rwanda                      2003,
Saudi Arabia                1998,1996,1995,1994,1993,1992,
Senegal                     1993,1990,1987,1986,
Slovak Republic             1999,1998,
Spain                       1994,
Swaziland                   2003,
Thailand                    1997,
Togo                        2001,1998,1993,1992,1987,1986,
Turkey                      2001,1994,
Ukraine                     1998,
Uruguay                     2002,
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.        1995,1992,1988,1987,1986,




                                                    29
                         Table 3: Probit Estimation of Liquidity Crises

                                    Case 1                 Case 2               Case 3            Case 4
Population, log                     -0.090***              -0.12**              -0.16***          -0.15**
                                    [0.031]                [0.054]              [0.053]           [0.073]
GDP per capita, log                 -0.12***               -0.17***             -0.26***          -0.21*
                                    [0.034]                [0.065]              [0.067]           [0.12]
US real interest rate               0.10***                0.12***              0.12***           0.12**
                                    [0.027]                [0.038]              [0.039]           [0.048]
Trade openness                      -0.12                  -0.22                -0.29*            -0.21
                                    [0.086]                [0.15]               [0.15]            [0.19]
Political risk                      0.015***               0.014**              0.0086            0.0011
                                    [0.0034]               [0.0061]             [0.0064]          [0.011]
Number of listed stocks                                    0.13**               0.12**            0.11
                                                           [0.051]              [0.054]           [0.079]
Current Account /GDP                -0.015***              -0.048***
                                    [0.0053]               [0.010]
Budget Surplus/GDP                                                              -0.031**
                                                                                [0.015]
S&P country rating                                                                                -0.17**
                                                                                                  [0.072]
Constant                            2.30***                2.88*                4.25***           3.64
                                    [0.8]                  [1.6]                [1.6]             [2.3]
Observations                        1851                   1028                 971               671
R-squared                           0.09                   0.11                 0.08              0.12

Note: Table 3 estimates the probability of liquidity crises for countries over the period 1985-2004. The
dependent variable is the liquidation of source country’s foreign asset. Political risk indexes is from ICRG,
country rating is from Standard and Poor’s, while all other variables are from the WDI. A pooled Probit
regression is estimated. Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     30
                             Table 4: Determinants of FPI over FDI

                                   Fixed Effect     Fixed Effect     Dynamic Panel        Dynamic Panel

Prob of Liquidity Crisis at t+1 3.06***             2.53**           1.88***              0.81
                                [0.85]              [1.20]           [0.65]               [0.94]
Population, log                                     -1.99***                              -1.53**
                                                    [0.77]                                [0.68]
GDP per capita, log                                 -0.49                                 -0.23
                                                    [0.36]                                [0.29]
Stock capitalization/GDP                            0.045                                 0.018
                                                    [0.040]                               [0.033]
Trade openness                                      -0.55**                               -0.33*
                                                    [0.22]                                [0.17]
Log(FPI/FDI), lag                                                    0.77***              0.73***
                                                                     [0.028]              [0.030]
Observations                       1135             849              1023                 737
Number of countries                89               78               84                   75
R-squared                          0.08             0.1

Note: The estimated probability of liquidity crisis is based on the estimates from Table 3 (Case 1). The
dependent variable is the log of FPI stock over FDI stock, for source countries from 1985 to 2004. All other
explanatory variables are from the WDI. Cases 1 and 2 are estimations with country and year fixed effects.
Cases 3 and 4 add the one-year-lagged dependent variable to estimates a dynamic panel model. Standard
errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     31
                                  Table 5: Determinants of FPI over FDI-Opacity

                                  CIFAR      CIFAR      ACC         ACC         OPA         OPA         GCR         GCR
                                  Fixed      Dynamic    Fixed       Dynamic     Fixed       Dynamic     Fixed       Dynamic
Population, log                   -5.76***   -1.17***   -4.46***    -0.87**     -4.00***    -0.6        -4.97***    -2.01***
                                  [0.82]     [0.38]     [0.76]      [0.43]      [0.76]      [0.43]      [0.77]      [0.54]
GDP per capita, log               -1.47***   -0.50**    -0.25       -0.099      -0.34       -0.17       -0.18       -0.23
                                  [0.47]     [0.21]     [0.36]      [0.19]      [0.36]      [0.19]      [0.37]      [0.23]
Stock capitalization/GDP          -0.047     -0.078**   -0.039      -0.066**    -0.02       -0.052*     -0.037      -0.044
                                  [0.073]    [0.032]    [0.048]     [0.029]     [0.047]     [0.029]     [0.045]     [0.031]
Trade openness                    -0.2       -0.042     -0.24       -0.15       -0.17       -0.12       -0.27       -0.26*
                                  [0.29]     [0.12]     [0.24]      [0.12]      [0.24]      [0.12]      [0.24]      [0.15]
Log(FPI/FDI), lag                            0.85***                0.84***                 0.84***                 0.71***
                                             [0.019]                [0.022]                 [0.022]                 [0.024]
Prob of liquidity crisis at t+1   -9.97***   -1.22      -6.21***    -2.58**     -12.6***    -6.19***    -12.7***    -3.85*
                                  [2.87]     [1.22]     [2.36]      [1.20]      [3.17]      [1.64]      [3.49]      [2.20]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(CIFAR)       0.27***    0.042
                                  [0.077]    [0.033]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(ACC)                               0.16**      0.079**
                                                        [0.067]     [0.035]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(OPA)                                                       0.28***     0.14***
                                                                                [0.072]     [0.037]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(GCR)                                                                               4.03***     1.24*
                                                                                                        [1.11]      [0.70]
Observations                      520        476        587         528         587         528         669         599
Number of countries               36         36         44          44          44          44          52          52
R-squared                         0.18                  0.12                    0.13                    0.14

Note: The estimated probability of liquidity crisis is based on the estimates from Table 3 (Case 2). The dependent variable is
the log of FPI stock over FDI stock for source countries from 1985 to 2004. The Overall Opacity Index (OPA) and the
Accounting (ACC) Opacity Index are constructed in 2004 by Kurtzman Group. The opacity index (CIFAR, 1993) is from the
Center for International Financial Analysis and Research. The opacity index (GCR, 1999) is from the annual Global
Competitiveness Report by the World Economic Forum. All other explanatory variables are from the WDI. Standard errors in
brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                               32
                                   Table 6: Determinants of FPI over FDI-Opacity
                                  (With Alternative Estimation of Crisis Probability)

                                  CIFAR      CIFAR        ACC         ACC          OPA         OPA          GCR         GCR
                                  Fixed      Dynamic      Fixed       Dynamic      Fixed       Dynamic      Fixed       Dynamic
Population, log                   -6.51***   -1.22***     -5.56***    -1.13**      -4.72***    -0.90**      -5.15***    -2.15***
                                  [0.79]     [0.38]       [0.78]      [0.45]       [0.76]      [0.43]       [0.75]      [0.54]
GDP per capita, log               -1.91***   -0.48**      -0.034      -0.014       -0.12       -0.055       -0.16       -0.13
                                  [0.47]     [0.21]       [0.38]      [0.20]       [0.38]      [0.19]       [0.38]      [0.23]
Stock capitalization/GDP          -0.066     -0.076***    -0.067      -0.080***    -0.059      -0.076***    -0.046      -0.053*
                                  [0.063]    [0.029]      [0.045]     [0.027]      [0.045]     [0.027]      [0.043]     [0.029]
Trade openness                    -0.28      -0.1         -0.17       -0.12        -0.062      -0.058       -0.31       -0.23
                                  [0.26]     [0.12]       [0.23]      [0.12]       [0.23]      [0.12]       [0.23]      [0.14]
Log(FPI/FDI), lag                            0.84***                  0.83***                  0.83***                  0.70***
                                             [0.020]                  [0.022]                  [0.022]                  [0.024]
Prob of Liquidity Crisis at t+1   -26.2***   -2.05        -11.5***    -2.72        -17.1***    -6.84***     -16.1***    -6.15**
                                  [4.04]     [1.82]       [3.26]      [1.72]       [4.63]      [2.32]       [4.27]      [2.66]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(CIFAR)       0.62***    0.058
                                  [0.10]     [0.045]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(ACC)                                 0.32***     0.10**
                                                          [0.084]     [0.045]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(OPA)                                                          0.38***     0.18***
                                                                                   [0.10]      [0.050]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(GCR)                                                                                   4.87***     2.17***
                                                                                                            [1.32]      [0.82]
Observations                      519        475          573         516          573         516          668         598
Number of countries               36         36           43          43           43          43           52          52
R-squared                         0.24                    0.15                     0.15                     0.15

Note: The estimated probability of liquidity crisis is based on the estimates from Table 3 (Case 3). The dependent variable is the
log of FPI stock over FDI stock for source countries from 1985 to 2004. The Overall Opacity Index (OPA) and the Accounting
(ACC) Opacity Index are constructed in 2004 by Kurtzman Group. The opacity index (CIFAR, 1993) is from the Center for
International Financial Analysis and Research. The opacity index (GCR, 1999) is from the annual Global Competitiveness
Report by the World Economic Forum. All other explanatory variables are from the WDI. Standard errors in brackets; ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                            33
                                   Table 7: Determinants of FPI over FDI-Opacity
                                  (With Alternative Estimation of Crisis Probability)

                                   CIFAR       CIFAR       ACC         ACC         OPA         OPA         GCR         GCR
                                   Fixed       Dynamic     Fixed       Dynamic     Fixed       Dynamic     Fixed       Dynamic
Population, log                    -5.04***    -0.90**     -5.20***    -1.31***    -4.47***    -0.90**     -4.48***    -1.83***
                                   [0.82]      [0.38]      [0.74]      [0.42]      [0.75]      [0.42]      [0.77]      [0.52]
GDP per capita, log                -0.41       -0.44**     0.62*       0.023       0.36        -0.09       0.38        0.0069
                                   [0.48]      [0.21]      [0.35]      [0.18]      [0.35]      [0.18]      [0.36]      [0.22]
Stock capitalization/GDP           0.16**      -0.032      0.12**      -0.039      0.17***     -0.025      0.16***     0.03
                                   [0.068]     [0.031]     [0.059]     [0.032]     [0.060]     [0.032]     [0.053]     [0.034]
Trade openness                     0.28        0.0022      0.39*       -0.049      0.29        -0.069      -0.0054     -0.18
                                   [0.27]      [0.12]      [0.23]      [0.12]      [0.24]      [0.12]      [0.24]      [0.15]
Log(FPI/FDI), lag                              0.86***                 0.81***                 0.82***                 0.64***
                                               [0.023]                 [0.026]                 [0.026]                 [0.028]
Prob of Liquidity Crisis at t+1    -15.6***    -2.17       -18.3***    -8.93***    -14.9***    -7.95***    -16.1***    -6.72**
                                   [4.16]      [1.89]      [3.56]      [1.93]      [5.33]      [2.82]      [4.50]      [2.99]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(CIFAR)        0.42***     0.03
                                   [0.11]      [0.051]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(ACC)                                  0.58***     0.26***
                                                           [0.098]     [0.053]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(OPA)                                                          0.36***     0.18***
                                                                                   [0.11]      [0.061]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(GCR)                                                                                  4.90***     2.29***
                                                                                                           [1.28]      [0.85]
Observations                       441         402         492         441         492         441         567         506
Number of countries                35          35          43          43          43          43          51          51
R-squared                          0.26                    0.27                    0.23                    0.22

Note: The estimated probability of liquidity crisis is based on the estimates from Table 3 (Case 4). The dependent variable is the
log of FPI stock over FDI stock for source countries from 1985 to 2004. The Overall Opacity Index (OPA) and the Accounting
(ACC) Opacity Index are constructed in 2004 by Kurtzman Group. The opacity index (CIFAR, 1993) is from the Center for
International Financial Analysis and Research. The opacity index (GCR, 1999) is from the annual Global Competitiveness
Report by the World Economic Forum. All other explanatory variables are from the WDI. Standard errors in brackets; ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                              34
                                  Table 8: Determinants of FPI over FDI-Opacity
                                                -Alternative Panel

                                  CIFAR      CIFAR       ACC         ACC        OPA         OPA         GCR         GCR
                                  Fixed      Dynamic     Fixed       Dynamic    Fixed       Dynamic     Fixed       Dynamic
Population, log                   -5.37***   -1.07***    -4.43***    -0.75*     -4.04***    -0.49       -4.81***    -2.15***
                                  [0.82]     [0.36]      [0.78]      [0.40]     [0.78]      [0.41]      [0.77]      [0.47]
GDP per capita, log               -1.93***   -0.51**     -0.5        -0.16      -0.57       -0.2        -0.51       -0.27
                                  [0.47]     [0.20]      [0.38]      [0.19]     [0.37]      [0.18]      [0.38]      [0.21]
Stock capitalization/GDP          -0.026     -0.097***   -0.0036     -0.066**   0.014       -0.054*     0.035       -0.038
                                  [0.076]    [0.032]     [0.059]     [0.028]    [0.059]     [0.028]     [0.053]     [0.029]
Trade openness                    -0.98***   -0.019      -0.63**     -0.16      -0.55**     -0.098      -0.80***    -0.35**
                                  [0.33]     [0.14]      [0.28]      [0.14]     [0.28]      [0.14]      [0.28]      [0.16]
Real exchange rate (lag)          -1.99***   -0.25*      -1.11***    -0.16      -1.05***    -0.12       -1.09***    -0.33**
                                  [0.34]     [0.15]      [0.28]      [0.14]     [0.28]      [0.14]      [0.27]      [0.16]
Log(FPI/FDI), lag                            0.84***                 0.84***                0.83***                 0.71***
                                             [0.020]                 [0.022]                [0.022]                 [0.023]
Prob of liquidity crisis at t+1   -6.58**    -0.82       -4.26*      -2.20*     -10.4***    -6.23***    -10.3***    -3.75*
                                  [2.87]     [1.18]      [2.55]      [1.26]     [3.44]      [1.70]      [3.59]      [2.04]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(CIFAR)       0.22***    0.041
                                  [0.077]    [0.032]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(ACC)                                0.13*       0.072*
                                                         [0.075]     [0.037]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(OPA)                                                       0.25***     0.15***
                                                                                [0.079]     [0.039]
Prob(crisis)*Opacity(GCR)                                                                               3.28***     1.21*
                                                                                                        [1.13]      [0.64]
Observations                      487        449         542         494        542         494         614         558
Number of countries               34         34          40          40         40          40          47          47
R-squared                         0.26                   0.16                   0.17                    0.18

Note: The estimated probability of liquidity crisis is based on the estimates from Table 3 (Case 2). The dependent variable is
the log of FPI stock over FDI stock for source countries from 1985 to 2004. The Overall Opacity Index (OPA) and the
Accounting (ACC) Opacity Index are constructed in 2004 by Kurtzman Group. The opacity index (CIFAR, 1993) is from the
Center for International Financial Analysis and Research. The opacity index (GCR, 1999) is from the annual Global
Competitiveness Report by the World Economic Forum. All other explanatory variables are from the WDI. Standard errors in
brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                35
                   Table 9: Determinants of FPI over FDI-Opacity
                     (With Actual Occurrence of Liquidity Crisis)

                                                   CIFAR         ACC         OPA           GCR
Log(FPI/FDI), lag                                  0.84***       0.84***     0.84***       0.71***
                                                   [0.020]       [0.023]     [0.023]       [0.026]
Population, log                                    -1.11***      -0.62       -0.54         -1.70***
                                                   [0.39]        [0.44]      [0.44]        [0.57]
GDP per capita, log                                -0.55**       -0.24       -0.25         -0.41*
                                                   [0.22]        [0.20]      [0.20]        [0.24]
Stock market capitalization/GDP                    -0.081***     -0.067**    -0.068**      -0.03
                                                   [0.030]       [0.027]     [0.027]       [0.029]
Trade openness                                     -0.051        -0.13       -0.15         -0.36**
                                                   [0.12]        [0.12]      [0.12]        [0.15]
Liquidity Crises, one-period ahead                 -0.34*        0.06        -0.76***      -0.35
                                                   [0.19]        [0.22]      [0.27]        [0.33]
Liquidity crisis (t+1)*Opacity(CIFAR)              0.012**
                                                   [0.0057]
Liquidity crisis (t+1)*Opacity(ACC)                              -0.00085
                                                                 [0.0062]
Liquidity crisis (t+1)*Opacity(OPA)                                          0.019***
                                                                             [0.0064]
Liquidity crisis (t+1)*Opacity(GCR)                                                        0.14
                                                                                           [0.11]
Observations                                       449           492         492           561
Number of countries                                34            41          41            51

Note: The actual liquidity crisis is used in the estimation. The dependent variable is the log of FPI
stock over FDI stock for source countries over the period from 1985 to 2004. The Overall Opacity
Index (OPA) and the Accounting (ACC) Opacity Index are constructed in 2004 by Kurtzman
Group. The opacity index (CIFAR, 1993) is from the Center for International Financial Analysis
and Research. The opacity index (GCR, 1999) is from the annual Global Competitiveness Report
by the World Economic Forum. All other explanatory variables are from the WDI. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       36
Appendix Table 1: Opacity Index- CIFAR

Argentina                                32
Australia                                20
Austria                                  38
Belgium                                  32
Brazil                                   44
Canada                                   25
Switzerland                              20
Chile                                    22
Colombia                                 42
Germany                                  33
Denmark                                  25
Spain                                    28
Finland                                  17
France                                   22
United Kingdom                           15
Greece                                   39
Hong Kong                                27
India                                    39
Ireland                                  19
Israel                                   26
Italy                                    34
Japan                                    29
Korea                                    32
Sri Lanka                                26
Mexico                                   29
Malaysia                                 21
Nigeria                                  30
Netherlands                              26
Norway                                   25
New Zealand                              20
Pakistan                                 27
Philippines                              36
Portugal                                 44
Singapore                                21
Sweden                                   17
Thailand                                 34
Turkey                                   42
Taiwan                                   42
United States                            24
South Africa                             21
Zimbabwe                                 28
Note: CIFAR (1995) is from the Center for International Financial Analysis and
Research. We use 100 minus the original CIFAR transparency index to get the
CIFAR opacity index




                                                          37
                        Appendix Table 2: Opacity Index- Kurtzman et al (2004)

Country              ACC         OPA        Country             ACC         OPA         Country            ACC       OPA

Finland              17          13         Argentina           30          44          Taiwan             40        34

Belgium              17          23         India               30          48          Brazil             40        40

Germany              17          25         Venezuela           30          51          Poland             40        41

USA                  20          21         UK                  33          19          Russia             40        46

Canada               20          23         Denmark             33          19          Egypt              40        48

Chile                20          29         Hong Kong           33          20          Czech Rep          44        41

Israel               20          30         Australia           33          21          Turkey             44        43

Thailand             20          35         Austria             33          23          Lebanon            44        59

Japan                22          28         S. Africa           33          34          Singapore          50        24

Indonesia            22          59         France              33          37          Spain              50        34

Sweden               25          19         Mexico              33          44          Portugal           50        35

Switzerland          25          23         Pakistan            33          45          Hungary            50        36

Ecuador              25          42         Saudi Arabia        33          46          Greece             50        41

Colombia             29          43         Philippines         33          50          China              56        50

Malaysia             30          35         Netherlands         38          24          Italy              63        43

Korea                30          37         Ireland             38          26


Note: The Overall Opacity Index (OPA) was constructed in 2004 by Kurtzman, Yago and Phumiwasana (2004), following the
methodology of PricewaterhouseCoopers (2001) Opacity Index. It covers corruption (COR), efficacy of the legal system (LEG),
deleterious economic policy (ENF), inadequate accounting and governance practices (ACC), and detrimental regulatory structures
(REG). The higher is the index, the higher is the opacity.




                                                          38
                          Appendix Table 3: Opacity Index-GCR

Argentina                   2.91                          Japan                     2.75
Australia                   1.82                          Jordan                    2.84
Austria                     2.06                          Korea                     3.27
Belgium                     2.24                          Luxembourg                2.44
Bolivia                     4.38                          Malaysia                  2.79
Brazil                      2.91                          Mauritius                 2.89
Bulgaria                    3.51                          Mexico                    2.66
Canada                      1.84                          Netherlands               2.2
Chile                       1.99                          New Zealand               1.88
China,P.R.: Mainland        4.29                          Norway                    2.04
China,P.R.:Hong Kong        2.81                          Peru                      2.97
Colombia                    3.15                          Philippines               3.17
Costa Rica                  3.46                          Poland                    2.8
Czech Republic              3.71                          Portugal                  2.67
Denmark                     2                             Russia                    4.41
Ecuador                     4.47                          Singapore                 2.37
Egypt                       3.35                          Slovak Republic           4.12
El Salvador                 3.98                          South Africa              2.48
Finland                     1.58                          Spain                     2.23
France                      2.26                          Sweden                    1.69
Germany                     2.39                          Switzerland               2.65
Greece                      2.85                          Thailand                  3.35
Hungary                     3.05                          Turkey                    2.97
Iceland                     2.85                          Ukraine                   2.22
India                       3.07                          United Kingdom            1.74
Indonesia                   4.13                          United States             1.59
Ireland                     2.62                          Venezuela, Rep. Bol.      3.88
Israel                      2.58                          Vietnam                   4.1
Italy                       2.83                          Zimbabwe                  2.78

Note: The opacity index (GCR, 1999) is from the annual Global Competitiveness Report produced by the
World Economic Forum. We use 8 minus the original index as our proxy of opacity.




                                                         39
Appendix Table 4: Correlation Among Opacity Indexes

             OPA         ACC      CIFAR       GCR
OPA          1
ACC          0.37        1
CIFAR        0.68        0.33     1
GCR          0.78        0.24     0.65        1




                                         40
