NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MATCHING AND CHALLENGE GIFTS TO CHARITY:
EVIDENCE FROM LABORATORY AND NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENTS
Daniel Rondeau
John A. List
Working Paper 13728
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13728

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

We are grateful to the British Columbia Chapter of the Sierra Club of Canada for allowing us to design
their fundraising campaign. Part of the writing of this paper was done while Daniel Rondeau was an
OECD fellow and Visiting Scholar at the LAboratoire Méditerranéen d’Économie Théorique et Appliquée
(LAMETA), INRA-Montpellier, France. Their financial support and hospitality is gratefully acknowledged.
We also thank seminar participants at Wharton, Columbia, and the 2004 EAERE and 2005 ASSA
meetings. Richard Carson, Rachel Croson, Glenn Harrison, Liesl Koch, David Reiley, Lise Vesterlund,
Stefano della Vigna, Timothy Cason and three anonymous referees provided remarks that improved
the manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Daniel Rondeau and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Matching and Challenge Gifts to Charity:Evidence from Laboratory and Natural Field Experiments
Daniel Rondeau and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 13728
January 2008
JEL No. C9,C93,H4
ABSTRACT
This study designs a natural field experiment linked to a controlled laboratory experiment to examine
the effectiveness of matching gifts and challenge gifts, two popular strategies used to secure a portion
of the $200 billion annually given to charities. We find evidence that challenge gifts positively influence
contributions in the field, but matching gifts do not. Methodologically, we find important similarities
and dissimilarities between behavior in the lab and the field. Overall, our results have clear implications
for fundraisers and provide avenues for future empirical and theoretical work on charitable giving.

Daniel Rondeau
Department of Economics
University of Victoria
Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 2Y2
rondeau@uvic.ca
John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu

1. Introduction
Charitable fundraising remains an important matter for the international
community and more narrowly in the U.S., where the American Association of
Fundraising Counsel estimates that total contributions to American philanthropic
organizations in the year 2000 exceeded 2 percent of GDP. Dove (2000) reports
that there is at least one capital campaign under way in virtually every major
population center in North America that has an objective of raising between $25
million and $100 million. Smaller capital campaigns are even more numerous.
Fundraisers have developed a variety of strategies aimed at successfully
reaching specific funding targets, but to date, little is known empirically about the
demand side of charitable fundraising. For example, without more than a handful
of anecdotes, professional fundraising consultants strongly assert that “leadership
gifts” are an important step towards a broader public campaign.1 Such leadership
contributions typically take one of two forms: challenge gifts and matching gifts.
A challenge gift is an unconditional commitment by a donor, or set of
donors, to provide a given sum of money to the cause. Professional fundraising
consultants advise seeking at least 10% and up to 80% of the overall objective of
a capital campaign through leadership gifts before embarking on the public phase
of fundraising (Lawson, 2001). Alternatively, a matching gift is a conditional

1

Leadership gifts should be distinguished from rebate mechanisms such as tax deductions,
whereby charitable contributions can be used to reduce one’s tax burden. There is an extensive
literature estimating price elasticities of such government-sponsored tools (see, e.g., Randolph,
1995; Auten et al., 2002), and it is fair to say that the empirical estimates vary widely.

2

commitment by the leadership donor(s) to match the contributions of others at a
given rate, up to the maximum amount the leadership donor is prepared to give.
While the rate of matching is typically the result of an agreement between the
fundraiser and the leadership donor, received wisdom suggests that presenting
less than a 1:2 matching ratio (one leadership dollar for every two dollars
contributed by other donors) has noticeably less power to leverage other
contributions than more generous matching rates (e.g., 1:1 or 2:1) (Dove, 2000).
Interestingly, these “rules of thumb” are largely anecdotal. Only recently
have economists begun to formally examine such claims. For example, List and
Lucking-Reiley (2002) find that challenge gifts announced by the fundraiser
influence charitable contributions. Landry et al. (2006) report data from a door-todoor fundraising drive that suggests challenge gifts increase conditional
contributions. Meier (2007) finds that a matching contribution has an immediate
positive effect on charitable contributions, but notes that the net long run effect is
to reduce the overall level of contribution of the group when individuals are given
repeated opportunities to give. Karlan and List (2007) also obtain mixed results
on the effect of matching gifts: matching is shown to have a significant effect on
the contributions of some but not all groups of potential donors. The relative
efficacy of challenge and matching gifts, however, has not to our knowledge been
studied systematically, neither in the field nor in the laboratory.2

2

In a much different environment and context, Eckel and Grossman (2003) compare matching to
an equivalent rebate of one’s contributions in a laboratory dictator game and find that matching
contributions lead to significantly larger contributions than the rebate mechanism. The interested

3

Our first objective is to perform such a comparison in a natural field
experiment (see the classification scheme in Harrison and List, 2004) using four
parallel fundraising appeals conducted as part of the British Columbia Chapter of
the Sierra Club of Canada’s normal fundraising efforts. Using direct mail
solicitation, 3,000 Sierra Club supporters were randomly divided into four
treatments and asked to support the expansion of a K-12 environmental education
program. We designed the experiment in an effort to provide a clean test of the
absolute and relative efficacy of challenge and matching gifts.
We report some potentially useful insights. We observe that a challenge
gift attracted 23% more donors and increased total dollar contributions 18% when
compared to the identical campaign in which no announcement of leadership gift
was made. While the number of donors was also higher in the matching treatment,
average and total donations under matching were actually lower than in the
challenge and control treatments. We also find that increasing the monetary target
of the fundraising campaign has a significant effect on the size of the average gift.
Our second objective is to compare these insights with those gained from
a controlled laboratory experiment. The combination of lab and field data
provides a deeper understanding than either approach could provide in isolation.
Such an exercise also permits an exploration of an important issue facing
experimental economists: whether behavior inside the laboratory is a good
indicator of behavior outside the laboratory.
reader should also see Frey and Meier (2004), Shang and Croson (2005), Falk (2007), or the
survey on field experiments on charitable giving in List (2006).

4

We report empirical results from five laboratory treatments, revealing a
mix of similarities and differences with data from the field experiment. One
difference is that contrary to our observations from the field, the rate of
participation in the laboratory (giving to the public good) is nearly 100%—i.e., a
strong majority of subjects give something to the public good. A second result is
the close correspondence between the relative rankings of monies raised in the lab
and the field: in terms of relative mechanism performance, the lab and field data
share strong similarities. Third, while the field results show that donors respond
strongly to the change in the cost of the program, the laboratory treatments offer
mixed evidence on the extent of this effect. Combining insights from the lab and
the field provides evidence consistent with the notion that solicitees in the field
viewed the stated monetary goal as a signal of the quality of the public good to be
provided.

5

2. Controlled Fundraising Campaigns in the Field
2.1 Design
In June 2004, the British Columbia chapter of the Sierra Club of Canada
mounted four parallel fundraising campaigns in an effort to expand their K-12
environmental education programs. This chapter of the Sierra Club typically
appeals to its members and supporters to send tax-deductible donations three to
four times per year. Our field experiment was one of those fundraising drives, and
the basic design is inspired by both fundraising practices and previous laboratory
threshold public goods experiments (for recent examples, see Rondeau et al.
1999; List and Rondeau, 2003, Rondeau et al., 2005).
A total of 3,000 Sierra Club supporters were randomly divided into four
treatments. Supporters received a solicitation letter from the director of the Club,
written, as usual, on Sierra Club letterhead and accompanied by a payment return
card of a format typically used by the Club in its fundraising. The letter explained
the Club’s objective of expanding its existing K-12 environmental education
program to increase the number of students it reaches by at least 200. We
designed our solicitation as a threshold public good with a money-back guarantee.
All pledge letters specified that 750 supporters were being solicited and that the
program would be expanded only if a specified minimum amount of money was
raised. In three of the treatments, the total amount of money required was set at
$5,000. In the fourth treatment letter, the announced threshold was $2,500.

6

Importantly, in all cases, it was clearly indicated that if the minimum
amount required was not received, individual contributions would be returned to
donors. The inclusion of a money-back guarantee in a threshold public good
campaign is not an everyday occurrence, but motivated by other uses in the field
(e.g., Manitoba’s New Democratic Party, the Association of Oregon Faculties,
and Office coffee clubs—see List and Lucking-Reiley) and the findings of
Rondeau et al. (1999, 2005), which reveal that under a range of conditions, the
combination of a threshold and money-back-guarantee significantly increases
contributions in laboratory experiments.
More importantly, this design choice provides a level playing field for the
relative test of efficacy across the challenge and matching gift treatments under a
theory of signaling (Vesterlund, 2003; Andreoni, 2006). This intuition holds
because if leadership gifts actually signal the type and value of the public good,
they should increase contributions relative to the case with no announced
leadership gifts.3 With the inclusion of a money-back guarantee, both challenge

3

One simple mechanism underlying this effect is that when a large donor believes in the project
by giving a gift this informational value affects an agent’s beliefs regarding the value of the public
good. Andreoni (1998) discusses a different effect of challenge monies: his model of charitable
giving for a threshold public good has multiple equilibria, and in the absence of seed money there
exists a Nash equilibrium with zero charitable giving. The zero-contribution equilibrium can be
eliminated, however, by initial commitments of seed money, which lower the remaining amount
needed to be raised in the public fundraising campaign. Thus, in his model seed money is used as
an elimination device rather than as a credibility device.

7

gifts and matching gifts yield equivalent outcomes whether or not the threshold
goal is reached.4
Solicitation letters also explained that any amount of money collected in
excess of the threshold would serve to further increase the number of students
reached by the program (at the rate of one additional classroom for each $775
received). The four treatments were:
-

-

-

a “High Control” (HC) group, in which the full amount of $5,000 is
solicited from the members receiving the letter;
a “Challenge” (CH) treatment, in which $5,000 has to be raised, but
where a leading donor has already committed $2,500 in a challenge
gift to the cause;
a “Matching” (MA) treatment, where $5,000 has to be raised, but
where a leading donor has committed to match the first $2,500 in
contributions at a rate of 1:1;
a “Low Control” (LC) treatment, in which the existence of a
leadership gift is not announced but where $2,500 is requested from
donors.

We provide verbatim copies of the letters in the supplementary material found on
the journal’s website. Key portions of the payment mechanism and treatment
variations are reproduced here:
This year one of the main goals of the Sierra Club is to expand the
scope of our environmental education program. This is why you are
one of 750 Sierra Club supporters receiving this letter.

4

For example, if the threshold (goal) is not reached, all donations from the solicitees are refunded
in both cases. Alternatively, if the goal is reached, in each case the full amount of the leadership
gift is used to help fund the public good. Thus, the money-back guarantee serves to remove the
conditionality inherent in the matching gift solicitation if the goal is not reached. The money-back
guarantee therefore serves to equalize the price of giving over all ranges of giving for this
particular public good. An astute reader might wonder in practice how a money-back guarantee
influences the leadership gift. Following standard practices, a challenge gift remains with the
charity but are used for other undefined purpose. Alternatively, the matching monies are not
received.

8

If we raise $5,000, we could prepare and deliver our education
program to an additional 200 children across the province. So we are
appealing to donors like you to help us raise the $5,000 needed to
expand the program.
But wait, we can do even more! If we receive more than $5,000 from
this group of 750 supporters, we will be able to reach an even greater
number of students. With each extra $775 we can deliver the
program to one additional classroom.
On the other hand, if we fail to raise $5,000 from our supporters we
will not be able to bring the gift of environmental education to more
children this year, and we will refund your donation to you.
In the LC treatment, the letter was in all respects identical except that all instances
of “$5,000” were replaced by $2,500.5 In the matching treatment, the second
paragraph above became:
If we raise $5,000, we could prepare and deliver our education
program to an additional 200 children across the province. The great
news is that we have already received a commitment of $2,500 in
matching donations. This means that for each of the first $2,500 we
receive from supporters like you, we will also receive another
dollar and double the impact of your donation. So we are
appealing to donors like you to help us raise the $2,500 needed to
expand the program.
In addition, the residual amount of money required mentioned in the last two
paragraphs ($5,000) was changed to $2,500. Similar modifications were made for
the challenge treatment:
If we raise $5,000, we could prepare and deliver our education program to
an additional 200 children across the province. The great news is that we
have already received a commitment of $2,500 in start-up money. So we
are appealing to donors like you to help us raise the $2,500 needed to
expand the program.
5

The Sierra Club committed the additional $2500 necessary to reach 200 children if they raised
$2,500 in this treatment.

9

Together, these four treatments represent experimental cells that, to our
knowledge, have not been explored heretofore and allow for the testing of
hypotheses: i) the size of a threshold affects giving; ii) announcing a lead gift
increases contributions; and iii) the form of the lead gift will affect contributions.
2.2 Results
A quick overview of the results can be gleaned from the summary data
shown in Table 1.6 One clear pattern is that the challenge (CH) treatment raises
considerably more money than the other three treatments: the $1,620 raised is
18%, 31%, and 71% higher than the total amount raised in the HC, MA, and LC
treatments, respectively. The donation of those who answered the different
appeals (overall mean, conditional on giving) varies from $45.83 in the HC
treatment to a low of $27.79 in the LC group. The average donation in the CH
treatment, at $43.78, is comparable to that of the HC treatment, whereas the
average donation in the MA treatment ($34.31) is closer to the amount observed
in the LC treatment. Considering mean conditional contributions, Tables 2 and 3
provide the results of pair-wise tests of equality of the mean donations and of
homogeneity of the distributions.
--- INSERT TABLES 1, 2 and 3 HERE --Examination of the data reveals that (1) there is a strong threshold effect—
decreasing the announced cost of the good significantly decreases contributions;
(2) consistent with anecdotal evidence and past field results, we find that the use
6

Our results concerning the challenge treatment would be stronger, but we excluded one
contribution of $400 from the challenge treatment because the donor later retracted her check
citing that she had made a mistake when contributing.

10

of challenge funds has a positive influence on contributions—the challenge
treatment yielded a participation rate 23% (9%) higher and overall contributions
18% (71%) higher than the High (Low) Control treatment; and (3) matching
donations provides no advantage to the fundraiser, yet monies raised are not
significantly lower than the challenge treatment. We consider each result in turn.
2.2.1 Strong Threshold Effect in the Field
The HC treatment raised $1,375, whereas the LC treatment raised $945.
Neither treatment mentions a leadership gift. The only difference between the two
appeals is the minimum amount of donations required to expand the education
program ($5,000 in the HC treatment versus $2,500 in the LC treatment).
Since the LC treatment induced a slightly higher response rate, the
observed difference in the total amount received is attributable to larger
individual donations in the HC treatment. The difference between the mean
contribution of $45.83 in the HC treatment and $27.79 in the LC treatment
represents an increase of roughly 65%, and is statistically significant at the p <
0.02 level using a two-tailed t-test (A generalized rank-sum test of distribution
homogeneity rejects the null hypothesis that the two distributions are identical at
the p < 0.08 level).7

7

This generalized rank-sum test, which is described in Hoel (1971), is less restrictive than other
non-parametric tests (e.g., a Mann-Whitney test) in that it requires no assumption about the shape
of the underlying distribution being tested.

11

These results suggest that the size of contributions is positively correlated
with the threshold level.8 Such a finding is consistent with the notion that
individual donors place a greater weight on the expressed need of the Sierra Club
than on the “price” of the education program (or the benefit-cost ratio of the
program, which was twice as large in the LC treatment compared to the HC
treatment).
Despite the fact that Sierra Club members did not have information about
the value of the public good to others, the observed threshold effect is also
consistent with the Nash prediction for contributions in a provision point game
with complete information (Bagnoli and Lipman, 1989). In the efficient equilibria
of this game, the sum of contributions equals the cost of the good (and each
individual contributes no more than his value). Incentives to free-ride remain,
however. Thus, the theoretical prediction implies an increase in the average
contribution with the increase in the threshold provided the threshold remains
lower than total benefits. Though we observe the static result, group contributions
did not reach the threshold.9
2.2.2 The Challenge Gift Increases Total Contributions

8

As an astute reviewer noted, this cannot be a general result since an enormous goal would likely
lead to few contributions. We concur with this intuition.
9
The $5,000 threshold level had been conservatively chosen by the Sierra Club on the basis of
their historical records on donor rate of response (13%-14%) and average donation (greater than
$50). This fund raising effort produced much lower response rates and contributions. However, a
regular fund raising effort conducted simultaneously by the Club with a different subset of its
members produced an even smaller rate of response and smaller contributions. Club staff has no
explanation for the dismal results—none of our treatments reached the threshold—but neither we
nor they attribute it to our experimental design.

12

The announcement of a challenge gift yielded $1,620 compared to the
$1,375 raised from the HC group. This difference in overall contributions is not
due to an increase in average contributions, as the average gift conditional on
giving was $43.78 and $45.83 in the CH and HC treatments, respectively. Rather,
it is driven by the 23% difference in the participation rates across the two
treatments and the fact that the number of “large” gifts (gifts of $50 or more) is
27% greater in the challenge treatment. Both of these results are consistent with
the empirical results of List and Lucking-Reiley (2002).
Further insights on the usefulness of challenge gifts can be obtained from
comparing contributions when a challenge gift is announced (CH treatment) to
outcomes of a campaign where an amount equivalent to the challenge gift has
been secured by the fundraiser but not announced. The LC treatment permits this
comparison. In this case, the effective amount of the threshold is simply reduced
by the amount of the implicit challenge gift.
When comparing contributions in the LC and CH treatments the
announced cost of the good varies between treatments, but the amount of money
required of the solicited individuals remains constant at $2,500. This comparison
therefore provides another measure of the value of the signal sent by the
challenge gift. We find that the average contribution increases from $27.79 in the
LC treatment to $43.78 when a challenge gift is announced, a difference that is
statistically significant at the p < .02 level using a two-tailed t-test (p <0.04 using
the generalized rank-sum test). The total amount raised also increases 71 percent,

13

from $945 to $1,620, due not only to higher average gifts, but also to a slightly
greater number of contributors (though the difference in the number of
contributors - 37 versus 34 is not statistically significant via a test of proportions
on the response rate). We believe that this experimental comparison is novel to
the literature, and represents an important piece of the puzzle to interpret previous
data (e.g., List and Lucking-Reiley. 2002).
2.2.3 The Matching Gift Does Not Increase Contributions
The data suggest that the gains from implementing a matching gift
campaign are not as strong as the gains from a challenge gift campaign. While
more funds were raised in the MA than in the LC treatment ($1,235 versus $945),
the matching contributions are considerably lower than the $1,620 raised in the
CH treatment. Furthermore, the average contribution from matching donors is not
statistically different from any of the other three treatment means at conventional
levels. These results provide little support for the received fundraiser view that
announcing that individual donations will be matched on a 1:1 ratio by a leader is
an effective way of leveraging higher donations in the public phase of the
campaign. While the total amount contributed in the CH treatment exceeds that
contributed in the MA treatment, none of our statistical tests can reject the null
that the differences are due to noise.
This result differs with those of Karlan and List (2007) and of Meier
(2007), who find that matching significantly increases contributions. Our
respective results are not directly comparable, however, since their campaigns did

14

not include a threshold, nor a money back-guarantee. The voluntary contribution
and threshold mechanisms produce radically different incentives that might
explain the difference, but it is worth noting that both studies show that the
impact of matching is not straightforward. Karlan and List show that it increases
donations only in some geographical areas, and Meier finds that those who give
under a matching condition later reduced their contributions to the same cause,
resulting in a net reduction of total contributions. Much remains to be learned. In
this spirit, we now turn to a set of parallel laboratory experiments.
3. Laboratory Experiment
While the above insights are useful for both positive and practical
purposes it is interesting and relevant to consider whether a laboratory experiment
with student subjects can yield similar quantitative and qualitative insights.
There are reasons why the insights gained in the lab and in the field might
be at odds. A recent framework by Levitt and List (2007) highlights that to the
extent that lab and naturally-occurring environments differ on any of several
dimensions—e.g., the nature and extent of scrutiny, the particular context in
which a decision is embedded, and the manner in which participants are selected
to participate—the results obtained across domains might differ. This is not to
suggest that either domain is inferior in some manner, rather we aim to explore
whether there are differences; and, if so, what causes such behavioral differences.
3.1 Design

15

In designing the laboratory experiment a first difficult question is whether
to parallel the field treatments exactly. An alternative approach is to hold true to
the experimental literature and set-up an environment to replicate the important
features of the theory while maintaining a connection to the field environment of
interest. We opted for the latter because we also aim to speak to the
generalizability of extant laboratory results, which are typically designed to
replicate the important features of the theory. Thus, the design of our laboratory
experiment closely resembles previous threshold public goods experiments
(Rondeau et al. 1999, 2005; List and Rondeau, 2003).
Subjects in groups of six are given an initial endowment of $12 and asked
to divide this amount between a private account and a group fund. Any division is
allowed, provided the amounts in the two accounts are positive and sum to
exactly $12. An investment is made by the group fund only if the sum of
contributions by group members reaches a minimum threshold (the provision
point). If the group fails to reach the threshold, all contributions are refunded. If
the threshold is reached or exceeded, a fixed payoff (of $4.50 or $9.00 depending
on the treatment) is paid to each member of the group. In addition, each group
member receives an additional payoff for contributions in excess of the threshold.
This additional payoff is paid at the rate of $0.20 per dollar of excess
contributions.
In all treatments, everything about the experiment was common
knowledge with the exception of the payoffs of other players. While everyone had

16

identical payoffs, subjects were told that they were randomly assigned to their
payoff amounts and that others may not have the same payoff amount.10
--- INSERT TABLE 4 HERE --Table 4 summarizes the experimental design.11 In the High Control (HC)
treatment, the public good was provided if a minimum of $45 was contributed to
the group fund. If the good was funded, subjects received $9 as a fixed payoff
plus 0.2 times the amount of excess contributions. In the Challenge Gift (CH)
treatment the only change is that subjects were told that an amount of $22.50 had
already been committed to the group fund by “an outside investor.” The Matching
Gift (MA) treatment was identical to the HC and the CH treatments except for the
fact that the first $22.50 placed in the group investment fund would be matched
by an equal investment (a matching ratio of 1:1) from “an outside investor.”
The Low Control (LC) and Low Control 2 (LC2) treatments provide
useful controls for the leadership treatments and lend further insights into the
influence of the threshold in these games. The LC treatment had a threshold of
$22.50, benefits of $9 per subjects at the threshold, and additional payoffs of

10

One referee was of the opinion that since all induced values were identical, our statements to
subjects were a mild form of deception. In fact, subjects were randomly assigned to a seat with a
set of instructions when they entered the room; we did not say that the values were randomly
chosen; and while all induced values were equal, the statement that other subjects "may not" have
the same amounts does not rule out that they may.
11
All five treatments were conducted with student subjects recruited voluntarily from first year
introductory economics classes at the University of Victoria. HC, CH and MA are direct parallels
to three of the four field treatments. The LC treatment matches a field treatment but these data
were collected at a different time (i.e., with a different cohort of similarly recruited first and
second year economics students). While we have no reason to believe that systematic differences
exist between subjects at these two points in time, we cannot definitively assert that this has no
influence.

17

$0.20 per dollar in excess of the threshold. Alternatively, LC2 had a provision
point of $22.50, leading to fixed payoffs of $4.50, and additional payoffs of $0.20
per dollar in excess of the threshold. The LC2 treatment therefore corresponds to
a situation where half the money is sought in order to deliver half of the benefits.
The experiment was implemented as a single-shot game, with students
earning approximately CA$15 on average for a 45-minute session. At the time of
recruitment, students were told that they would have an opportunity to earn
money in research experiments completely unrelated to the course they were
enrolled in and that no knowledge of economics was required to participate. Upon
arrival at a predetermined meeting room, students were asked to read and sign a
consent form. Communication between students from this point on was strictly
forbidden. Written instructions were distributed, read by subjects and summarized
orally. Individual questions were answered when necessary.
In sum, a total of 240 students participated in the experiment in sessions of
12, 18, or 24. All five treatments were conducted with student subjects recruited
voluntarily from introductory economics classes at the University of Victoria.
Treatments HC, CH, MA, and LC are direct parallels to the four field treatments.
Treatment LC2 is a variation for which we do not have a parallel field treatment
since its low threshold and low benefits structure made it impractical for the
Sierra Club.
3.2 Results

18

Tables 5 and 6 summarize our laboratory data. Contributions to the public
good amount to roughly 50% of individual endowment, leading to positive
provision of the public good in every treatment. This result is consistent with
previous laboratory studies.
The average contribution level in the HC, $7.53, is higher than the CH
treatment mean of $6.84, the MA treatment mean of $5.76, and the LC treatment
mean of $7.33. Statistical tests on these means (and medians) yield four
observations:12 (1) there is a threshold effect—decreasing the amount of money
required to fund the public good strongly decreases contributions; (2) subjects
have a strong positive reaction to the level of the induced value; (3) neither
leadership contribution treatment raises more money than the HC treatment; and
(4) the CH treatment raises more funds than the MA and LC treatments. In the
following sub-sections, we review each result in more detail.
---- INSERT TABLES 5 and 6 HERE --3.2.1 Strong Threshold and Strong Induced Value Effects
Recall that the HC and LC2 treatments are identical except for the
threshold level of contributions at which subjects begin to receive a return from
the group fund. This design choice ensures that the benefit-cost ratio of any sum
of contributions leading to the provision of the public good was constant at 1.2.
The comparison of these two treatments, therefore, allows us to isolate the effect
12

Jarque-Berra tests do not reject the null that the data for each treatment is normally distributed.
Pairwise tests also fail to reject equality of variances. As a result, we only report t-tests on the
experimental data.

19

of simply reducing the level (from $45 to $22.50) at which individuals start
obtaining benefits from the (otherwise linear) public good.
We find that this reduction in the threshold reduced the mean contribution
by more than 30%: from $7.53 in the HC to $5.41 in the LC2 treatment, and that
this difference is highly significant in a two-tailed t-test (p<0.002). This is
consistent with a strong and significant threshold effect and the results of Cadsby
and Maynes (1999), who report that contributions in a similar threshold game are
positively correlated with the provision point.
The LC data can be compared to the LC2 to gauge the effect of doubling
the personal benefits while the threshold remains constant at $22.50. Doing so
reveals that subjects are also responsive to the benefits they stand to receive from
the public goods. Doubling the induced value increased contributions from $5.41
to $7.33, a difference that is significant at p<0.01.
This result is consistent with the findings of Rondeau et al. (2005) who
show that the contributions of laboratory subjects in similar provision point
experiments (but where subjects have less information than in our case) respond
positively and significantly to increases in induced value. They also show that the
elasticity of this response is less than unity, which is also consistent with our
results. It is also worth noting that the magnitude of the threshold and induced
value effects essentially cancel each other out in our experiment (the equality of
the HC and LC means cannot be rejected: p>0.74).

20

The key difference between the lab and field results is that the field HC
and LC contributions are significantly different while in the lab, HC and LC are
indistinguishable, both higher than LC2. Thus, in the lab, subjects respond to
both a decrease in the threshold provision cost, and to an increase in its benefitcost ratio in a manner that cancels out the two opposing effects. In the field, we
observe a drop in contributions associated with the lower threshold, but no
opposite effect. This suggests that field participants put a greater weight on the
threshold cost than subjects in the laboratory experiment. This, we surmise,
might be explained by field participants taking the stated cost as a signal of the
quality of the good to be provided. This might be so because the value of the
field public good holds a far greater degree of uncertainty than that of the
laboratory public good.
3.2.2 Challenge and Matching Gifts Do Not Increase Contributions in the
Laboratory
The CH and Ma treatments each raised smaller contributions per subject
than the HC or LC treatments. For the MA treatment, those differences are
statistically significant (p<0.004 that MA=HC; and p<0.02 that MA=LC). While
the CH treatment raised more money than the MA treatment, the difference lies
outside of the normally accepted level of statistical significance (p > 0.11). Thus,
taken alone, the laboratory experiment provides little support for the view that

21

leadership gifts increase the amount of funds raised.13 It is worth keeping in mind
that in our laboratory environment where individual benefits are known with
certainty, a leadership gift does not carry any information on the quality of the
public good. This is a key difference between the lab and field. Given this
difference and the higher observed field contributions in the Challenge gift
treatment, one possible explanation (for the difference in difference) is once again
that the leadership gift plays a signaling role of the value of field public goods.
At the same time, it is interesting to note that the field and laboratory
average contribution orderings of the HC, MA, and CH treatments generated
identical rankings. This tends to support of the view that despite the qualitative
differences between field and laboratory leadership gifts, the laboratory is
potentially a useful testbed for fundraising institutions. Most importantly, this
provides one piece of empirical evidence that the qualitative, or directional,
insights gained from a generic lab experiment can be a useful indicator of
treatment effects in naturally-occurring environments.
4. Concluding Remarks
The popular literature on the demand side of charitable fundraising is long
on advice and accepted wisdom but largely unsubstantiated by “hard facts”.
Controlled experiments provide a means to explore questions heretofore
unanswered within the area of charitable fundraising. In this study, we directly pit
challenge gifts and matching gifts in an effort to advance our understanding of the
13

An interesting point of future research is to compare behavior in laboratory experiments where
values are uncertain, but linked to the level of the leadership gift.

22

optimal uses of leadership gifts. Our data provide some evidence on the power of
challenge gifts in the field: they work to increase the size of individual
contributions relative to the comparable treatments in which the same amount is
required but no challenge is present. They may also induce greater participation.14
We view our set of experiments as also making a broader methodological
point and playing a dual role in the research discovery process. First, field
experiments are capable of providing evidence on the generalizability of
laboratory evidence. Importantly, we find that the qualitative insights gained from
the laboratory are quite similar to those found in the field. Second, our lab
experiment helped to uncover the causes and underlying conditions necessary to
produce the data patterns observed in the field. Viewed in this light, our results
should have practical import for fundraisers as well as positive and normative
implications

for

economists.

Our

contribution

also

highlights

the

complementarities that lab and field experiments provide, as stronger inference
can be made when combining the most attractive features of each approach.

14

While this latter effect might not be as important when soliciting from a “warm” list of
contributors, it is invaluable when soliciting from a “cold” list since fundraisers understand that
attracting a first donation from an individual is also identifying a new supporter, a crucial element
in ensuring the long-term viability of a charity. Indeed, fundraising strategists typically rank
building a “donor development pyramid” as the most important aspect of a successful long-term
fundraising effort.

23

References
Andreoni, J. (2006). Leadership Giving in Charitable Fundraising. Journal of
Public Economic Theory 8(1): 1-22.
Andreoni, J. (1998). Toward a Theory of Charitable Fund-Raising. Journal of
Political Economy, 106(6): 1186-1213.
Auten, G., H. Sieg, C.T. Clotfelter. (2002). Charitable Giving, Income and Taxes:
An Analysis of Panel Data. American Economic Review, 92: 371-82.
Bagnoli, Mark, and Barton L. Lipman. (1989). Provision of Public Goods: Fully
Implementing the Core through Private Contributions,” Review of
Economic Studies, 56: 583-601.
Cadsby, C.B. and E. Maynes. (1999). Voluntary provision of threshold public
goods with continuous contributions: experimental evidence, Journal of
Public Economics 71, 53-73.
Dove K.E. (2000). Conducting a Successful Capital Campaign. 2nd edition. San
Francisco, Jossey-Bass. 510pp.
Eckel, Catherine C. and Phillip J. Grossman. (2003). “Rebate versus Matching:
Does How We Subsidize Charitable Contributions Matter?,” Journal of
Public Economics, 87, 681–701.
Falk, Armin. (2007). “Gift-Exchange in the Field." Econometrica 75(5):15011511.
Frey, Bruno S. and Stephan Meier. (2004). "Social Comparisons and Pro-social
Behavior: Testing Conditional Cooperation in a Field Experiment."
American Economic Review 94(5): 1717-1722.
Hoel, P.G. (1971). Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 4th Edition, John
Wiley and Sons.
Karlan Dean and John A. List. (2007). "Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving?
Evidence from a Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment.” American
Economic Review 97(5): 1774-1793.
Harrison, Glenn and John A. List. (2004). "Field Experiments," Journal of
Economic Literature, XLII (December): pp. 1013-1059.
Landry, C., A. Lange, J.A. List, M.K. Price, and Nicholas Rupp. (2006). "Toward
an Understanding of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field
Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (2): 747-782.
Lawson, C.E. (2001). “Capital Fund Appeals,” in J.M. Greenfield, ed., The
Nonprofit Handbook: Fund Raising, Third Edition. New York, Wiley.
Levitt, Steven D. and John A. List. (2007). “What do Laboratory Experiments
Measuring Social Preferences tell us about the Real World,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 21 (2): 153-174.
List, J. A. (2006). “Field Experiments: A Bridge between Lab and Naturally
Occurring Data.” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 6(2),
Article 2.

24

List, J.A. and D. Lucking-Reiley. (2002). The effects of seed money and refunds
on charitable giving: experimental evidence from a University capital
campaign, Journal of Political Economy 110, 215-233.
List, J.A. and D. Rondeau. (2003) The Impact of Challenge Gifts on Charitable
Giving: An Experimental Investigation. Economics Letters 79:153-159.
Meier, Stephan. (2007). “Do Subsidies Increase Charitable Giving in the LongRun? Matching Donations in a Field Experiment.” working paper, Boston
Federal Reserve Board.
Randolph, W.C. (1995). Dynamic Income, Progressive Taxes, and the Timing of
Charitable Contributions, Journal of Political Economy 103: 709-38.
Rondeau, D., W.D Schulze and G.L. Poe. (1999). Voluntary revelation of the
demand for public goods using a provision point mechanism, Journal of
Public Economics 72, 455-470.
Rondeau, D., G.L.Poe and W.D. Schulze. (2005). VCM or PPM? A Comparison
of the Performance of Two Voluntary Public Goods Mechanisms." Journal
of Public Economics 81:1581-92.
Shang, Jen and Rachel Croson. (2005). “Field Experiments in Charitable
Contribution: The Impact of Social Influence on the Voluntary Provision
of Public Goods.” Working Paper, Wharton School of Business,
University of Pennsylvania.
Vesterlund. L. (2003). The informational value of sequential fundraising, Journal
of Public Economics 87:627-657.

25

Table 1 Field Experiment - Summary Results
High Control

Challenge

Matching

Low Control

(HC)

(CH)

(MA)

(LC)

Mean

$45.83

$43.78

$34.31

$27.79

Total Raised

$1375

$1620

$1235

$945

Median

$30

$35

$25

$25

Minimum

$5

$10

$15

$5

Maximum

$125

$250

$100

$75

Std. Deviation

$34.72

$41.09

$20.04

$14.78

Observations

30

37

36

34

Undeliverables

2

1

0

3

4.01%

4.94%

4.80%

4.55%

Net Response Rate

Notes: Cells represent raw data summaries for the various treatments. “Undeliverables”
are those letters that were returned as undeliverable, likely because the person had
moved.

26

Table 2
Field Experiment - Pair-wise two-tailed Student’s t tests
Probability that the Mean of Individual Contributions in the Row and Column
Treatments are Equal

High Control

Challenge

Matching

Low Control

0.829

0.115

0.012

0.214

0.032

Challenge

0.128

Matching

Table 3
Field Experiment - Pair-wise Two-tailed Generalized Rank-sum Tests
Probability that the Distribution of Contributions in the Row and Column
Treatments are Homogenous

High Control (HC)
Challenge (CH)
Matching (MA)

Challenge

Matching

Low Control

(CH)

(MA)

(LC)

0.396

0.235

0.077

0.241

0.038
0.128

27

Table 4 Experimental Design - Laboratory
Individual
Treatment

Threshold

Leadership

Benefit if

Gift

Threshold
Is Met

Excess
Payoff
Rate

Number of
Subjects

High Control (HC)

$45

$0

$9

$0.20

48

Challenge (CH)

$45

$22.50

$9

$0.20

48

Matching (MA)

$45

$22.50

$9

$0.20

48

Low Control (LC)

$22.50

$0

$9

$0.20

48

Low Control 2 (LC2)

$22.50

$0

$4.50

$0.20

48

Table 5 Summary Results - Laboratory
High
Challenge Matching
Control
(CH)
(MA)
(HC)

Low

Low

Control

Control 2

(LC)

(LC2)

Mean

$7.53

$6.84

$5.76

7.33

$5.41

Median

$8.00

$6.50

$5.50

7.00

$4.50

Minimum

$1.00

$0.00

$0.00

1.00

$0.00

Maximum

$12.00

$12.00

$12.00

12.00

$12.00

Std. Dev.

$2.69

$3.40

$3.17

$3.32

$3.77

Observations

48

48

48

48

48

28

Table 6
Laboratory Experiments Pair-wise two-tailed Student’s t tests
Probability that the Mean of Individual Contributions in the Row and Column
Treatments are Equal

High Control (HC)
Challenge (CH)
Matching (MA)
Low Control (LC)

Challenge

Matching

Low Control

Low Control 2

(CH)

(MA)

(LC)

(LC2)

0.271

0.004

0.747

0.002

0.111

0.474

0.055

0.020

0.625
0.010

29

