NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEQUESTS AND SOCIAL SECURITY
WITH UNCERTAIN LIFETIMES

11JIU..L W

1D

.L).

At-..-!
J1.LJJ.

Working Paper No. 1372

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 198I

I thank Olivier Blanchard, Christopher Cavanagh, Stanley Fischer,
Benjamin Friedman, Elhanan Helpman, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Robert
McDonald, James Pesando, Larry Summers, Lars Svensson, Mark Watson,
and Jeffrey Wolcowitz for valuable conversations. I also thank the
participants in seminars at Boston University, Columbia University,
Cornell University, Federal Reserve Board, Harvard University,
University of Iowa, M.I.T., University of Montreal, National Bureau
of Economic Research, North Carolina State University, the Wharton
School and Yale University for their helpful comments. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations and project in Government Budget. Any opin-.
ions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1372
June 1981

Bequests and Social Security With
Uncertain Lifetimes

ABSTRACT

The fact that consumers do not know in advance the dates at which
they

will die effects their individual consumption and portfolio decisions.

In general, some consumers will end up leaving bequests at death, even if
they have no bequest motive, simply because they happen to die at a time
when they are holding wealth to provide for their own

In the model of this paper,
(randomly)

their

future

consumption.

consumers who are otherwise identical, die

at different ages and thus leave

bequests of different sizes

to

heirs. Therefore, there is intra—cohort variation in wealth and con-

sumption even if all consumers have the same labor income, taxes, and social

security benefits. This paper presents explicit steady state distributions

for consumption and wealth. The introduction of an actuarially fair social
security system reduces steady state private wealth by more than one—for—one

so that, even in a fully funded system, national wealth falls. In addition,
all central moments of the steady state distributions of consumption and
wealth are reduced by actuarially fair social security.

Andrew B. Abel
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 111
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Consumers do not, in general, know with certainty the date at which they
will die. An individual who has accumulated assets to provide for consumption

during retirement but then dies prematurely ends up leaving a larger bequest
to his heirs than he intended.

In this paper we examine the implications of

uncertain lifetimes and the consequent "accidental" bequests for the saving—

consumption decisions of individuals and for aggregate consumption and savings. We extend the Modigliaui—Brumberg (1954) — Samuelson (1958) — Diamond
(1965) overlapping generations framework to take account of the fact that a
consumer's initial wealth depends on the mortality and bequest history of his
ancestors. The fact that the date of death and the size of bequest are random

leads to a non—degenerate distribution of wealth and consumption. Therefore,

in examining the effects of social security, for instance, we are able to
analyze the effects on the variance of consumption within each cohort as well
as the effects on the aggregate consumption of each cohort.

The effects of uncertain lifetime on individual consumption behavior were

first examined formally in a seminal paper by Yaari (1965). More recently
Fischer (1973), Barro and Friedman (1977), Levhari and Mirman (1977), Katz
(1979), Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) and Pelzman and Rousslang (1982) have used

Yaari's framework to examine various aspects of consumption and saving
behavior in the presence of uncertain lifetimes; however, all of these papers
focused on the consumption decision of an individual and ignored the effect of
uncerta).n lifetimes on the bequests received by subsequent generations.1 As we

will show at various points in this paper, changes in the economic environment

can have effects on aggregate behavior which differ dramatically from the
1. Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) focus on the role of the family in providing
an (incomplete) annuities market but stop short of a full—scale
overlapping generations model in which the distribution of bequests is
determined endogenously.

—2—
effects on individual behavior because of the endogenous adjustment of
bequests. For example, we show that if the net rate of return on capital is
equal to the population growth rate, then the introduction of actuarially fair
social security will raise the consumption of young consumers, if we hold ini-

tial wealth constant; however, allowing for the endogenous adjustment of
bequests, we find that in the long run aggregate consumption of the young
cohort is invariant to the presence or absence of actuarially fair social
security.

Sheshinski and Weiss (1981) have used an overlapping generations model

with uncertain lifetimes to examine the effects of social security and to
develop an optimal social security system. In their model, all consumers who
are born at the same date live exactly the same length of time. Thus there is
no intra—cohort variation in bequests, consumption or wealth. However, in the

model developed below, all consumers have the same probability of dying but
different members of the same generation die at different ages.

It is this

tntra—cohort variation in the time of death which leads to non—degenerate distributions of bequests, wealth and consumption.

Eckstein, Eichenbaum, and Peled (1983a) have developed an overlapping
generations model in which consumers with identical ox ante mortality proba-

bilities die at different ages.

Since the Eckstein—Eichenbaum—Peled model,

which was developed independently of and virtually simultaneously with tbe
model presented below, is so similar to

te oet here, it

is worth commenting

on the diffices between the two models. First, asd most importantly, the
Eckstein—Eic..

aum—Peled model has no capital althou8h one could interpret

that model as applying to an economy in which the net rate of return on capital is zero (i.e., a costless storage technology). However, as we show below,

—3—
the effects of social security policy in a stationary economy differ dramati-

cally depending on whether or not the rate of return on capital zero. A
second difference between the two models concerns the generality of the
instantaneous utility function. In this paper, we assume that the instantaneous utility function displays hyperbolic absolute risk aversion (HARA) whereas

Eckstein, Eichenbaujn, and Peled use a more general concave utility function.

However, the formulation used by Eckstein, Eichenbaum, and Peled is not as
general as it might first appear because they must at some point assume that

the concavity of the derived saving function is "not too large" (p. 16)
without presenting the implied restrictions on the utility function.

An

advantage of the HARA utility function used here is that it leads to linear
decision rules thereby making the analysis easily tractable. A third difference between the models is that the model presented below allows for nonzero
rates of time preference and population growth whereas each of these rates is

assumed to be zero by Eckstein, Eichenbaum and Peled. Finally, the model
presented below is used to analyze the effects of actuarially fair social
security whereas Eckstein, Eichenbanm and Peled mention the effects of social

security only in the presence of a well—functioning annuity market, in which
case social security has no effect, as pointed out later in this paper.2

A major finding of this paper is that actuarially fair social security

reduces private wealth by more than 100%.

That is, the introduction of

actuarially fair social security leads to a reduction in total national
2. In a different paper, Eckstein, Eichenbaum and Peled (1983b) examine the
effects of social security in the presence of heterogeneous mortality
probabilities. However, in that paper, there are private annuity markets
so that individuals without explicit bequest motives hold all of their
savings in the form of annuities. Thus, there are no bequests in that
model. The structure of that model is quite different from the structure
of the model presented below in this paper or the model in Eckstein,
Eichenbaum, and Peled (1983a).

—4—
wealth, even if the social security system is fully funded. If the net rate
of return on capital is equal to the population growth rate, then this reduction in national wealth does not reduce steady state sustainable consumption;
the aggregate consumption of the young cohort and the aggregate consumption of

the old cohort are each invariant to the introduction of actuarially fair
social security in this case.

However, if the rate of return on capital

exceeds the population growth rate, then the reduction in national wealth
reduces aggregate sustainable consumption; in this case, the aggregate consumption of the young cohort and the aggregate consumption of the old cohort
are each reduced by the introduction of social security. A second major finding is that an increase in the level of actuarially fair social security will

uniformly narrow the distributions of consumption and bequests; all central
moments of the distributions of consumption and bequests will be reduced.

A consumer's claim to social security benefits can be viewed as an
annuity.

If the consumer survives until retirement, the annuity pays some

specified amount, but if the consumer dies before retirement, the annuity pays

zero. Under an actuarially fair social security system, the price that the
consumer pays for this annuity (i.e., the social security tax levied on young
consumers) is equal to the expected present value of future payoffs. However,

consumers would be willing to pay more than the expected present value of
future payoffs because the payoffs are positively correlated with future mar-

ginal utility of consumption. The annuity has a positive payoff if and only
if the consumer survives, thereby having a positive marginal utility of con—

sumption the annuity has a zero payoff if the consumer dies, in which case
wealth has zero marginal utility. Therefore, an actuarially fair increase in

the level of social security taxes and benefits will make a young consumer

—5—
wealthier and hence increase his consumption. Since an increase in the social
security tax levied on a young consumer will decrease his disposable income by

the amount of the tax and will increase his consumption, it is clear that the
saving of the young consumer will be reduced by an amount larger than the tax
increase.

The description in the paragraph above is partial equilibrium in nature

in that it ignores the effects on bequests and on consumption and savings
behavior of subsequent young consumers.3 To the eztent that private saving of

young consumers is reduced by a permanent increase in the level of social
security taxes and benefits, there will be a reduction in bequests received by

subsequent generations. In our model, bequests are received at the beginning
of a consumer's life so that the reduction in bequests leads to a reduction in

the initial wealth of subsequent young consumers. The effect of this reduction in initial wealth is to mitigate or even reverse the increase in consump-

tion of subsequent young consumers; on the other hand, the effect of reduced
initial wealth would tend to reinforce the reduction in saving of subsequent
young consumers.

Since in our model, the private capital stock is equal to

the savings of the young consumers, an actuarially fair permanent increase in

social security taxes will reduce the long—run private capital stock by more
than one—for—one.

In section I we develop a simple model of individual consumption behavior

in the presence of an uncertain lifetime. We assume that consumers are selfish in the sense that they derive no utility from the consumption or utility
of their children.4 In section II we explicitly take account of the fact that
3. Hubbard (1983) also provides a partial equilibrium analysis in which young
consumers increase their consumption in response to the introduction of
actuarially fair social security.

—6-the unconsumed wealth held by a consumer at the time of his death is passed on

to his children. We calculate the steady state distributions of consumption

of the young, consumption of the old, and private wealth. Actuarially fair
social security is analyzed in section III where we show that national wealth
is reduced by the introduction of (fully funded) social security. In addition
to analyzing the effects on aggregate consumption of each cohort, we show that
the introduction of social security uniformly narrows the steady state distri—

bution of consumption of each cohort. The analysis in section III is confined

to steady states, and in section IV we examine behavior along the transition
path to the new steady state. It should be noted that social security has an
effect in this model only because there is no private market for actuarially
fair annuities which would enable consumers effectively to offset the social
security system. In section V we examine the effects of the introduction of a

private market for actuarially fair annuities. Section VI contains a diagram-

matic presentation of many of the results of the paper. Concluding remarks
are presented in section VII.

I. Individual Consumption Behavior Under Uncertain Lifetime

Consider an economy with many consumers and a single commodity. This
commodity can be either consumed or invested. If one unit of the commodity is

invested, it yields R units of the commodity in the following period. Each
consumer lives either one period or two periods. A consumer works during the

first period of his life earning a fixed labor income Y. Also in the first

4. Fischer (1973) and Sheshinski and Weiss (1981) model consumers as deriving
utility from leaving a bequest. This utility is a function of the size of
the bequest. Barro (1974) and Drazen (1978), in models without lifetime
uncertainty, assume that consumers derive utility from the utility of
their children.

—7—
period of his life, a consumer consumes an amount c1 and pays a tax T. At the
end of the first period of his life, the consumer has G .. 1 children. There

is a probability p that the consumer dies at the end of his first period of

life5 (after having the children). If the consumer survives to the second
period of life, he does not work but receives a social security payment S. He
then consumes an amount c2. When a consumer dies (either at the end of period

one or period two), any unconsumed wealth is divided equally among his children.

Each consumer in the economy chooses c1 and c2 to maximize the following
utility function

U(c1) + (1—p)6U(c2)

(1)

where 0 < & .. 1 is the inverse of one plus the rate of time preference. This

utility function is based on the uncertain lifetime literature in which the

discounted utility index for period j is multiplied by the probability of
being alive in period j. This formulation is simply the expected value of a

state—contingent utility function in which U(c) is the utility index contingent on being alive at age j, and the utility index is identically zero.
contingent on not being alive at age j.6 Note that according to the utility
function in (1), consumers do not care about their children; they derive no
utility from leaving bequests.

5. Although individual consumers face uncertainty about their date of death,
there is no aggregate uncertainty; a fraction p of the consumers in each
generation dies at the end of the first period of life.
6. It is not necessary that the utility index is equal to zero in the case of
death. All that is required is that utility in the state of death does
not depend on the level of wealth.

—8—
Up to this point it may appear that all consumers are identical:

they

have identical utility functions, labor income Y, taxes T, childbearing
characteristics, probabilities of survival, and, if they survive, identical
social security benefits S. However, different consumers receive bequests of
different sizes depending on the mortality history of the earlier generations

of their families. Let B be the bequest a consumer receives from his parent

when he is born.7 For the moment we take B as given; we will discuss the
determination of B later in the paper.

Finally we define W to be the wealth of a consumer at the end of the
first period of his life,

W=B+Y—T—c1

(2)

If a consumer dies at the end of his first period of life, each of his chil-

dren receives RW/G as a bequest at the beginning of the following period. If
the consumer survives into the second period, he consumes c2 = RW + S, because

he derives no utility from leaving a bequest. That is, if the consumer survives into a second period of life, his second—period consumption is
c2 = RIB + Y — T —

c1] +

S

(3)

We can now solve a consumer's first—period consumption decision. Maximizing (1) with respect to c, subject to the constraint in (3) yields

U'(c1) =

(l—p)RU'(R(B

+ Y — T —

c1]

+ S) =

(l—p)RU'(c2)

(4)

7. If a parent dies after the first period of his life, his child receives a
bequest B at the beginning of the first period of the child's life. If a
parent lives 2 periods, then as shown below, the child receives no bequest
in either period; in this case, of course, the bequest received at birth
by the child is zero.

—9—
In general1 if U( ) is concave, then the optimal first—period consumption is a
decreasing function of (l—p)R6 and an increasing function of REB + Y — TI + S.

We will restrict the utility index U(c) to be a member of the HARA family

(hyperbolic absolute risk aversion) so that the optimal value of c1 is a
linear function of R(B + Y —

TI +

S, as shown below. A general specification

of the HARA class of utility functions is

(5)

n)1

i(_D.Q_ +
y l—y

U(c)

> 0; j- +

subject to the following restrictions: y # 1;

—. The

=

cases:

i>

0; i = 1 if

HARA family of utility functions includes the following special

(1) constant relative risk aversion (i

= 0),

which includes loga-

rithmic utility if y = 0;

(2) constant absolute risk aversion (y =

(3) quadratic utility (y =

2).

U'(c) (j- +

n) so

Differentiating (5)

with

+);

and

respect to c yields

that the first—order condition in (4) can be written

as

+

—1

= (l—p)R8[

(R(B+Y—T—c1] + S)
+

1

qI'

1

(6)

Equation (6) can be rearranged to yield the following linear consumption func—
t ion

= a(R(B + Y — T] +

S) + b

(7a)

1

b =

The

[(1—p)R6I]

a = (R +

where

7a[1 — ((1_p))h/i_7)]

(7c)

consumption function in (7) is particularly simple in the case in

which Il(c) has constant relative risk aversion (n

b =

(7b)

= 0).

In this case, since

0, first—period consumption is proportional to the value of disposable

lifetime resources REB +

Y

—

T]

+

S.

Let u 1—y be the (constant)

— 10 —

coefficient

of relative risk aversion. Note that if R = 5 = 1 (i.e., zero

time preference and zero net rate of return on capital), then the fraction of

total disposable resources (B + Y — T + S) consumed in the first period of

life is a = (1 +

(1—p)']1.

The greater the coefficient of relative risk

aversion, the smaller the fraction of disposable resources consumed in the
first period.

In the limit as a —4 ,

a

consumer would consume 1/2 of

disposable resources in the first period. On the other hand, in the limit as

a —+ 0, the consumer would consume all of his disposable resources in the
first period.8

Using the consumption function (7), we can easily calculate the end—of—
first—period wealth and the second—period consumption of the consumer. Combining equations (2) and (7) yields
W = (1—aR)(B+Y—T) — aS — b

(8)

and combining equations (3) and (7) yields

c2 =

1—aR
b
a c1 —

(9)

According to (9), the income expansion path relating c1 and c2 is linear and
positively sloped. (From (7), a > 0 and aR ( 1.) This relation will be useful later when we examine the intra—cohort distributions of c1 and c2.

II. Intergenerational Transfers

We have solved the consumer's saving—consumption decision conditional on

8. If the consumer cannot borrow against his (uncertain) future social
security benefit S, then c1 —4 B + Y — T as a —4 0. Of course, if S =
then the consumer will indeed consumer all of his disposable lifetime
resources in the first period.

0,

— 11 —

the bequest B received at birth. In this section, we calculate the bequests
received by each consumer. The bequest received by a consumer depends on the
mortality history of the earlier generations of his family. Specifically, let

j be the number of consecutive previous generations in a consumer's family
which died at age 1. For example, j

0 indicates that the consumer's parent

lived 2 periods and therefore left no bequest to the consumers If j = 1, then

the consumer's parent died at age 1 leaving a bequest but the consumer's

grandparent lived 2 periods leaving no bequest. We index all consumers
according to j and observe that for a consumer drawn at random, the probability that he is of type j is p3(1—p).

Let the superscript j indicate that a variable pertains to a consumer of

type j. We will first examine type 0 consumers and then we will examine type

j consumers for j > 1. As indicated above, B0 = 0.

The first—period con-

sumption and end—of—first—period wealth of type 0 consumers follow immediately
from (7) and (8), respectively,

= a(R[Y—T]+S) + b

= (1—aR)(Y—T) — aS —

(10)

b.

(11)

Note that the sum of c° and W° is equal to after—tax labor income Y—T.9

For consumers of type j, j > 1, consumption and saving behavior depend on
the initial bequest,

received at birth. From (7) and (10), we obtain

=

9.

+

0)

(12)

We assume that S and T are s1Jl enough and that the utility function and
labor income are such that W
> 0. Note th)if b = 0 (as it would be
with constant relative risk aversion), then W
> 0 provided that S and T
are small enough.

— 12 —

and from (8) and (11), we obtain

(1—aR)B

=

(13)

+

In general1 if a type j—1 consumer dies after one period, he leaves a bequest

of G'W1 to each of his children (who are type j consumers). The bequest
earns a gross rate of return K so that
=

where, by convention, W1 0.

(R/G)W

(14)

Substituting (14) into (13) yields the

first—order linear constant coefficient difference equation
= (1—aR) (R/G)W1

+ W0

j =

0,1,2,...

(15)

which has the solution

=

W°

j =

I (1—aR) 3(R/G)'
1=0

0,1,2,...

According to (16), WL1) is an increasing function of 3.

(16)

That is, as we

increase the number of previous generations which died early and thus left
bequests, we increase
W(j)

(0)
_________

We will assume that (1—aR)R < G)° Therefore,
.

.

approaches 1—1—aRR/G as j approaches infinity.
We have now completely solved the model. Given any nonnegative integer 3

we know that a fraction (1—p)p of the population is of type j. Then using
equations (10)—(12), (14), and (16) it is a simple matter to calculate the
1

((1—p)R6]' > 0.
10. Observe from (7b) that (1—aR)R = R/(ø+R) where 0
then
(1—aR)R
(
G.
It
can
be
shown
that
if
G,
Thus, if 0 .
(0—G)(R—G) < G2, then (1—aR)R < G. Thus, if 0 > G and K j G, then (1—aR)R
< G.

— 13 —

consumption, wealth, and bequests received at birth by each type j consumer.
Our next step is to summarize the distributions of consumption, wealth and
bequests by calculating the values of aggregate first—period consumption, C1',

aggregate second—period consumption, C2*, aggregate private wealth W', and
aggregate bequests, B'. Each of these aggregates is expressed on a per capita

basis (more precisely, per person in the young generation). For example,
aggregate private wealth per capita is defined as

=

I (1—p)pW

(17)

j =0

Calculating the aggregate per capita values of both sides of (13) we
obtain

= (1—aR)B' +

(18)

The aggregate per capita level of bequests received at birth is calculated by

recalling that a fraction p of each type of consumer dies early leaving a
bequest. Thus the aggregate wealth held by consumers who die young is pW'.
Including the accrued interest on this wealth and adjusting for the fact that

each generation has G times as many consumers as the previous generation, we
obtain

B' = p(R/G)W'

(19)

Substituting (19) into (18) yields

(0)

=

1 — (1—aR)pR/G

Therefore, average per capita wealth is proportional to
type 0 consumers.

(20)
the wealth of

— 14 —

In

order to calculate the aggregate per capita value of first—period con-

sumption, we observe from equation (2) that

C=Y_T+B*_W*

(21)

Substituting (19) into (21) yields
= Y — T — (1 — pR/G)W*

(22)

Eefore calculating per capita aggregate second—period consumption, recall

that our per capita aggregates are calculated as per person in the young
cohort. Since only a fraction (l—p) of young consumers survives to the second

period of life, and since each generation is only G' times as large as the

succeeding generation, C (1—p)G I

j =0

=

(1—p)pc.

From the fact that

+ S we easily obtain

=

(1_p)G(RW*

+ S)

(23)

To calculate aggregate economy—wide consumption per capita add together
(22) and (23) to obtain

C +

= Y — T + (1—p)GS + (RIG —

1)?

(24)

Observe from (24) that aggregate private consumption per capita is equal to
the sum of after—tax labor income, Y—T, plus social security payments to the

surviving fraction (l—p) of the old cohort, plus the net return on wealth,
adjusted for population growth.

A final useful relationship between C and C is obtained by calculating
the aggregate per capita values of both sides of the income expansion path in
(9) to obtain

— 15 —

2
Thus,

the

= 1_-aR* — k
a

1

(25)

a

aggregate income expansion path relating C

and C

is linear and

positively sloped. Thus, in analyzing the steady state effects of changes in

the social security parameters S and T, we know from (25) that C and C both
move in the same direction.

III. The Effects of Actuarially Fair Social Security

In this section we consider the effects on savings and consumption of the

introduction of a fully funded actuarially fair social security system. We
suppose that the only role of the government is to collect social security
taxes from the young and to distribute social security benefits to the old.
Thus the taxes T levied on the young are social security taxes. An actuarially fair social security system would levy a tax of (1—p)R dollars for each
dollar of benefits promised, i.e., RT = (1—p)S.

Under this system, a consumer

contributes (1—p)RS to the social security system. Be receives S if he sur-

vives to the second period of life but receives zero if he dies after one
period. Thus the expected present value of the social security benefit is
(1—p)RS which is equal to the consumer's contribution. Put differently. the
social security system runs a balanced account vis—a—vis each generation. The
social security system collects taxes from the members of each generation when

they are young, invests the tax revenue at a gross rate of return R, and then

returns all of the tax revenue with accrued interest to the surviving old
members of the generation.

lilA. ] Effects
Capital Accumulation

Social Security

Aggregate Consumption and Aggregate

— 16 —

In order to study the effects of actuarially fair social security on
aggregate consumption, we proceed in three steps.

First, we analyze the

effects of social security on the saving and consumption behavior of type 0
consumers. Then, we use our results about the effects on

to analyze the

effects on the private capital stock and on the total national capital stock.
Finally, we use the relations between the national capital stock and aggregate

consumption to determine the effects on C and C2.

To calculate the effects of actuarially fair social security on consump-

tion and saving of young type 0 consumers, we substitute T =

(1—p)RS

into

(10) and (11) to obtain

c0 =

aRY + b + apS

(26)

= (1—aR)Y — b — T — apS

(27)

The introduction of actuarially fair social security increases the future
value of lifetime resources, R(B + Y —T) + S, by —RT + S = pS.

A consumer who

survives to the second period receives a social security payment S which
exceeds the value of his contribution with accrued interest, RT, because the
surviving members of each generation receive (on a pro rata basis) the taxes—

cwn—interest contributed by members of their generation who died after one
period. The effect of this increase in lifetime resources is to increase c0
by apS. The wealth held at the end of the first period by type 0 consumers is

reduced for two reasons: first, disposable resources available in the first
period fall by the amount of the tax T. second, the increase in first—period
consumption further reduces wealth held at the end of the first period.

In a fully funded social security system, the total national capital
stock per capita (measured at the end of a period) is equal to the sum of the

— 17 —

aggregate private capital stock per capita, W, and the per capita capital
stock held by the social security system T. Recall from equation (20), that
the private capital stock, W, is proportional to

and that the constant

of proportionality does not depend on the parameters of the social security
system. Since, from (27), the introduction of social security reduces
it is clear that the aggregate private capital stock is reduced by the intro-

duction of social security. Since B* = (pR/G)W*, the reduction in the aggregate private capital stock implies an equiproportionate reduction in aggregate
bequests per capita.

The effect of actuarially fair social security on the aggregate national
capital stock per capita, W* + T, is easily determined by first observing from
the definition of end—of—first--period wealth in (2) that

W*+T=Y+B*_C

(28)

Then calculating the aggregate per capita values of both sides of (12) we
obtain

c1

= aEB* +

(29)

Substituting (29) into (28) yields

W* + T = Y + (1—aR)B —

(30)

Since we have already shown that the introduction of social security causes B*

to fall and

to increase, it is clear from (30) that the aggregate

national capital stock W* + T is reduced by the introduction of social security.

Next we examine the effects on aggregate consumption of the introduction

— 18 —

of

actuarially fair social security. Substituting RT for (1—p)S in (24) gives

an expression for aggregate economy—wide consumption per capita

C +

C

= Y + ((RIG) —

l)(W+T)

(31)

Aggregate private consumption is equal to the sum of labor income Y and the
net return (adjusted for population growth) on national wealth. Observe that

if R=G, so that the net rate of return on capital is equal to the rate of
population growth, then the coefficient on national wealth in (31) is zero.

In this case, C +

C

is independent of the level of actuarially fair social

security taxes and benefits. Furthermore, in view of the aggregate income

expansion path in (26), both C and C are independent of the level of
actuarially fair social security taxes and benefits when R = G.

If R > G,

then the reduction in aggregate wealth, W + T, induced by the introduction of

social security leads to a reduction in C +

C;

in light of (25), C and C

are each reduced by the introduction of actuarially fair social security.

Finally,

*

*

if R < G, then C1 and C2 are each increased by the introduction of

actuarially fair social security.

III.B. The Effects of Social Security

Intra—Cohort Distribution of

Consumut ion.

Raving analyzed the effects of social security on the aggregate consump-

tion of the young cohort and the aggregate consumption of the old cohort, we
now examine the intra—cohort distributions of consumption and wealth. We have
already shown (equation (26)) that the first—period consumption of type 0 con—

sumers increases by apS in response to the introduction of social security.
Also we have shown that

falls by T + apS when social security is intro—

— 19 —

duced.

As a consequence of the fall in

there is a reduction in

bequests, BU), received at birth by type 1 consumers. Indeed, the introduc—

tion of social security reduces

1,2,3

for all type j consumers for j =

This result follows from the facts that

is proportional to

(see equations (14) and (16)) and that W0 is reduced by the introduction of social security. Taking account of the induced reduction in bequests,
we analyze the intra—cohort distribution of consumption.

The deviation of a type j consumer's first—period consumption from the
average level of first—period consumption is easily calculated by subtracting
(29) from (12) to obtain

c' —

C1*

=

aR(B

— BC)

(32)

Thus, the deviation of c' from the average consumption of the young cohort
is proportional to deviation of

from the average bequest B. Using equa-

tions (14), (16) and (20), equation (32) can be rewritten as'1

c0 —

= a(R2/G)W)(•I0(1_aR)1(R/G)1

—
1—p(RIG)(1—aR)

Since the introduction of actuarially fair social security reduces

it is

clear from (33) that the (magnitude of the) deviation of type j consumer's
first—period consumption from the average first—period consumption is reduced

by the introduction of social security. Thus, the distribution is narrowed by

the introduction of social security. More precisely, all central moments of

the intra—cohort distribution of

are reduced by the introduction of

social security.

i—i

11. We use the convention that

(1—aR) 1(R/G)' is equal to zero for j =
i=0

0.

— 20 —

The effects of the introduction of social security on second—period con-

sumption are easily calculated by observing from (9) that c' can be
expressed as an increasing linear function of
of the distribution of

Therefore, the narrowing

implies that the distribution of

is also nar-

rowed by the introduction of social security.

For the case in which R = G, it is straightforward to analyze the (steady

state) welfare implications of the introduction of social security. In this
case, the introduction of actuarially fair social security does not affect the

average levels of consumption of the young or of the old as explained in sec-

tion III.A.

However, it narrows the distribution of consumption of each

cohort. Therefore, if each consumer has an identical utility function and
receives equal weight in the social welfare function, the introduction of
social security is welfare—improving.

If R < G, then the introduction of

security raises the average level of consumption and reduces the variance of
consumption. Each of these effects increases social welfare. However, if R >
G, then the introduction of social security reduces average consumption, which

tends to reduce welfare, but also reduces the intra—cohort variance of consumption, which tends to raise welfare.

IV. The Transition Path to the New Steady State

In section III we examined the effects on consumption and wealth of the
introduction of actuarially fair social security. However, the comparison of
regimes with and without social security was actually a comparison of steady
states. In particular, we assumed that the social security system had been in
effect long enough so that essentially no one received a bequest that included

part of the savings of an ancestor who lived in the initial regime without

— 21 —

social

security. Equivalently, we assumed that each person had at least one

ancestor who lived for two periods under the new regime, leaving no bequests
and thus severing links to the old regime.

In this section we examine the transition path to the new steady state
which accompanies the introduction of an actuarially fair social security sys-

tem. We show that the introduction of social security reduces the intra—
cohort variances of first—period consumption and second—period consumption for
every generatIon (except the first) born under the new social security regime.

Also, if R . G,

then the average levels of first—period consumption and

second—period consumption of each generation are at least as high under the

social security regime as in the absence of social security. In this case.
the introduction of social security increases the welfare of every generation
born under the social security regime.

Suppose that actuarially fair fully funded social security is introduced

at the beginning of period t*+1. We will assume that since the older cohort

(born at time t*) did not contribute to the social security system they
receive no benefits.

The young generation pays a tax T = (1—p)1(S and the

survivors will each receive a social security payment of S as discussed in
section III. In order to analyze the transition path to the new steady state
we introduce the following notational conventions:

(1) a double tilda over a

variable denotes the value of that variable under the social security system;
a single tilda denotes the value that the variable would have had without the
introduction of social security; (2) the subscript t*+m denotes that the vari-

able pertains to a consumer born at the beginning of period t+m; without a
time subscript, the variable refers to the steady—state value of the variable
(i.e., m =

co). Thus,

for instance,

is the first—period consumption,

— 22 —

under a social security regime, of consumers of type j born at the beginning
of period t5+m.

The effect of social security on the first—period consumption of consu-

mers of type j born at the beginning of period t*+m is easily obtained from
(12) and (14),

(j)

Clt*+m

—

= (O)
(j)
1,t*+m
1

—

(O) +
1

t*+m_1

(j—1)
t*+m_1

'

j

=

m =

0,1,2,...
1,2,3,...
(34)

where we use the convention thatt*+m
1) =

1, then (j—1)
—
t*+m_1

(j—1)
t*+m._1

1)

=

t*+m

0.

We also note that if m =

= 0 because the wealth of the generation born at

time t is unchanged by the introduction of social security. Observe from
(26) that

O) — (O)

= apS

(35)

Therefore, the introduction of social security increases by apS the first—
period consumption of every consumer born at time t*+1. Also, from (9), the
second—period consumption of each surviving member of this cohort is increased

by (1—aR)pS. Thus, the first generation born under the new social security
regime is made unambiguously better off. The bequests received by each indivi-

dual in this cohort are invariant to the introduction of social security, and

for a given level of bequests, the introduction of social security increases
the consumption possibilities of each consumer.

Now we examine the consumption and wealth of generations born after
period t+1. A straightforward generalization of (16) yields

— 23 —

= I(l—aR)'(R/G)'W2j

(36)

where t*+m_1
W0 . is the end—of—first—period wealth of consumers born in period
t*+m_i.

Since the social security system first goes into effect in period

t+l, it follows from (27) that

t+m—i

—

(0)
t+m—i

—(T+apS),

——

0

,

for i =

0,1,2,...,m—l

for

m,m+l,m-f2,...

i =

(37)

Then, from (36) and (37) we obtain

—

-m

=

where

Finally, we substitute (35)

—

it*+m =

=

_(T+aPS)10(1_aR)1(R11,
j*

(38a)

(38b)

min(j, rn—i)

and (38a) into (34) to obtain

apS —

a(R2/G)(T+apS)I(l—aR)'(R/G)',
j =

m =

(39)

0,1,2,...
1,2,3,...

—1

where we use the convention that I (l—aR)'(R/G)' = 0.
i=0

for any given m,
j =

1,...,

—

*+rn

Observe from (39) that

is non—increasing in j.

Moreover, for

rn—i, the effect on first—period consumption of the introduction of

social security is strictly decreasing in j.

We will now show that the introduction of actuarially fair social secu-

rity reduces the intra—cohort variance of consumption of each generation
(except the first) born under the social security regime. We first record

— 24 —

three

observations:

(ii)

(iii) C''
1,t*+m

>

j =

1,2,3,...

>

j =

1,2,3,...

—

<
1,t*+m —

'
c'j
1,t*+m

—

fl_I
—,
1,t*+m

—1 2 2
' '.'."
.
with strict inequality

for some j if m

2.

Observation (i), which follows from (12), (14), and (16), simply states that
for a given cohort, first—period consumption is increasing in j in the absence

of social security. Observation (ii), which follows from (12), (14), and (36)

states that for a given cohort born under the social security regime, first—

period consumption is increasing inj. Observation (iii), which follows from

(39), states the effect on first—period consumption of the introduction of
social security is non—increasing in j, and is strictly decreasing for some j,

if m

2. According to the lemma below, these three observations imply that

is less than the intra—cohort variance of
the intra—cohort variance of i)
1, t+m

(j)
1, t*+m
LEMMA.

Consider the

f = prob

x)

(x =

1,2,3,...,
and some j.

and
Yj

discrete random variables x

= prob
>

and

y

(y i' i 0,1,2.... Suppose that
y_1, j = 1,2,3,..., with strict inequality

Suppose also that

for some i. Then Var (y) ( Var (x).

—

—

with

and

let

'ii i =
for some i

strict inequality

— 25 —

Proof.

See Appendix A.

We have shown that the introduction of actuarially fair social security
does not affect the intra—cohort variance of first—period consumption of the

first generation born under the social security regime; however, it does
reduce the intra—cohort variation of first—period consumption of each subse-

quent generation. Since the second—period consumption of each consumer is a
linear function of first—period consumption (equation (9)), it follows that
the introduction of social security does not reduce the intra—cohort variance

of second—period consumption of the first generation born under the social
security regime but does reduce this intra—cohort variance for all subsequent
generations.

We have derived unambiguous results about the intra—cohort variance of
consumption along the transition path to the new steady state. The effects on

the average level of consumption are less clear—cut. We have already shown
that for the generation born at the beginning of period t+1, the average levels of first—period consumption and second—period consumption are increased by

the introduction of social security. Also, we have shown that in the new
steady state, the average levels of

and

decrease, increase, or

remain unchanged depending on whether R is greater than, less than, or equal

to G. Letting ,t+m denote the average value of *+m and
the average value of

we will show that ,t+m —

,t*+m

denote
decreases as

m increases. The reason is that as m increases (i.e., as we increase the
length of time for which the social security regime has been in effect), there

is a decrease in the amount of bequests which represent accumulated saving
from generations born before the introduction of social security, when private
saving was higher.

— 26 —

The effect of social security on the average first—period consumption of
the generation born at the beginning of period t+m is calculated in Appendix
B and is equal to

C1t*+m —

Cit*+m

lp(R/G)(laR)Rl' +

[1_p(l_aR)](k/G)mpm(1_aR)i.)
(40)

Since we have assumed that (l—aR)pR is less than G, it is clear from (40) that
—

,t*+m decreases

as m increases, as claimed above.

In the case in which R = G, equation (40) implies that t*+m —

is

equal to aSpm(1_aR)m which is positive for all finite a. Thus, since the

introduction of social security increases the average value and reduces the
variance of

for all finite m, it also (see equation (9)) increases the

average value and reduces the variance of CJ*+m for all finite a. Therefore, if R = G, the introduction of social security is welfare—improving for

every generation born under the new social security regime. More generally,
if R j G, the welfare of every generation (except the current old generation
which is unaffected) is improved by the introduction of social security.

The welfare effects of the introduction of social security are less
clear—cut in the case in which R > G. Clearly, the welfare of the generation

born at time t+l is improved because, as explained earlier, the first—period

consumption of every consumer in this generation increases by apS (and from
equation (9), second—period consumption increases by (1—aR)pS). For all generations born after time t*+l, the introduction of social security reduces the

intra—cohort variance of consumption. For sufficiently small m, it follows

— 27 —

from (40) that the average level of first—period (and second—period) consumption is increased by the introduction of social security. Thus, for these
generations, welfare is increased. The difficulty in our welfare analysis
arises for generations born long after t*+l.

If R > G, then it follows

immediately from (40) that fOr sufficiently large m, the average first—period

(and a fortiorj average second—period) consumption of the generation born at

time t*+rn is reduced by the introduction of social security. The effect on
the welfare of this generation thus depends on whether the welfare—improving
effects of reduced variance dominate the welfare—worsening effects of reduced
average consumption.

V. Private Annuities

We have examined the effects of actuarially fair social security in which

the amount of this annuity held by each individual is determined by the
government rather than by the individual. Implicit in this analysis was the
assumption that there is no market for private annuities. In this section we
will introduce a market for private annuities in which individuals can choose
the level of annuities purchased. Because actuarially fair social security is
a perfect substitute for actuarially fair private annuities, the introduction

of social security has no effect on an economy in which there is already a
private annuity market. Thus, we will not consider social security in this
section. Rather we will simply focus on the effects of introducing actuarially fair annuities into an economy in which there is no social security.

With the introduction of private annuities, there are now two alternative

forms in which a consumer can hold his wealth. As before, he can hold capital
directly, earning a gross rate of return R. Alternatively, he can deposit his

— 28 —

savings at an annuity company.

The annuity company operates by accepting

deposits from young consumers and using these deposits to buy capital which
earns a gross rate of return R. At the beginning of the following period, the

annuity company distributes its holdings (with accumulated interest) to its
surviving depositors in proportion to their initial deposits. Thus, each surviving depositor at the annuity company receives A =

dollars

for each dol-

lar initially deposited. As shown by Yaari (1965), consumers who do not have
explicit bequest motives will choose to hold all of their wealth in the form
of these annuities. Thus, there will be no bequests.

The effect of introducing actuarially fair private annuities is to raise

the (gross) rate of return on saving from R to A = RJ(l—p).

For any given

individual, the response to an increased rate of return is to increase
second—period consumption. However, the effect on first—period consumption is

ambiguous because of the usual conflict of income and substitution effects.

We will demonstrate in this section that if R =
A =

(1—pY'),

&

=

G

= 1

(so that

then despite the ambiguity at the individual level, the effect

on aggregate first—period consumption is unambiguous.

In particular, the

introduction of actuarially fair private annuities will reduce aggregate consumption of the young and raise aggregate consumption of the old.

Consumers can, by holding annuities, earn a gross rate of return A on

their savings so that c2 = AFY — c1].

The maximization problem of the

representative consumer12 is

Max U(c1) + (1—p)&IJ(A(Y —

c1))

ci

12. Since there are no bequests, there is no need to distinguish consumers
according to the mortality history of their families.

(41)

— 29 —

The

first—order

condition for this problem is

(1—p)AÔU'(A(Y —

IJ'(c1) =

With actuarially fair annuities (1—p)A = R.

c1))

(42)

Therefore, since c2 = A(Y —

c1),

equation (42) can be rewritten as

U'(1) = R8U'(2)

(43)

where we use a circumflex to denote the value of a variable in the presence of

a private annuity market.
risk aversion (TI

Observe that if U( )

= 0; a 1 —

y

exhibits

constant relative

> 0), then (43) implies that (1/2Y =

whereas equation (4) implies that in the absence of private annuities,
= (1—p)R6 for all j. Therefore, it follows that, with constant

relative risk aversion, the introduction of private annuities reduces the
share of aggregate consumption consumed by the young cohort.

For the remainder of this section we assume that G = R = & =

1,

i.e.,

that the rate of population growth, the net rate of return on capital and the
rate of time preference are all equal to zero. With R& = 1, (43) implies that

=
and A =

for

any strictly concave utility function U( ).

(1—pr1,

we obtain

=
1

2

= —-—Y.
2—p

1

2—p

2

2—p

0* =
2-p

Since 02 =

A(Y—1)

Therefore, we obtain

(44a)

(44b)

(44c)

In order to calculate aggregate consumption in the absence of annuities, we

— 30 —

observe from (4) that when R = 6 = 1,
=

(45)

(l—p)U'(4J)

Since i—p is less than one, it follows that for any concave utility function
U( ),

3 =

4j) >

(i—p)pc0 and C,*
— =

Since C1* =
3=0

0,1,2,...

(46)

I (l_p)ZpJ4J), it follows from (46)
-

3=0

that
(47)

C2* < (i—p)C1'

We can now compare steady state consumption of each cohort with and
without private annuities. Because R =
tion

is

C1* +

not

=Y

=

affected

by

the

+ 2*. However,

G

=

1, steady state aggregate consump-

presence

of

private

annuities:

from (44a,b) and (47) we see that the

older generation consumes a smaller fraction of total output in the absence of

annuities than in the presence of annuities. That is, the introduction of
actuarially fair annuities will reduce the aggregate consumption of the young

and increase the aggregate consumption of the old. This finding is unambigu-

ous despite the fact that for any individual with given initial endowments,
the effect on first—period consumption is ambiguous. As will be explained in
the next section, the income and substitution effects on first—period consump-

tion work in opposite directions for an individual; however, at the aggregate
level, there is no income effect (when R = G) so that the substitution effect
dominates.

— 31 —

Finally,

we examine the effect of the introduction of annuities on

private wealth. Our comparison will be limited to the case of constant relative risk aversion and 6 = R =
ambiguity.
(q =

&

1.

=

Even in this simple case, there is an

Observe from (7c) that with constant relative risk aversion

0, a = 1

— y > 0), b =

0;

from (7b), we see that with R =

8

= 1,

1

a =

(1 +

(1_)a]

Substituting these values of a and b into the expression

for (0), equation (11), and substituting the result into (20) yields the
level of wealth in the absence of private annuities

(48)

1

a

i—p + (i—p)

To calculate the effect on private wealth of the introduction of private
annuities we subtract (48) from (44c) to obtain

** —

= --{(1—p) a —

(1+p—p2))

(49)

Observe that ** — W* has the same sign as the term in curly brackets. For
example, with logarithmic utility (a =

1),

the term in curly brackets is equal

to —p + p2 < 0 so that ** < W*. There is some value of the coefficient of

relative risk aversion a less than 1 such that ** = W*.

Using (49) it can be

shown that

>

as a—a
>

where

(50a)

<

(1 —

11P))]

< 1.

(50b)

— 32 —

To summarize, we have shown that the introduction of private annuities
reduces the share of aggregate consumption consumed by the young cohort if
either of the following two conditions is met: (a) the utility function U(
exhibits constant relative risk aversion; or (b) 6 = R = 6 = 1.

The direction

of the effect of private annuities on the level of private wealth is harder to

determine. Even if we make both assumptions (a) and (b), the introduction of
private annuities can either increase or decrease private wealth, depending on
the coefficient of relative risk aversion.

VI. A Diagrammatic Presentation

In this section we present a simple diagrammatic illustration of the
effects of introducing social security and of introducing private annuities.
We limit our analysis to the case in which R =

G

= 6 =

1.

By restricting the

net return on capital and the population growth rate to equal zero, we essentially remove any aggregate income effects associated with the introduction of
either actuarially fair social security or actuarially fair private annuities.
More precisely, if R = G =

1,

then steady state aggregate consumption is equal

to Y regardless of the level of actuarially fair social security (see equation

(31)) and regardless of the presence of actuarially fair private annuities
(see equations (44a,b)). In the case with K = 6 = 6 =

1,

there are particu-

larly sharp distinctions between the responses of individual behavior and of
aggregate behavior to various changes. For example, for an individual with a

given endowment, the introduction of social security will raise both first—

period and second—period consumption; however, the introduction of social
security has no effect on the (steady state) level of aggregate consumption of

either the young or the old. As another example, the introduction of private

— 33 —

annuities

has an ambiguous effect on individual consumption behavior, but the

effect on aggregate consumption is unambiguous. The difference between the
analyses of individual effects and of aggregate effects is that the aggregate
analysis takes account of the endogenous adjustment of bequests. Although the

introduction of either social security or private annuities has a positive
income effect from the viewpoint of the individual, the endogenous adjustment

of bequests offsets any income effect in the aggregate analysis. The fact
that neither social security nor private annuities affects aggregate income
essentially imposes a zero income effect in the aggregate analysis.

First consider the introduction of social security as illustrated in fig-

ure 1.

In the absence of social security or private annuities the

individual's budget line is given by II' which has a slope of —l and has
intercepts equal to B+Y. The consumer chooses point

in the absence of

social security or private annuities. The dashed line JFB has slope equal to
—A =

—l/(l—p).

In the presence of actuarially fair social security, which

levies a tax of T on the young and pays a benefit S = AT to the old, the
consumer's budget line is DFG. Provided that the social security benefit S is

smaller than second—period consumption at E1, the consumer moves to a point
such as E2. The introduction of social security has a positive income effect

because S > T but has no substitution effect. The positive income effect
leads to an increase in first—period consumption and hence reduces the size of

the bequest if the consumer dies after one period. In the aggregate, the
negative income effect on subsequent generations resulting from the lower
bequests received by these generations exactly offsets the positive income
effect arising from the fact that S > T. Thus, C1* and C2 are invariant to
the presence or absence of social security.

H

'S

C

JI

F

s{

Cl
T

Figure 1

— 34 —

Now

consider the introduction of private annuities which shifts the

budget line from JJ' to the dashed line JFB. The consumption point shifts

from E1 to E3.

The income effect tends to increase consumption in both

periods whereas the substitution effect tends to decrease c1 and increase

c2.

The total effect on c2 is thus unambiguously positive but the effect on c1 is
ambiguous.

In the presence of private annuities, all consumers will hold

their savings in the form of these annuities and there will be no bequests.
The elimination of bequests imposes a negative income effect on all subsequent

consumers except for type 0 consumers. In the aggregate, the negative effect
arising from the elimination of bequests exactly offsets the positive income

effect arising from the availability of private annuities as illustrated in
figure 1. Thus, in the aggregate, only the substitution effect is operative
so that aggregate first—period consumption falls and aggregate second—period
consumption rises.

From the analysis in this section it is clear that the distinction
between social security and private annuities is not that the claims to future

social security benefits are liabilities of the government and the claims to

future annuity payments are liabilities of private firms.

Rather, the dis-

tinction is that the social security system we have examined is compulsory and

has a fixed level of participation whereas individuals can choose the amount

of privately marketed annuities to hold. As explained above, the compulsory
social security system has no substitution effect, i.e., it does not affect
the intertemporal marginal rate of transformation for an individual consumer.

Kowever, the introduction of a market for annuities allows the consumer to
choose the level of annuities in his portfolio, and hence affects the inter—
temporal marginal rate of transformation.

— 35 —

VII.

Cong ludina Remarks

We have developed an overlapping generations model with random lifetimes
which induce random intergenerational transfers in the form of bequests. This

model adds considerable richness to the standard overlapping generations
framework because it generates intra—cohort distributions of wealth and consumption. Therefore, the model can be used to analyze the effect of policies

on the distribution of consumption and wealth within cohorts as well as the
effects on the aggregate consumption and wealth of each cohort.

The model developed in the paper has been used to analyze the effects on

wealth and consumption of changes in the level of actuarially fair social

security. We showed that increasing the level of social security reduces
national wealth (even if the social security system is fully funded) and uniformly narrows the distribution of consumption within each cohort. The reduction in national wealth leads to a decrease, an increase, or no change in the

steady state consumption of each cohort depending on whether the net rate of
return on capital is greater than, less than, or equal to the rate of population growth.

Appendix A
Proof of Lemma

Observe that Var (y) =

Y f(y1—y) where a bar over a variable denotes
1=0

y. —

the expectation of that variable. Define

Var(y) =

+

1=011

I f.(1.—1)2,

Since Var(x) =

If(z1—z)2

+

x1 and observe that

2If1(i.-)(z1—z)

(Al)

we have

i=O

Var(y) —

Var(x)

I f1(z1—z)[z1_z

1=0

=

Therefore Var(y) —

+

2(x_x)]

(A2)

.I f,(z1—z)(x+y1--(x+))

Var(x)

= Cov(z, x+y). Since x1+y1 is nondecreasing in i

and z is nonincreasing in 1, Cov(z, x+y) < 0. Therefore Var(y) ( Var (x).
q.e.d.

Appendix B

In this appendix we calculate the effect on the aggregate first—period
consumption of the generation born in period t*+m of the introduction in

period t*+1 of actuarially fair social security. That is, we derive equation
(40) in the text.

It will be useful to define x as

=

.'

ll

1_I

Under actuarially fair social security, RT = (1—p)S so that
(R2/G)(T+apS) = (R/G)(1—p+apR)S = ((RIG)—px)S

(B2)

Substituting (Bi) and (B2) into (39) yields

—

= aStp — ((RIG) —

px]1x11

(B3)

As a step toward calculating the average value of each side of (B3), we
first calculate
•s—l

I (1_p)pJ I x = (l—p) i pl:1_
X
i=0

j=0

Recalling

that j*

= min(j,

j=0

rn—i), (B4) can be rearranged to yield

m-1

I (i_p)pij—lI x = 1—xtl—p I

j=0

(B4)

i=0

j=0

—

I ix1]

jm

Calculating the sums on the right hand side of (B5) yields

(B5)

I =

I (l_p)pJ
i=O

j=O

which

i:.u

mm—i
tpx
—
i—p

'

mm
1—px

I

(B6)

can be simplified to yield

I (i—p)p

.j—l
- x1 =

P

l—px

i=O

j=O

1 —

m—lrn—l
x
).
p

(B7)

Now calculate the average value of each side of (B3) and use (B7) to obtain
—5

Cit*+m —

Ci*+

=

apS(i

— (R/G)—PZ(1

m-.iKrn_i))

i—i,x

(B8)

Rearranging (88) yields

Ci.+

—

(RIG) + [(R/G)—pr]pxm-')

(B9)

— px]prn—i irn—i = (1 — p(1_aR)Ip(i_aR)m-i(R/G)W

(BlO)

= aDS1
'i,t+m l-px

Recognizing that

[(RIG)

then yields equation (40) in the text.

References

Barro, Robert I. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal
82,6 (November/December 1974), 1095—1117.

Political Econ—

_______________ and Friedman, James W., "On Uncertain Lifetimes," Journal j
Political Economy 85,4 (August 1977), 843—9.

Diamond, Peter, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," American
Economic Review 55 (1965), 1126—50.
Drazen, Allan, "Government Debt, Human Capital and Bequests in a Life—Cycle
Model," Journal of Political Economy 86,3 (June 1978), 505—16.
V1..
k5LVJLL,

7*1..
ar.iu
£fL, ILwaum, U

,.

,

D1* fl —

,,'ri
£LS

UI.

Wealth

and Welfare in the Presence of Incomplete Annuity Markets," mimeo,
Carnegie—Mellon University, May 1983a.

Eckstein, Zvi, Eichenbaum, Martin and Peled, Dan, "Uncertain Lifetimes and the
Welfare Enhancing Properties of Annuity Markets and Social Security,"
mimeo, Carnegie—Mellon University, May 1983b.
Fischer, Stanley, "A Life Cycle Model of Life Insurance Purchases,"
tional Economic Review 14, 1 (February 1973), 132—152.
Hubbard, K. Glenn, "Uncertain Lifetimes and the Impact of Social Security on
Individual Wealth Accumulation," mimeo, Harvard University, May 1983.
katz, Eliakim, "A Note on Uncertain Lifetimes," Journal
87, 1 (February 1979), 193—5.

Political Economy

otlikoff, Laurence 3. and Spivak, Avia, "The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy 89, 2 (April 1981), 372—391.
Levhari, David and Mirman, Leonard, "Savings and Consumption with an Uncertain
Horizon," Journal of Political Economy 85,2 (April 1977), 265—81.
Modigliani, Franco and Brumberg, Richard, "Utility Analysis and Aggregate ConAn Attempt at Integration," mimeo 1954.
sumption Functions:
Pelzman, Joseph and Rousslang, Don, "A Note on Uncertain Lifetimes: A Comment," Journal of Political Economy 90,1 (February 1982), 181—3.
Samuelson, Paul A., "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest with or
Without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal
Political Economy
66,6 (December 1958), 467—82.

Sheshinski, Eytan and Weiss, Yoram, "Uncertainty and Optimal Social Security
Economics, 96,2 (May 1981), 189—206.
Systems," jç. Quarterly Journal
Yaari, Menachem E., "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory

Consumer," Review .jci Studies 32 (April 1965), 137—50.

of

the

