                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




COMPLEMENTARITY AND THE MEASUREMENT OF INDIVIDUAL RISK TRADEOFFS:
       ACCOUNTING FOR QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF LIFE EFFECTS

                                            Mary F. Evans
                                            V. Kerry Smith

                                        Working Paper 13722
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13722


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




Partial support for this research was provided by the U.S Environmental Protection Agency thru STAR
grant 83159501. Thanks are due Ian Bateman, Kip Viscusi, and two anonymous referees for very constructive
comments on an earlier draft of this research and to Diana Burns and Richard Laborin for assistance
in preparing several drafts of the manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Mary F. Evans and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Complementarity and the Measurement of Individual Risk Tradeoffs: Accounting for Quantity
and Quality of Life Effects
Mary F. Evans and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 13722
January 2008
JEL No. I12,J17

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the factors responsible for differences with age in estimates of the wage compensation
an individual requires to accept increased occupational fatality risk. We derive a relationship between
the value of a statistical life (VSL) and the degree of complementarity between consumption and labor
supplied when health status serves as a potential source of variation in this relationship. Our empirical
analysis finds that variations in an individual's health status or quality of life and anticipated longevity
threats lead to significant differences in the estimated wage/risk tradeoffs. We describe how extensions
to the specification of hedonic wage models, including measures for quality of life and anticipated
longevity threats, help to explain the diversity in past studies examining how the estimated wage–risk
tradeoff changes with age.


Mary F. Evans
Department of Economics
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
mevans12@utk.edu

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 873806
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu
            Complementarity and the Measurement of Individual Risk Tradeoffs:

                      Accounting for Quantity and Quality of Life Effects

I. Introduction

        Recent research has identified how complementarity relationships help in

resolving some empirical puzzles in economics. In the first of these papers, Chetty

[2006] develops an upper bound on the coefficient of relative risk aversion using labor

supply elasticities. His relationship implies that the bound varies with the degree of

complementarity between consumption and labor supplied. A second paper by Hall and

Jones [2007] uses a form of complementarity to explain the rationality of an increasing

income share for health expenditures as incomes grow. In particular, Hall and Jones

assume consumption goods and health services are weakly complementary. We argue

that combining these two independent insights provides a possible explanation for yet

another puzzle largely associated with microeconomic applications—the relationship

between age and the marginal willingness to pay for risk reductions (the value of a

statistical life or VSL) and the diverse empirical findings from revealed preference

studies designed to examine this relationship.1

        We use Chetty’s result to show that complementarity between consumption and

labor supply implies, in the absence of other considerations, a lower estimate for the

value of a statistical life than would be implied by models that assume independence. We

hypothesize that health status may well be a third influence on individual choice. That is,



1
  Chetty describes the logic for our proposed analysis as follows: “If complementarity between
consumption and labor is sufficiently strong, even highly risk averse individuals may choose not to reduce
labor supply when wages rise because increased consumption makes work less painful” (p.1821).


                                                     2
a person’s state of health may influence the extent of complementarity between labor

supply and consumption.

       This logic is consistent in broad terms with the arguments in Hall and Jones

[2007] where health expenditures contribute to maintaining a health state. Improvements

in health increase the value of leisure and change the types of goods consumed. Thus,

improved health increases the demand for leisure and with it demands for a different mix

of consumption goods, which in turn reduces the apparent degree of complementarity

between labor supply and a fixed weight measure for aggregate consumption. Thus,

differences in the degree of complementarity between labor supply and consumption

among individuals with different health states offer one potential explanation for why we

might observe differences in estimated VSLs across individuals of different ages.

       Finally, identifying the relationships among health status, complementarity, and

estimated risk/wage tradeoffs helps to reconcile diverse findings regarding the

relationship between age and the VSL in the revealed preference literature. Viscusi and

Aldy [2007] suggest lower VSL estimates among the older workers in their sample, with

a sample mean age of 39; Smith et al. [2004] fail to find lower VSL estimates for the

older workers in their sample, with a sample mean age of 55. Neither analysis, however,

controls for differences in health status among workers. If the distribution of health

status varies among those workers in the two samples, then this variation could help to

explain the observed differences in empirical results.

       This paper examines the effects of an individual’s health status or quality of life

as well as a person’s latent perceptions of his (or her) longevity on estimates of the VSL.

Our analysis considers a sample of older workers who participated in the Health and




                                             3
Retirement Study (HRS).2 We find these measures for quality and quantity remaining of

life influence the risk/wealth tradeoffs in ways that are consistent with our

complementarity explanation. Specifically, we exploit the panel dimension of the HRS to

define a measure of subjective quality of life based on a survey response given two years

before labor market choices are reported. The motivation for our measure of the

(subjective) quantity of life remaining stems from results in Smith et al. [2001] that

suggest a respondent’s perceived longevity can be viewed as a latent variable from the

analyst’s perspective. While this latent variable influences the other risks an individual

will assume, it is not completely reflected in subjective longevity assessments elicited at

the time the labor market behavior is recorded. Thus, we use a future death (or another

serious health condition) as an instrument for a respondent’s current perceptions of

personal longevity or as a subjective measure of the “quantity” of life remaining.

Typically, the analyst is unable to take into account how these factors would affect risk

taking behaviors; the HRS panel structure allows us to consider them.

        Section two provides a brief summary of the policy context for the questions

associated with the sources of heterogeneity in risk preferences. The third section

describes the theoretical logic that underlies the tests in our basic empirical model.

Section four summarizes our data and findings and the last section discusses their

implications.

II. Policy Context

        In 2002, EPA’s Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) for the Clear Skies initiative

(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [2002]) included an adjustment to the VSL

2
 The HRS (Health and Retirement Study) is sponsored by the National Institute of Aging (grant number
NIA U01AG09740) and conducted by the University of Michigan. Where possible, we rely on the RAND


                                                 4
estimates used to monetize the benefits from reduced risks experienced by older

populations. Specifically, the RIA included an estimate of the mortality benefits of the

proposed regulations using a VSL estimate discounted by approximately thirty-six

percent. The resulting controversy over this “senior discount” has affected subsequent

policy guidance, scientific reviews of the literature, and research. For example, following

this controversy the Office of Management and Budget [2003] has suggested that

regulatory agencies consider the possibility of using cost effectiveness analysis and

quality adjusted life years to acknowledge that policies yield risk reductions to

heterogeneous populations. In a recent advisory letter to the EPA Administrator, the

Environmental Economics Advisory Committee of EPA’s Science Advisory Board

(SAB) addressed the policy use of VSL estimates adjusted for differences in life

expectancy. The letter concluded that:

         “…The VSL may increase, decrease or remain constant as life expectancy
         decreases. The relationship between the VSL and life expectancy is
         therefore an empirical matter. In practice, because life expectancy is
         difficult to observe, the Agency will have to relate the VSL to factors
         related to life expectancy – namely age and health status. Although the
         literature on the relationship between age and VSL is growing, the
         Committee does not believe that it is sufficiently robust to allow the
         Agency to use a VSL that varies with age”
         (Morgan and Cropper [2007], emphasis added).

         This conclusion is important because there is a sharp contrast between summaries

 of the results from revealed preference studies that rely on evidence from the labor

 market and the estimates from stated preference studies.3 In a review of the revealed

 preference research that has examined the age-VSL relationship, Aldy and Viscusi

 [2007b] conclude that the VSL varies with age and that there is sufficient information to


Corporation’s cleaned version of the HRS. Otherwise, we use the raw HRS data.
3
  See also the review of the stated and revealed preference literature in Evans and Smith [2006].


                                                     5
suggest “…VSL increases with age, peaks in mid-life, and subsequently declines” (p.

257). By contrast, Krupnick [2007] concludes, based on his review of the stated

preference findings, that “…considering the weight of the evidence, the implication is

that for countries that apply a single VSL to adults of all ages, there is insufficient

information and consensus to make a reasoned decision to switch to using either

different VSLs for different ages (in a private-good context) or a VSLY [value of a

statistical life year] which imposes a linear (discounted) relationship between life-years

remaining and the VSL” (pp. 275-276, bracketed phrase added).

       Even if the empirical issues could be resolved, a decision about how, in a

normative sense, to treat heterogeneity in risk preferences elicits a broad range of

emphatic (if not dramatic) responses. The same SAB advisory letter we cited earlier

concludes its recommendations by noting that

       “…while there is no denying the reality of income effects, it is a policy
       judgment, not a scientific question, whether the same VSL should be
       employed in all regulatory decisions across a society or different values
       should be closer depending upon the preferences and income of the
       population affected by a specific regulation” (Morgan and Cropper
       [2007]).


       Aldy and Viscusi [2007b] confirm the importance of these considerations using a

new set of estimates of the wage/risk tradeoffs that provide age-specific VSLs. They

compare the benefit estimates for the Clear Skies Initiative derived using their age- and

industry-specific measures of the VSL to the estimates derived using the EPA’s constant,

consensus VSL estimate. Their results suggest about a forty percent reduction in the

benefits of the Clear Skies Initiative for older populations using the age-differentiated

VSL measures.




                                              6
         Of course, using a constant VSL to estimate the aggregate benefits of a policy that

affects a population with different VSLs is inconsistent with the basic principles

underlying benefit-cost analysis. As Sunstein [2004] observes, “a movement toward

greater individuation of VSL would undoubtedly be extremely controversial. But it is not

merely consistent with that theory that justifies current practice; it is mandated by it. In

principle, government should not force people to buy protection against statistical risks

at a price that seems to them excessive” (p. 5, emphasis added).

         Sunstein’s argument for complete individuation is unlikely to be politically or

practically feasible. Most of the policy uses for estimates of income-risk tradeoffs are in

short-term policy analyses with modest resources for new research and short time

horizons for completion. Moreover, in many cases, the epidemiological analyses used to

identify the relationship between environmental quality and health risks simply do not

have the ability to carefully distinguish how each policy will impact sub-groups in a

heterogeneous population. These limitations are noteworthy because they impose

genuine practical constraints on what constitutes feasible policy analysis. In reality, the

uncertainties in measurement largely trump the political debates about the fairness of a

framework that allows a level of individuation that would be consistent with revealed

preference measures of risk tradeoffs.

         These concerns aside, the logic of the hedonic wage equilibrium suggests

heterogeneous risk preferences and skills in adapting to job risk will cause workers to sort

among jobs based on their personal attributes.4 Both an individual’s quality of life and


4
  The basic logic of the equilibrium described in a hedonic model has generally been recognized as a
matching process (see Rosen [1974] for an early discussion). Ekeland, Heckman, and Nesheim [2002]
provide a brief overview of how this interpretation of the market equilibrium affects the identification of
structural parameters governing the behavioral functions in the process and what can be identified.


                                                      7
quantity of life remaining should affect how he or she makes choices in the labor market.

As a result of this sorting, the market equilibrium will reveal different wage/risk tradeoffs

across workers based on each individual’s personal circumstances. The empirical

challenge in measuring the role of each person’s quality and quantity remaining of life for

risk/compensation tradeoffs is to identify instruments that adequately reflect these

dimensions and permit the analysis to overcome the effects of endogeneity of

contemporaneous measures of these effects.

        Given the potential constraints on the feasible responses to the empirical evidence

from a policy perspective, why study the sources of differences in VSL? We believe

research on the behavioral sources for differences in the tradeoffs people would make to

reduce risk can influence other dimensions of risk assessments by identifying the

important features of the heterogeneity in people’s risk tradeoffs. That is, with this

information it is possible for analysts to focus on a subset of key distinctions that can

arise in selecting the components of the overall risk analysis for special emphasis.

Inevitably the preparation of each regulatory impact analysis faces resource and time

constraints. Nonetheless, even if the analyst never explicitly assigns different values to

each group, knowledge of the potential for differences in the tradeoffs among different

groups can contribute to the design of sensitivity analyses to gauge how policy judgments

would change with individuation.

        Our application does not have sufficient information to develop reliable measures

of the VSL for specific groups of individuals. Instead, we use the results to estimate the

wage-risk tradeoff for one group of individuals relative to another group.


Recently Shogren and Stamland [2002] focus on the information to be derived by describing how
individuals' observable characteristics might influence what can be learned from equilibrium schedules.


                                                    8
III. Complementarity and the VSL

       The motivation for our empirical analysis in the next section combines insights

from three recent papers by Smith, Pattanayak, and Van Houtven [2003], Chetty [2006],

and Hall and Jones [2007] on the relationships among the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of

relative risk aversion, the compensated labor supply elasticity, the degree of

complementarity between consumption and labor supply, and the value of a statistical

life. The first (Smith et al. [2003]) develops a simple link between the uncompensated

labor supply elasticity and the VSL for a specific preference specification, based on

Burtless and Hausman’s [1978] framework. In particular, Smith et al. find that the wage

risk tradeoff can be expressed as in equation (1),

        dw      w
           =                                                                           (1)
        dp (1 − p )ε lw

where p represents fatality risk, w is the wage, and ε lw denotes the uncompensated

(Marshallian) labor supply elasticity. Chetty [2006] provides the second insight, which

confirms a more general link between labor supply elasticities and estimates of the VSL.

Using a general indirect utility function, denoted v(c, l ) , defined in terms of Hicksian

composite goods for the inter-temporal choices of consumption goods (c) and labor

supply (l) over the life cycle, Chetty [2006] develops a relationship between the Arrow

Pratt coefficient of relative risk aversion (R) and the ratio of the income elasticity of labor

supply to the substitution elasticity of labor supply (or compensated labor supply




                                              9
elasticity), and the proportional response of consumption to changes in labor supply.

Equation (2) summarizes the basic form of Chetty’s result (his equation (7))5

                ν cc (c, l )      ⎛ 1 ⎞ ε lm 1
         R=−                 c = −⎜       ⎟ c + ε ucl                                               (2)
                ν c (c, l )       ⎝ 1 − α ⎠ ε lw α

                w⋅l
where α =             with m and w representing unearned income and the wage rate,
              m + w⋅l

respectively. Labor income is given by w ⋅ l . ε lm , ε lwc , and ε ucl denote the income

elasticity of labor supply, the compensated labor supply elasticity, and the elasticity of

the marginal utility of consumption with respect to labor respectively.6

         The compensated and Marshallian elasticities of labor supply can be related using

a Hicks-Allen equation as in (3)

                          w⋅l
         ε lwc = ε lw −       ε lm                                                                  (3)
                          m

Solving equation (3) for ε lm and substituting the result into (2), with some manipulation,

we have:

         ε lw = ε lwc (1 + ε ucl − αR) .                                                            (4)

         Increased complementarity between consumption and labor supplied increases

ε ucl . For a given coefficient of relative risk aversion (R), share of wage income in total



5
  Equation (2) is also related to another connection more closely linked to environmental applications, the
willingness to pay (WTP) and willingness to accept (WTA) disparity. It is an extended version of the
relationship Hanemann [1991] used to explain dramatic differences between WTP and WTA for non-
market environmental services by establishing a simple connection between the price flexibility of income
for non-market goods, the income elasticity of demand for these goods, and an elasticity of substitution
between these non-market environmental services and a composite of all other goods.
6
  The relationship between the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk aversion and the income elasticity of
the VSL is closely related to our discussion here. This relationship was discussed by Eeckhoudt and
Hammitt [2001] in an appendix to a paper that focused on the role of background risk for the properties of
wage risk tradeoffs. More recently, Kaplow[2005] develops an analogous relationship to discuss the
properties of the income elasticity of the VSL.


                                                     10
income ( α ), and compensated labor supply elasticity ( ε lwc ), increased complementarity

implies a higher Marshallian labor supply elasticity ( ε lw ) and, by equation (1), a lower

VSL. If good health increases the demand for leisure and leisure- related consumption

goods, then this change can in turn reduce the apparent degree of complementarity

between labor supply and a consumption aggregate as depicted in the Chetty formulation.

       Thus, to the extent improved health increases the complementarity between

leisure and consumption we should expect an individual would require greater

compensation to accept risk (a higher VSL). With poorer health (i.e., a poorer quality of

life), leisure is less complementary to consumption, the uncompensated labor supply

elasticity will be larger and the VSL smaller. Of course, it is important to acknowledge

the other parameters included in equations (2) and (4) are not constants and can be

expected to change with health status. Our argument merely provides motivation for one

possible channel of influence on the labor supply elasticity – health status as an influence

on the complementarity between consumption and labor supply. This connection in turn

helps to explain how an individual’s health status can affect her willingness to accept

wage compensation to accept risk and thus measures of the VSL.

       While health status can be considered a measure of the quality of life, our analysis

cannot ignore the potential for the remaining quantity of life to impact the estimated wage

risk tradeoffs (Pratt and Zeckhauser [1996]). Therefore, our empirical analysis contains a

measure for health status (or quality of life) as well as an instrument intended to reflect

each individual’s unobserved subjective longevity expectations (or perceptions about the

quantity of life remaining). Estimates from past studies (including our own) that have

examined the relationship between age and the VSL will reflect the joint impacts of



                                             11
differences across individuals in the effects of health status and serious threats to

longevity. To the extent health status, subjective beliefs about longevity, or some

composite of the two effects are correlated with age and separate measures of these

effects are not included in the specification of the wage equation, the omission has the

potential to influence estimates of the effects of age on risk tradeoffs. Our analysis seeks

to disentangle these effects. Unfortunately, we do not have sufficient information to

allow a formal test of the hypothesis that differences in estimated VSLs with health status

stem from differences in the extent of complementarity between consumption and leisure

(labor supply).



IV. Empirical Model, Data, and Results

       Our empirical analysis relies on the observed labor market experiences of

respondents in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). We exploit the panel dimension

of this survey to distinguish measures of the increased risk of death and the deteriorating

quality of life for this sample of older adults. In earlier research (Smith et al. [2004]) we

did not take full advantage of these opportunities. Our earlier analysis was comparable to

the rest of the literature in that we assumed difference in individuals’ assessments of the

quality of their lives as well as their beliefs about longevity would not independently

influence risk tradeoffs revealed in the labor market choices; rather, we assumed age

would proxy for these effects. We also used an average job risk measure for all

respondents in an industry and assumed this aggregate measure was relevant for the

largely older workers represented in the HRS.




                                              12
       Recently, Aldy and Viscusi [2003, 2007a, 2007b] have proposed the use of the

Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries (CFOI) to

develop a refined measure of job risk that accounts for the ages of workers. They

structure mortality risk cells for each industry (by 2-digit SIC code) and age group. Our

analysis uses the same on-the-job fatality risk measures, based on workers’ ages and

industries.

       We consider three sets of models. The first is our primary model. The model

controls for demographic attributes, occupation, a measure of risk tolerance (again as a

qualitative variable), and the age- and industry-specific job risk. This model treats age

non-parametrically, using a set of categorical variables that distinguish different age

intervals. We consider interactions of job risk with age, risk tolerance, as well as the

quality of life measure and our instrument for perceived longevity. To evaluate the

sensitivity of our findings to the treatment of age, our second set of models includes age

and age squared as an alternative description for how age has been hypothesized to

influence wages along with risk tradeoffs. This specification also includes the same

controls as in the primary model. The third set of models excludes age and risk tolerance

measures to evaluate whether the effects of the health status variable and the longevity

instrument are influenced by the presence of these other controls. Finally, the last set of

models considers the effects of health status and longevity separately to evaluate whether

these variables offer robust measures of the separate influences of individual effects of

the quality and the quantity of life remaining. Rather than report all the estimates for

each model we present the key parameter estimates for our primary model and include




                                             13
selective comparisons using the estimates with the other sets of findings. These added

models are intended to be largely checks on the robustness of our main results.

         There is an important qualification to our estimates. We do not claim that the

HRS sample provides sufficient information to estimate the VSLs for heterogeneous

workers over the full range of individual circumstances. As we and others have

previously noted (see for example Viscusi and Aldy [2007]), the HRS is intended to

reflect behavior of older adults. The younger respondents in the sample are spouses (or

partners) of the targeted population. Equally important, the mix of industries and

occupations represented may not be as detailed as the samples usually considered for

estimating wage risk tradeoffs. Finally, to assure our analysis is aligned with the hedonic

wage model’s assumptions we limit the sample to respondents paid by the hour. These

restrictions yield a smaller sample in comparison to what has been available in other

recent hedonic wage studies.

         As a result of these considerations, we focus on how the relative risk tradeoffs

among workers within this sample vary with health status and longevity threats. Equation

(5) adapts the conventional form of a wage hedonic function to include the added terms

for our primary model.

                       K                                    16
ln( wageit ) = β 0 + ∑ δ k ⋅ xkit + β1 ⋅ BLSrisk it + ∑ ar ⋅ Occrit
                      k =1                                 r =1
          5                                 4
      + ∑ α l ⋅ Agelit ⋅ BLSrisk it + ∑ γ j ⋅ Tol ji (t −1) ⋅ BLSrisk it
         l =1                              j =2
                                                                                       (5)
      + θ1 ⋅ Exhealthi (t −1) ⋅ BLSrisk it + θ 2 ⋅ Dead i (t +1) ⋅ BLSrisk it
                                                                   6
      + θ 3 ⋅ Exhealthi (t −1) ⋅ Dead i (t +1) ⋅ BLSrisk it + σ ∑ ρ s ⋅ S sit + ε it
                                                                  s =1




                                                            14
Individual characteristics including race, gender, and education are represented by xkit ,

with the subscript t indicating the period of interest. The Occrit terms identify a set of

occupational dummy variables. Our notation uses (t – 1) as a subscript to imply the

interview wave preceding the occupational outcome (the preceding interview actually

occurred two years earlier than the current wave) and (t + 1) for the subsequent wave

(two years later).

           BLSriskit measures the number of fatalities per 10,000 workers associated with the

individual’s industry, based on the 2-digit SIC code, and age range (16-19, 20-24, 25-34,

35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65+).7 The age- and industry-specific fatality data are from the BLS

Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries while the age- and industry-specific employment

data are annual averages based on the Current Population Survey.

           Age, in our primary model, is treated non-parametrically with the Agelit terms.

The five terms classify respondents into one of six age classes, 44 and under, 45-50, 51-

55, 56-60, 61-65, and over 65 (i.e., Agelit = 1 if respondent i’s age falls in the lth age

class and 0 otherwise; the omitted category is greater than 65). The Tol ji (t −1) terms refer

to dummy variables formed using a qualitative variable defined by the risk tolerance

measure described in Barsky et al. [1997]. The risk tolerance index is based on responses

from a previous interview to questions about choices between a secure job for life and

another job with a 50-50 chance of two different income levels.8 With locally constant

relative risk aversion, the answers classify respondents into one of four risk tolerance

categories, with category 1 indicating the least risk averse and 4 the most. The risk


7
    Note that the two youngest age ranges are not represented in our sample.
8
    The risk tolerance question was not asked in all waves of the HRS.


                                                      15
tolerance index included in equation (5) is therefore a measure of financial risk aversion.

While by definition an increase in risk aversion defined as in the term’s colloquial use

increases the VSL, Eeckhoudt and Hammitt [2004] show that the effect of an increase in

financial risk aversion on the WTP to reduce mortality risk is, in general, ambiguous.

        The last three interaction terms provide our basis for distinguishing the effects of

health status/quality of life and serious threats to longevity on the estimated risk

tradeoffs. In constructing these terms, we make use of two additional binary variables,

represented in equation (5) by Exhealthi (t −1) and Deadi (t +1) .

        Our quality of life measure, Exhealthi (t −1) , is defined based on each individual’s

response to a question about the state of his or her current health as excellent, very good,

good, fair, or poor and exploits the panel featuring the HRS. We use each individual's

response to this health question in the preceding wave.9 Thus the qualitative variable

Exhealthi (t −1) corresponds to answers from the interview preceding the observed

occupational choice. If a respondent answered that he or she was in excellent health the

variable is coded as unity. Otherwise, Exhealthi (t −1) takes a value of zero.

        Deadi (t +1) is constructed to identify those individuals facing impending, serious

threats to longevity. While information about immediate, serious health conditions may

be known to respondents, it appears that they do not report all aspects of their subjective

assessments at the time of each wave's interview (see Smith et al. [2001]). Therefore, we

use the occurrence of death in the near future to proxy for such information. Deadi (t +1) is

a dummy variable to identify people who died between the interview wave when their




                                                 16
labor market choices were reported and the subsequent interview. These are confirmed

deaths and not sample attrition for other reasons. 10 Exhealthi (t −1) and Deadi (t +1) , through

the final three interaction terms in equation (5), provide instruments for identifying the

effects of excellent quality of life and serious longevity threats on estimated risk

tradeoffs.

        As noted in Smith et al. [2004], selection into the labor force or into other

employment categories such as retirement is an important consideration when examining

the occupational choices of older workers. In order to address this, we follow the same

logic as discussed in Smith et al. [2004], relying on the Bourguignon et al. [2001]

generalization of the two step selection framework. We first estimate a multinomial logit

selection model of labor force status. The S sit terms in equation (5) are then the

expectations for the wage model’s error conditional on employment state that arise from

the selection model (see Smith et al. [2004] for further discussion) and reflect choices at

the extensive margin (e.g., work, retire, unemployed, etc.) that give rise to selection

effects on wage models.

        Our wage model estimates are based primarily on information obtained in wave 2

of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), conducted in 1994. The HRS is a panel

survey designed to represent individuals between ages 51 and 61 in 1992 and their

spouses (whose ages need not fall within the targeted age range). The initial interviews

were conducted in 1992 with follow-up interviews scheduled every two years. The

baseline survey included 12,652 persons (7,600 households). The panel was designed to

9
 Both current and previous wave responses to these health condition questions are also significantly
different for respondents who die between waves 2 and 3 and those who do not (results for the current wave
are: χ2=40.40, p-value=0.00 and for the previous wave: χ2=21.73, p-value=0.00).



                                                   17
achieve several objectives (see Juster and Suzman [1995]) including monitoring work,

health, and income relationships. The HRS structure allows construction of the quality of

life instrument based on wave 1 (1992) subjective health status and the impending serious

health shock instrument based on deaths between waves 2 (1994) and 3 (1996). For

consistency with the notation adopted in equation (5), the time subscripts t − 1 , t , and

t + 1 correspond to 1992, 1994, and 1996 respectively.

        While a number of waves are available for analysis, when considering waves

beyond wave 2 (1994), the analysis confronts the limitations imposed by the age profile

of the sample. This structure implies a decrease in the number of respondents with typical

employment patterns. This decline limited our earlier analysis of wage/job risk tradeoffs

as the HRS sample aged.11 For this reason, our current analysis focuses on labor market

experience as of wave 2. As noted earlier, our sample for the hedonic wage model is

limited to workers paid on an hourly basis, where the BLS fatality rates are more likely to

reflect the job risks faced by workers.

        Estimation of the multinomial logit selection model requires that we define

relevant labor force status categories, working and paid by the hour being one such

category. We select five other categories: working and not paid by the hour,

unemployed, retired and not currently working, disabled, and not in the labor force. As

in Smith et al. [2004], we hypothesize that an individual’s marital status, age, number of

people living in his household, his household’s capital income, and whether or not his

health limits his work opportunities will influence his labor force status decision.



10
  Unfortunately the records do not include information about the causes of death.
11
  See Smith et al. [2004] for an example of the marked decline in workers from wave 1 continuing to work
by wave 4.


                                                  18
         Table 1 reports the results of the multi-state selection model in addition to

summary statistics by labor force status. Coefficients are interpreted as relative to the

excluded category, working and not paid hourly. For example, the coefficient on age is

positive and significant for the disabled category, suggesting that, relative to respondents

who are working and not paid hourly, respondents who are disabled tend to be older. The

results suggest that relative to respondents who are working and not paid hourly,

respondents who are working and paid hourly, unemployed, or disabled are less likely to

be married. The negative and significant coefficient on household capital income for all

categories indicates that household capital income is lower for other respondents relative

to respondents who are working and not paid hourly.12 Relative to respondents who are

working and not paid hourly, respondents who are unemployed, retired and not working,

disabled, or not in the labor force are more likely to report that their health limits their

ability to work. As expected, this variable is insignificant for the working and paid

hourly category. In general, the results of the multi-state selection model are consistent

with expectations. Based on these results, we estimate conditional expectations for the

wage equation’s error for each labor force state and include these terms as independent

variables in the hedonic wage model.

         Table 2 provides summary statistics and a selected set of parametric estimates

from six of the hedonic wage models motivated by equation (5).13 All estimated wage


12
    Household capital income is the sum of household business or farm income, self-employment earnings,
business income, gross rent, dividend and interest income, trust funds or royalties, and other asset income.
13
   In order to assure the existence of a wage-risk premium in line with the existing literature, we estimate a
conventional hedonic wage model (equation (5) without any of the interaction terms). The estimated
coefficient on the risk term in this equation is statistically significant and equal to 0.042. This implies an
estimated VSL of $9.6 million (2000$), above the median of $7 million reported in Viscusi and Aldy’s
[2003] meta analysis, but still within the range of values from what they considered to be the most reliable
studies.



                                                      19
equations were adjusted for selection effects as discussed above. While not reported, the

selection terms are jointly significant influences on wages (p-value = 0.01). The number

in parentheses below the estimated parameters in the second through seventh columns of

Table 2 presents the ratios of the estimated coefficients to their respective estimated

standard errors based on the Huber [1967] robust covariance matrix. In earlier research

we compared the Huber robust covariance matrix along with bootstrapped standard errors

and found no differences in conclusions about the role of job risk, age, and risk

preferences. Each of the models includes fixed effects for the occupational categories

identified in equation (5) but these are not reported in the table.

       The remaining models in the table are distinguished based on the treatment of the

age terms and the inclusion or exclusion of the quality of life and subjective longevity

interaction terms. Specification (2) includes age in linear and quadratic terms as well as

in categorized variables that are interacted with the BLS risk. Specifications (3) and (4)

drop the categorized treatment of age and use the linear and quadratic terms with risk

interactions as in work by Aldy and Viscusi. These two specifications vary based on the

inclusion or exclusion of risk tolerance, quality of life and longevity threat effects. In

order to investigate whether the treatment of serious longevity threats influences

estimates of risk tradeoffs independent of quality of life considerations, we re-estimate

the primary model, eliminating the interaction effects used to identify the quality of life

assessments. We repeat the same exercise eliminating interactions for longevity threats to

consider whether the quality of life effects are robust to this exclusion. The final two

specifications in Table (2) report these results. In addition to the estimates reported in

Table 2, we also considered a variety of other models that varied the treatment of the risk




                                              20
tolerance, the quality of life/health status, and the longevity effects terms. All of these

variations were developed to evaluate whether our basic conclusions would change with

plausible variations in the model specification. A summary of these comparisons would

suggest that our findings are quite robust to all of the model variations we considered.

        Because the BLS risk term enters alone and in interactions with age, risk tolerance

measures, and the variables used to gauge the quality of life and longevity perceptions,

the size, magnitude and significance of the coefficient for the simple risk term cannot be

interpreted independently. The interaction terms including the risk measure must be

considered in evaluating the size and significance of the estimated marginal effect of job

risk on the natural log of wages. To test for the effects of risk on wage compensation

requirements we need to consider several different coefficient sums. The estimated wage

differentials are formed by summing the coefficients on the risk term and the appropriate

interaction terms for each group. For example, in order to test the hypothesis that

∂ (ln(wage ))
              is zero for respondents in the second age and risk tolerance categories, who
∂ (BLSrisk )

reported poor health two years earlier, and who die in the next two years, the relevant test

                        ∧    ∧      ∧   ∧
statistic is given by β1 + α 2 + γ 2 + θ 2 .

        In discussing the results of our hedonic wage analysis, we begin with the primary

model. The first step in considering the effects of age, risk tolerance, quality of

life/health status, and anticipated longevity on estimated wage-risk tradeoffs is to test

whether all these interactions can jointly be omitted from the model. We reject the null

hypothesis that the interaction terms are jointly zero (p-value = 0.006). The set of age

and risk tolerance interactions terms are jointly significant at a marginal level (p-value =




                                               21
0.099); the health status and anticipated longevity effects strengthen the importance of

the set of interactions.14

         To highlight the effects of quality of life and serious longevity threats on the

estimated risk tradeoffs, Table 3 presents a subset of our results from four separate

models. In particular, we select the two most risk averse categories and the three age

categories that span the age range of which the HRS is intended to be representative, 51-

55, 56-60, and 61-65. Each cell in Table 3 reports the estimated coefficient sum,

∂ (ln(wage ))
              by group. In parentheses below each estimated coefficient sum, we report
∂ (BLSrisk )

the p-value for a test that the sum is significantly different from zero. In columns 2

through 5 we report the coefficient sums for two models, each of which includes terms

for both subjective health-related quality of life, under “Excellent health” and “Not

excellent health”, and the presence and absence of threats to longevity, under “Longevity

threat” and “No longevity threat”.15 The coefficient sum reported in the left-hand side of

each cell results from specification (1), our primary model. The coefficient sum reported

in the right-hand side of each cell results from specification (3). Recall these

specifications differ only in their treatment of age; specification (1) treats age non-

parametrically while specification (3) follows the parametric treatment of age used in




14
   While not reported, we estimated a model excluding the age and risk tolerance interaction terms. The
estimated coefficients (and levels of significance) on the three interaction terms measuring the effects of
health status and longevity threats are similar to our primary model.
15
   Relative to those results presented here, we were unable to reject the hypothesis that ∂ (ln(wage )) is zero
                                                                                            ∂ (BLSrisk )
for some of the groups not represented in Table 3. However, all unreported coefficient sums from this
model are either positive and statistically significant or not statistically different from zero. See Smith et al.
[2004] for a discussion of differences between the younger workers represented in the HRS sample and the
Current Population Survey. Full results are available from the authors.


                                                       22
Viscusi and Aldy.16 Computation of comparable coefficient sums using the results of

specification (3) required that we focus on particular ages, rather than age ranges. For

comparison, we computed coefficient sums for ages 55, 60, and 65. Comparing the terms

within each cell, we see the magnitude of the estimated effects are very similar regardless

of our treatment of age. Given these similarities, we restrict our attention in the

discussion that follows to the results for specification (1), reported in the left-hand side of

each cell.

         We conduct pair-wise comparisons of the estimated coefficient sums (from

specification (1)), testing whether or not the observed differences across groups are

statistically significant. The null hypothesis is equality of the estimated coefficient sums

corresponding to each comparison pair. Table 4 reports the p-values of a subset of these

tests where the age and risk tolerance categories are held constant.

         The results allow us to distinguish three types of effects. First, we discuss test

results for how impending serious longevity threats -- facing the prospect of death --

influence the risk tradeoff. This relationship also serves as a test of one interpretation of

the Pratt-Zeckhauser [1996] dead anyway hypothesis—individuals facing impending

serious health threats would be willing to pay more to realize even a small risk reduction.

Second, we investigate whether an individual's subjective opinion of his health-related


16
   The results of specification (3) are consistent with an inverted U-shaped relationship between age and the
VSL as has been found in work summarized by Aldy and Viscusi [2007b]. However, the estimated peak of
the relationship occurs around age 56 for our sample. Aldy and Viscusi report a peak at about age 40. Two
aspects of this comparison should be noted. First, if we review the results from our earlier analysis that did
not take account of quality or quantity issues and introduced age non-parametrically, the estimated wage
rsik tradeoffs were not precisely estimated for the 61-to 65 age group. Age category 56-60 was the last
group with significant estimates of the effects by risk tolerance group (see table 3 in Smith et al. [2004]).
Second and equally important, a quadratic specification for any variable restricts effects to a parabolic form
(either U or inverted U shapes). A non-parametric or categorical coding allows for different effects by age
category but does not restrict the form of those differences. As a result, it is our preferred treatment for
examining age effects.


                                                     23
quality of life influences the relative size of the effect due to serious longevity threats.

Finally, we examine the independent effect of quality of life on the estimated risk

tradeoffs.

           Pair wise comparisons of the terms in the left-hand sides of columns 2 and 3, and

4 and 5 respectively provide evidence consistent with an effect of longevity threats on

risk tradeoffs and support what we described as the dead anyway hypothesis. For a given

age, risk tolerance category, and quality of life, the dead anyway hypothesis would

suggest larger coefficient sums among individuals who expect serious adverse health

shocks (columns 2 and 4 of Table 3). For people who rated their health as excellent in

wave 1 with an impending serious longevity threat, the coefficient sums presented in

column 2 are at least six times the size of the estimated risk tradeoff for those in excellent

health without the impending threat. This difference is significant at the high end of

conventional levels (p-value = 0.085). Comparisons of columns 4 and 5 confirm the

large differential associated with impending threats to longevity for individuals in health

categories other than excellent. This difference is also significant (p-value = 0.050). The

estimated coefficient sums reported in columns 2 and 4 are large and would imply

extremely large VSL measures. We return to this point later in the discussion of our

results.

           Comparisons of coefficient sums associated with excellent or not excellent health

within the same age, risk tolerance, and longevity threat category allow us to examine

quality of life effects. Among those respondents with impending serious longevity

threats, the coefficient sums for the excellent health categories (in column 2) consistently

exceed those for the “not in excellent health” groups (in column 4). However, as




                                               24
reported in Table 4, these differences are not statistically significant (p-value = 0.254).

Comparing the coefficient sums in columns 3 and 5 yields a smaller but statistically

significant quality of life premium among respondents who do not expect serious health

threats (p-value = 0.018).

       In order to investigate whether the effects of serious longevity threats displayed a

fairly robust influence on risk tradeoffs independent of quality of life considerations, we

conduct a similar exercise using the results of specification (5). A subset of these results

is presented in columns six and seven of Table 3. Pair-wise comparisons confirm a

significant premium (p-value = 0.019) for those who face serious threats, the relative size

of which is consistent with the model accounting for quality of life differences.

However, the coefficient sums are not as large, suggesting that quality of life and serious

threats to longevity may well be confounded in these estimates.

       The results presented in the final two columns of Table 3 reflect the impact of

differences in quality of life, independent of longevity threats, on the estimated wage-risk

tradeoffs. The selected coefficient sums are formed using the results of specification (6),

which excludes the interaction terms used to identify the effects of serious longevity

threats. The coefficient sums in the eighth column, reflecting those with excellent health-

related quality of life, are approximately twice as large as the respective coefficient sums

in the final column. The estimated quality of life premium suggested by pair-wise

comparisons of these coefficient sums is significant (p-value = 0.018).

       To further explore the implications of allowing the estimated risk tradeoffs to vary

with quality of life, we compute what we call relative risk tradeoffs for the age/risk

tolerance groups with significant coefficient sums in the final two columns of Table 3.




                                             25
Table 5 presents these relative risk tradeoffs, which represent ratios of the associated

VSL estimates in 2000 dollars for respondents in excellent health to the VSL estimates

for respondents not in excellent health. Below each relative tradeoff is the p-value for a

test that the ratio is significantly different from one. We test this hypothesis using the

nlcom command in Stata.17 In each case, the relative tradeoff is significantly different

from one at a p-value of 0.05 or less, indicating that individuation on the basis of quality

of life leads to a significant difference in estimates of the marginal rate of substitution

between risk and wealth. For the respondents in our sample, excellent health almost

doubles the incremental risk tradeoff.

        As we noted, if differences in health status lead to variation in the degree of

complementarity between consumption and labor supply, we should also expect

differences in estimated risk tradeoffs with health status. Our results are consistent with

this response. Of course, we would not suggest that all the variation in VSL estimates

with age can be attributed exclusively to differences in the health status of older adults.

Rather we argue that it is important to acknowledge that the older adults in our sample

differentially experience serious health conditions that can alter their subjective

assessments of the quality of their lives and influence their labor/leisure choices.

        For each individual, consumption decisions are constrained by time as well as

income; time is required to enjoy the consumption that is permitted by increased income

arising from the labor each person supplies. Chetty’s analysis reminds analysts that when

we attempt to understand the interactions between labor supply and risk preferences

revealed through wage/risk tradeoffs, we have several “windows” on preferences. In our


17
 The calculation assumes that wage, hours worked per week, and weeks worked per year are fixed at the
mean values for the respective age and risk tolerance category.


                                                  26
analysis variation in health status was one means to reconcile Chetty’s argument for

different degrees of complementarity between labor supply and consumption to motivate

variation in the elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption (and in the labor supply

elasticity and VSL).

       Before turning to a brief discussion of the implications of these findings, it is

important to acknowledge that our results are consistent across age and risk tolerance

classes and different estimated wage models. We have limited the discussion of the full

structure of our wage model or the multiple state selection model because both have been

discussed for another closely related sample in Smith et al. [2004]. However, these other

components of the model assure that for this sample the effects of the quality of life and

serious longevity threat terms are being estimated within a framework that accounts for

an array of conventional covariates as well as the selection effects associated with the

labor force participation decision.

       As a final exercise, we estimate two additional models, both variants of our

primary model, in order to examine the robustness of our results to changes in our

longevity threat measure. First, we replace the future deaths variable with an alternative

instrument measuring serious threats to longevity, a qualitative variable identifying a

newly diagnosed cancer or stroke between waves 2 and 3. Compared to the number of

deaths experienced between waves 2 and 3, there were more new cases of these two

serious health conditions (i.e., 46 cases versus 23 deaths).18 We re-estimated the model

reported in columns six and seven of Table 3 using this new variable. As a second

exercise, we replace the future deaths variable with a variable indicating more than one




                                             27
hospital stay between waves 2 and 3. 19 Table 6 reports the resulting coefficient sums

from these two models for a subset of age and risk tolerance groups.20 For both models,

pair-wise comparisons indicate significant differences between the coefficient sums

reported in columns 2 and 3 (p-value = 0.078), and 4 and 5 (p-value = 0.018). The results

confirm a premium when we replace a future death with these two alternative indicators

of serious threats to longevity.



V. Implications

         The mature workers in our sample appear to select jobs with risks in ways that are

conditioned by their personal assessments of their longevity and the quality of their lives.

Serious threats to longevity affect the expected quantity of life remaining and, as a result,

the relative risk tradeoffs. We have provided a model that indicates a clear role for

subjective assessments of health status in these tradeoffs as well. Those in excellent

health require significantly greater compensation to accept risk increases compared to

those who are not. This finding lends support to health status or quality of life as a

potential source of variation in the degree complementarity between consumption and

labor supply.



18
   The number of deaths may seem especially limiting, considering all the coefficients reported in Table 1.
However, only two parameters (θ2 and θ3) are estimated to distinguish the hypotheses regarding quality of
life and longevity threats.
19
   124 respondents report more than one hospital stay between waves 2 and 3. In these final two models,
the sample sizes in the hedonic wage model reduce to 2521 and 2520 due to the exclusion of those who die
between waves 2 and 3 and to those respondents for whom we are unable to determine whether or not they
have experienced a stroke or cancer or a hospital stay in between waves 2 and 3. While not reported, the
estimated coefficients of the selection models and the hedonic wage models are similar to the results
reported in Tables 1 and 2.
20
   All but one unreported coefficient sum for the final two models is either positive and statistically
significant or not statistically different from zero. In the future cancer or stroke model, the estimated
coefficient sum for the older than 66, most risk tolerant with no future cancer or stoke group is negative and
statistically significant.


                                                     28
        Thus, these estimates suggest that current modeling decisions that rely on simple

descriptions of each individual’s life expectancy based on age alone may offer

incomplete basis for judging the wage/ risk tradeoffs underlying the measures for the

VSL. We must consider whether a person’s perceived health status influences the mix of

consumption goods and services selected, the amount and quality of leisure time selected,

and the net outcome of these factors on the measured extent of complementarity between

the consumption and labor supplied to the market. These influences may become more

relevant as a person ages.

        Our findings support the feasibility of using a sample of individuals in a panel

format to sort out some of the determinants of heterogeneous risk preferences, rather than

resorting to experts’ judgments as in the QALY literature. The detailed records of actual

health conditions, subjective evaluations of perceived health status, and panel structure of

the HRS allow us to demonstrate how it would be possible to measure the influence of

these factors on the relative size of different individuals’ risk tradeoffs. The next step is to

expand the samples considered beyond the older respondents in the HRS and evaluate

where analogous serious longevity threats and quality of life judgments affect younger

adults in similar ways.




                                              29
References

Aldy, Joseph E. and W. Kip Viscusi, 2003, “Age Variations in Workers’ Value of

       Statistical Life,” NBER Working paper 10199, (December).

Aldy, Joseph E. and W. Kip Viscusi, 2007a, “Adjusting the Value of a Statistical Life for

       Age and Cohort Effects,” RFF Discussion Paper 06-19, Review of Economics and

       Statistics, forthcoming.

Aldy, Joseph E. and W. Kip Viscusi, 2007b “Age Differences in the Value of Statistical

       Life: Revealed Preference Evidence” Review of Environmental Economics and

       Policy, 1 (Summer): 240-260.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1997,

       “Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental

       Approach in the Health and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

       112 (May): 537-580.

Bourguignon, Francois, Martin Fournier, and Marc Gurgand, 2001, “Selection Bias

       Correction Based on the Multinomial Logit Model,” CREST working paper.

Burtless, Gary and Jerry A. Hausman, 1978, “The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply:

       Evaluating the Gary Negative Income tax Experiment” Journal of Political

       Economy, Vol. 86 ( 6 ): 1103-1130.

Chetty, Raj, 2006, “A New Method for Estimating Risk Aversion.” American Economic

       Review, 96 (December): 1821-1834.

Eeckhoudt, Louis R. and James K. Hammitt, 2001, “Background Risks and the Value of

       a Statistical Life,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 23(3): 261-279/




                                            30
Eeckhoudt, Louis R. and James K. Hammitt, 2004, “Does Risk Aversion Increase the

       Value of Mortality Risk?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management

       47: 13-29.

Ekeland, Ivar, James J. Heckman, and Lars Nesheim, 2002, "Identifying Hedonic

       Models," American Economic Review Proceedings, 92 (May): 304-309.

Evans, Mary F. and V. Kerry Smith, 2006, “Do We Really Understand the Age-VSL

       Relationship?” Resource and Energy Economics 28: 242-261.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles J. Jones, 2007, “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health

       Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,” 122 (February): 39-72.

Hanemann, W. Michael, 1991 “Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept: How

       Much Can They Differ?” American Economic Review, 81 (June): 635-647.

Health and Retirement Study, Waves 1-3 public use dataset, 1992, Produced and

       distributed by the University of Michigan with funding from the National Institute

       on Aging (grant number NIA U01AG09740), Ann Arbor, MI.

Huber, P. J., 1967, “The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates under Non-

       standard Conditions,” in Proceedings of the Fifth Symposium on Mathematical

       Statistics and Probability (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press)

Juster, F. Thomas and Richard Suzman, 1995, “An Overview of the Health and

       Retirement Study,” Journal of Human Resources, 30: Supplement S7-56.

Kaplow, Louis, 2005, “The Value of a Statistical Life and the Coefficient of Relative

       Risk Aversion,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 31 (July): 23-34.

Krupnick, Alan, 2007 “Mortality Risk Valuation and Age: Stated Preference Evidence”

       Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1 (Summer): 261-282.




                                           31
Morgan, M. Granger and Maureen Cropper, 2007 Letter to Stephen L.Johnson,

       Administrator of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Subject: SAB Advisory

       On EPA’s Issues in Valuing Mortality Risk Reductions”, October 12.

Office of Management and Budget, 2003, Draft Report to Congress on the Costs and

       Benefits of Federal Regulations, February 3, Appendix C, Federal Register, 68

       (22): 5514-5527.

Pratt, John W. and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 1996, "Willingness to Pay and the Distribution

       of Risk and Wealth," Journal of Political Economy, 104 (4): 747-763.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1974, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in

       Perfect Competition," Journal of Political Economy, 82 (February): 34-55.

Shogren, Jason F. and Tommy Stamland, 2002, "Skill and the Value of Life," Journal of

       Political Economy, 110 (5): 1168-1173.

Smith, V. Kerry, Donald H. Taylor, Jr., and Frank A. Sloan, 2001, "Longevity

       Expectations and Death: Can People Predict Their Own Demise?" American

       Economic Review, 91 (September): 1126-1134.

Smith, V. Kerry, Mary F. Evans, Hyun Kim, and Donald H. Taylor, Jr., 2004, "Do the

       Near-Elderly Value Mortality Risks Differently?" The Review of Economics and

       Statistics, 86 (1): 423-429.

Smith, V. Kerry, Subhrendu Pattanayak, and George Van Houtven, 2003, “VSL

       Reconsidered: What Do Labor Supply Estimates Reveal About Risk

       Preferences?” Economics Letters, Vol.80 (1): 147-153.




                                           32
Sunstein, Cass R., 2004, “Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People?

       Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center

       working paper 04-05 (January).

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2002, “Technical Addendum: Methodologies for

              the Benefit Analysis of the Clear Skies Initiative.”

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy, 2003, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical

       Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and

       Uncertainty, 27 (August): 5-76.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy, 2007, “Labor Market Estimates of the Senior

       Discount for the Value of Statistical Life,” Journal of Environmental Economics

       and Management, 53 (May): 377-392




                                           33
Table 1. Multinomial logit selection model of labor force statusa

               Working and paid hourly              Unemployed               Fully retired or partially            Disabled                 Not in labor force
                                                                             retired but not working
    Variable   Coefficient        Mean       Coefficient          Mean       Coefficient       Mean       Coefficient         Mean       Coefficient           Mean
               (z-statistic)    (standard    (z-statistic)      (standard    (z-statistic)   (standard    (z-statistic)     (standard    (z-statistic)       (standard
                                deviation)                      deviation)                  deviation)                      deviation)                       deviation)
    Married       -0.30*           0.77         -0.97*             0.64         -0.041          0.78         -0.75*            0.57          0.22*              0.86
                  (-4.51)         (0.42)       (-6.68)            (0.48)       (-0.53)         (0.41)       (-5.99)           (0.50)         (2.04)            (0.34)
      Age        -0.0042          55.91        -0.024*            55.38         0.18*          60.49        0.037*            56.94         -0.014*            55.42
                  (-0.86)         (5.03)       (-2.03)            (5.86)       (28.89)         (5.25)        (3.05)           (4.83)        (-2.10)            (5.55)
# people in       0.046*           2.62         0.15*              2.72        -0.055*          2.39          0.75             2.51          0.15*              2.86
 household        (2.12)          (1.30)        (3.36)            (1.41)       (-2.05)         (1.14)        (1.76)           (1.46)         (5.42)            (1.42)
Household      -0.000033*        3301.05     -0.000015*          4801.75     -0.000010*       5971.67     -0.000075*          932.50     -0.0000021*         13239.34
   capital       (-14.32)      (12359.68)      (-3.42)         (23411.40)      (-7.75)       (26052.8)      (-5.13)         (7595.66)       (-2.32)         (80454.62)
  income
   Health        -0.016            0.10         1.37*             0.32           2.29*            0.51       5.63*             0.97         1.35*              0.28
limits work      (-0.19)          (0.30)       (9.43)            (0.47)         (31.62)          (0.50)     (18.84)           (0.16)       (14.98)            (0.45)
  Constant        0.23                          -1.13                          -11.45*                      -7.04*                         -1.36*
                 (0.79)                        (-1.60)                         (-29.49)                     (-9.24)                        (-3.40)
       N                   2708                          261                              2635                        436                            1013

a
  * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Reference category, with 3879 observations, is working and not paid hourly. Summary statistics for this
category are as follows: Married—0.83 (0.37), Age—56.04 (5.34), # people in household—2.58 (1.14), Household capital income—20841.68 (80357.23), Health
limits work—0.09 (0.29). Total number of observations for the multinomial logit selection model is 10932 with a pseudo R-squared value of 0.15.




                                                                                34
Table 2. Hedonic wage model: Selected parametersa

                                                                                              Mean (standard
    Independent
                         (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)         deviation) or
      variable
                                                                                             fraction of sample
                       0.268*     0.2698*    0.2667*        0.2682*    0.2689*    0.2680*
           Male                                                                                    0.42
                      (12.40)     (12.43)     (12.42)       (12.46)    (12.43)    (12.39)
                      -0.0158     -0.0168     -0.0146       -0.0130    -0.0141    -0.0173
        White                                                                                      0.78
                       (-0.80)     (-0.85)     (-0.74)       (-0.66)    (-0.71)    (-0.88)
       Years of       0.0268*     0.0266*    0.0267*        0.0268*    0.0273*    0.0264*          11.58
      education        (8.16)      (8.08)      (8.14)        (8.21)     (8.33)     (8.06)          (2.72)
                      -0.0641     -0.0451    -2.4423*       -2.431*    -0.0602    -0.0657           0.64
      BLS risk
                       (-1.56)     (-1.06)    (-3.09)        (-3.01)    (-1.47)    (-1.60)         (0.63)
                                   0.0449         _             _          _          _            55.91
           Age           _
                                   (-1.72)                                                         (5.03)
                                  -0.0004       _              _          _          _
           Age2          _                                                                           _
                                   (-1.71)
                                      _      0.0856*        0.0882*       _          _
    Age*BLS risk         _                                                                           _
                                              (3.15)         (3.25)
                                     _       -0.0007*           -         _          _
       2
    Age *BLS risk        _                    (-3.19)       0.0008*                                  _
                                                            (-3.34)
                       -0.0810    -0.0115       _              _       -0.0739    -0.0784
    Age1*BLS risk                                                                                  0.027
                        (-0.67)    (-0.08)                              (-0.61)    (-0.65)
                      -0.00444    -0.0213       _              _        0.0003    -0.0031
    Age2*BLS risk                                                                                  0.081
                        (-0.06)    (-0.30)                             (0.004)     (-0.04)
                        0.0532     0.0271       _              _        0.0597     0.0562
    Age3*BLS risk                                                                                  0.35
                         (1.20)     (0.58)                              (1.35)      (1.27)
                        0.0733     0.0510       _              _       0.0782*     0.0724
    Age4*BLS risk                                                                                  0.37
                         (1.87)     (1.23)                              (1.99)      (1.84)
                        0.0679     0.0542       _              _        0.0727     0.0673
    Age5*BLS risk                                                                                  0.15
                         (1.65)     (1.29)                              (1.77)      (1.64)
    Tol2(t - 1)*BLS   0.00815      0.0077     0.0069           _        0.0113     0.0086
                                                                                                   0.11
          risk          (0.23)     (0.22)     (0.20)                     (0.32)     (0.24)
    Tol3(t – 1)*BLS     0.0318     0.0337     0.0288           _        0.0389     0.0383
                                                                                                   0.11
          risk           (0.93)     (0.98)    (0.84)                     (1.14)     (1.12)
    Tol4(t – 1)*BLS   0.0524*     0.0532*    0.0500*           _       0.0531*    0.0541*
                                                                                                   0.66
          risk           (2.11)    (2.15)     (2.01)                    (2.14)     (2.18)
     Exhealth(t –     0.0514*     0.0522*    0.0513*           _           _      0.0515*
                                                                                                   0.23
     1)*BLS risk        (2.36)     (2.39)     (2.36)                               (2.37)
    Dead(t+1)*BLS       0.226*     0.2238     0.2240           _       0.2575*         _
                                                                                                   0.085
          risk          (1.96)     (1.94)     (1.94)                    (2.35)


a
 The numbers in parentheses in the second column are the ratios of the estimated coefficients to their
estimated standard errors based on the Huber [1967] robust estimates for the variance covariance matrix.
* indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. The final column reports means and standard deviations
for the continuous variables, or the fraction of the sample for the dichotomous variables listed in column
one. The values reported in this column for the interaction terms represent the fraction of the sample in the
relevant age or risk tolerance category (independent of the job risk term). The values reported for
Exhealth(t-1) and Dead(t+1) designate the fraction of the sample reporting excellent health in the preceding
wave and the fraction of the sample who died between wave 2 and wave 3.


                                                       35
 Exhealth(t-    0.3527   0.3498    0.3484           _      _     _
1)*Dead(t+1)    (0.99)   (0.99)    (0.98)                                –
 *BLS risk
 Number of
               2708      2708     2708           2708   2708    2708    2708
observations

     R2        0.40      .372     .372           .368   0.370   0.370    –




                                            36
    Table 3. Selected tests of quality of life and longevity threat effects on estimated risk tradeoffsa
Risk                  Risk tradeoff with quality of life and longevity threat adjustments         Risk tradeoff with longevity      Risk tradeoff with quality of life
tolerance                                                                                              threat adjustment                      adjustment
category                  Excellent health                         Not excellent health           Longevity      No longevity      Excellent health     Not excellent
               Longevity threat       No longevity         Longevity threat     No longevity        threat           threat                                health
                                          threat                                    threat
                                                                              Age 51-55
3              0.651* | 0.660*         0.072* | 0.088*      0.247* | 0.260*     0.021 | 0.036        0.296*           0.038            0.080*               0.029
               (0.052) | (0.049)      (0.052) | (0.009)    (0.037) | (0.027) (0.544) | (0.236)       (0.008)         (0.256)           (0.030)             (0.404)
4              0.672* | 0.681*         0.093* | 0.109*      0.268* | 0.282*    0.042* | 0.058*       0.310*          0.053*            0.096*              0.046*
               (0.046) | (0.043)      (0.002) | (0.000)    (0.022) | (0.015) (0.095) | (0.003)       (0.005)         (0.031)           (0.001)             (0.073)
                                                                              Age 56-60
3              0.671* | 0.659*         0.092* | 0.087*      0.288* | 0.259*    0.062* | 0.035*       0.315*          0.057*            0.096*               0.045
               (0.046) | (0.049)      (0.006) | (0.011)    (0.014) | (0.029) (0.002) | (0.245)       (0.005)         (0.058)           (0.004)             (0.143)
4              0.692* | 0.680*         0.113* | 0.108*      0.262* | 0.280     0.036 | 0.056*        0.329*          0.071*            0.112*              0.061*
               (0.040) | (0.043)      (0.000) | (0.000)    (0.030) | (0.016) (0.350) | (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.002)
                                                                              Age 61-65
3              0.666* | 0.621*         0.087* | 0.048       0.247* | 0.221*    0.021 | -0.0032       0.309*           0.051            0.091*               0.040
               (0.048) | (0.065)      (0.041) | (0.230)    (0.037) | (0.067) (0.544) | (0.930)       (0.007)         (0.171)           (0.025)             (0.295)
4              0.687* | 0.642*         0.108* | 0.069*      0.268* | 0.242*    0.042* | 0.018        0.323*          0.066*            0.107*              0.056*
               (0.042) | (0.057)      (0.001) | (0.036)    (0.022) | (0.042) (0.095) | (0.507)       (0.004)         (0.021)           (0.001)             (0.053)




    a
     The numbers are coefficient sums defining ∂(ln(wage)) / ∂(BLSrisk ) for each age, risk tolerance, quality of life, and severe health threat groups. Numbers in
    parentheses are p-values for the null hypothesis that the coefficient sum is zero. * indicates p-value of 0.10 or lower. The Huber [1967] robust estimate for the
    variance covariance matrix of the estimated parameters is used in forming the variance of the coefficient sums implied by each element in the table.




                                                                                    37
Table 4. Results of pair-wise comparisonsa
                      Excellent, No          Not excellent,         Not excellent, No
                      longevity threat       Longevity threat       longevity threat
Excellent,            0.085                  0.254                  0.061
Longevity threat
Excellent, No                                 0.134                 0.018
longevity threat
Not excellent,                                                       0.050
Longevity threat




a
  The table reports p-values for pair-wise comparisons of the estimated wage-risk tradeoff,
∂(ln(wage)) / ∂(BLSrisk ) , for each quality of life and severe longevity threat group for a given age and risk
tolerance category based on the results presented in Tables 1, 2, and 3. In all cases the Huber [1967] robust
estimate for the variance covariance matrix of the estimated parameters is used in forming the test statistic.
The null hypothesis is equality of the estimated coefficient sums for each pair presented in the table.



                                                      38
Table 5. Relative risk tradeoffs for quality of life effectsa

Age category             Risk tolerance category           Relative risk tradeoff
                                                           (p-value)
51-55                    4                                 2.16*
                                                           (0.014)
56-60                    4                                 1.85*
                                                           (0.000)
61-65                    4                                 1.93*
                                                           (0.004)




a
  The relative risk tradeoffs are formed using estimates of the average wage, hours, and weeks worked for
each age risk tolerance group. Numbers in parentheses are p-values for the null hypothesis that the relative
risk tradeoff is one. * indicates that the ratio is significantly different from one with a p-value of 0.05 or
less using the nlcom command in Stata. The test assumes wage, hours worked per week, and weeks
worked per year are fixed at their mean values for the respective age and risk tolerance category.



                                                     39
Table 6. Tests of effects of longevity threat hypothesis with alternative measures of
baseline mortality riska

                        Baseline mortality measure: newly          Baseline mortality measure: more than
                         diagnosed future cancer or stroke                 one future hospital stay
    Risk tolerance     Future cancer or     No future cancer        More than one       Zero or one future
       category             stroke             or stroke          future hospital stay     hospital stay
                                              Age 51-55
          3                0.116*                0.035*                 0.134*                0.033*
                           (0.044)              (0.316)                 (0.013)               (0.348)
          4                0.142*                0.061*                 0.162*                0.061*
                           (0.006)              (0.015)                 (0.001)               (0.017)
                                              Age 56-60
          3                0.137*                 0.056                 0.154*                 0.053
                           (0.012)              (0.073)                 (0.003)               (0.092)
          4                0.163*                0.082*                 0.182*                0.081*
                           (0.001)              (0.000)                 (0.001)               (0.000)
                                              Age 61-65
          3                0.130*                 0.049                 0.144*                 0.042
                           (0.026)              (0.214)                 (0.008)               (0.283)
          4                0.156*                0.075*                 0.172*                0.071*
                           (0.003)              (0.013)                 (0.000)               (0.021)




a
 The numbers are coefficient sums defining ∂(ln(wage)) / ∂(BLSrisk ) for each age, risk tolerance, and
baseline risk groups. Numbers in parentheses are p-values for the null hypothesis that the coefficient sum
was zero. * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. The Huber [1967] robust estimate for the
variance covariance matrix of the estimated parameters is used in forming the variance of the coefficient
sums implied by each element in the table.


                                                    40
