                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              GLOBAL FORCES AND MONETARY POLICY EFFECTIVENESS

                                            Jean Boivin
                                           Marc Giannoni

                                        Working Paper 13736
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13736


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




Prepared for the NBER conference on International Dimensions of Monetary Policy in Girona (Spain),
June 2007. We thank conference participants, in particular Olivier Blanchard, Jordi Galí, Mark Gertler,
Larry Meyer, Benoît Mojon, Lucrezia Reichlin, Chris Sims, and Michael Woodford for very valuable
discussions and comments, and Guilherme Martins for excellent research assistance. We are also grateful
to the National Science Foundation for financial support (SES-0518770). The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jean Boivin and Marc Giannoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Global Forces and Monetary Policy Effectiveness
Jean Boivin and Marc Giannoni
NBER Working Paper No. 13736
January 2008
JEL No. C32,C53,E31,E32,E40,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper, we quantify the changes in the relationship between international forces and many key
US macroeconomic variables over the 1984-2005 period, and analyze changes in the monetary policy
transmission mechanism. We do so by estimating a Factor-Augmented VAR on a large set of US and
international data series. We find that the role of international factors in explaining US variables has
been changing over the 1984-2005 period. However, while some US series have become more correlated
with global factors, there is little evidence suggesting that these factors have become systematically
more important. We don't find strong evidence of a change in the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy due to global forces. Taking our point estimates literally, global forces do not seem to have
played an important role in the US monetary transmission mechanism between 1984 and 1999. In
addition, since the year 2000, the initial response of the US economy following a monetary policy
shock --- the first 6 to 8 quarters --- is essentially the same as the one that has been observed in the
1984-1999 period. However, point estimates suggest that the growing importance of global forces
might have contributed to reducing some of the persistence in the responses, two or more years after
the shocks. Overall, we conclude that if global forces have had an effect on the monetary transmission
mechanism, this is a recent phenomenon.


Jean Boivin
HEC Montréal
3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Montréal (Québec)
Canada H3T 2A7
and NBER
jean.boivin@hec.ca

Marc Giannoni
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 824
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
mg2190@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

In many respects, the economic integration of the U.S. economy with the rest of the world has

deepened in the last two decades. International trade has continued to expand more rapidly than
economic activity in industrialized countries. For the US, the amount of goods and services imported

and exported which represented 18% of GDP in the mid-1980’s represents more than 27% in 2005.
But the globalization of finance has shown a much more dramatic development. During the same
period, the ratio of foreign assets and liabilities to GDP has increased from approximately 80%
to more than 300% in the 23 most industrialized economies, according to Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2006). As global economic integration is spreading, it is often argued that macroeconomic variables
in one country – whether they pertain to measures of economic activity, inflation, or interest rates
– should increasingly reflect events occurring in the rest of the world.1
    Such developments raise naturally two sets of questions which we attempt to address in this
paper. First, to what extent have international factors aﬀected the determination of key macroeco-
nomic variables in the US economy? Is it the case that with the recent globalization, this economy
has become more strongly aﬀected by international factors? Second, has the very rapid globaliza-
tion of finance weakened the ability of US monetary policy to influence domestic financial market
conditions, and through it, the rest of the economy? In other words, does a change in the Federal
Funds rate have a smaller impact on the US economy now than it used to?
    Central bankers and economists in the financial press have pointed out the fact that while the
US central bank raised the Federal funds rate target by 425 basis points between June 2004 and
July 2006, long-term rates remained at historically low levels with the ten-year Treasury bond yield
increasing by less than 40 basis points and the twenty-year yield actually falling by 20 basis points
during that time. This phenomenon, which former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan

labeled “conundrum” highlights the fact that US long-term interest rates may have become more
dependent on international factors than had been observed historically. As then Governor Bernanke
    1
      For example, the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Richard Fisher, and Michael Cox (2007) have
argued that domestic inflation may be increasingly determined in the rest of the world. Advocating a “new inflation
equation,” they conclude that “globalization has been changing how we consume as well as the way we do business.
It’s high time economic doctrine caught up.” The Economist (2005), citing Stephen Roach, chief economist of Morgan
Stanley, and the 2005 annual report of the Bank for International Settlements suggests that global forces have become
more important relative to domestic factors in determining inflation in individual countries.



                                                         1
(2005) explained, a more extensive global financial integration and the increased amount of savings
outside the US – in particular in developing economies – may have resulted in a “global saving
glut” which may have put downward pressures on long-term interest rates. A casual look at such
recent historical episodes raises the possibility that the long-term yields may respond less to changes

in Federal funds rates than in the past. Given that monetary policy does at least in part aﬀect
the economy through its eﬀect on long-term rates, it is natural to wonder about the implications
of the globalization of finance for the eﬀectiveness of monetary policy. Certainly, the answers to
such questions have key implications for a proper understanding of the determinants of economic
fluctuations, and for policy.
   To address these questions, we provide in this paper an empirical assessment of the synchro-

nization between international factors and key US economic variables. We then investigate whether
the importance of these global forces has changed for the US economy over the last two decades,
and how such a possible change has aﬀected the transmission of monetary policy.
   The general empirical framework that we consider is a factor-augmented vector autoregression
model (FAVAR), as described in Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005), but extended to explicitly
include international or “global” factors. One of its key features is to provide estimates of macro-
economic factors that aﬀect the data of interest by systematically exploiting all information from
a large set of economic indicators. In our application, we estimate the empirical model based on
the information from a large number of macroeconomic indicators, and disaggregated data for the
US, as well as a large set of macroeconomic indicators for the 15 major US trade partners. By

identifying US monetary policy shocks, this framework allows us to uncover the transmission of
such shocks to a large set of macroeconomic indicators. Our interest in studying the responses
to monetary policy shocks does not reside in the fact that these shocks are important. In fact,

it is well-known that they contribute only little to US output fluctuations. Rather, we find the
responses to such shocks interesting as they allow us to trace out the eﬀects of monetary policy on
the economy.

   Many studies have provided evidence that key macroeconomic variables display substantial
comovements across countries. For instance, Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2003), analyzing output,

consumption and investment data from 60 countries over the 1960-1990 period, document that a


                                                  2
large fraction of business cycles fluctuations of developed economies is accounted by a common
world factor. The latter factor – a component of economic activity which is common to all
countries considered – explains more than one third of output fluctuations in the US and in
Europe.2 Ciccarelli and Mojon (2005) argue that inflation in industrialized economies is also largely

a global phenomenon: they find that on average, about 70% of inflation variance is attributable
to a common global factor given by the component of inflation that is common across countries.
Moreover, Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon (2005) show that shocks to money, bond and equity

markets result in substantial spillovers between the US and Europe.
       Other researchers have recently examined whether the importance of such comovements across
regions has changed over time. The evidence regarding the output synchronization is mixed. Kose,
Prasad and Terrones (2003) report evidence of stronger comovements of output in industrialized
countries with a world factor, since the early 1980’s, than in the preceding two decades. However,
Doyle and Faust (2005), testing for changes in comovements among real activity measures for
the G7 countries find very few statistically significant changes over the 1960-2000 period. When
looking at their point estimates, they even find some evidence of a fall in the correlation across
countries since the early 1980s. Such a reduced synchronization is in fact consistent with findings
of Helbling and Bayoumi (2003), Monfort, Renne, Ruﬀer and Vitale (2003), Heathcote and Perri
(2004), Stock and Watson (2005), and Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2005). According to Stock
and Watson (2005), and Kose et al. (2005), the fact that the output correlations across countries
were particularly high in the 1970s may reflect unusually strong common shocks, such as large
movements in oil prices, during that period. These authors thus argue that the reduction in the
   2
    Similar comovements in economic activity have been documented for more restricted sets of countries. Gerlach
(1988) found that industrial production is positively correlated across several OECD countries. Backus, Kehoe
and Kydland (1995) and Baxter (1995) found that business cycles share similarities in major industrial economies.
Gregory, Head and Raynauld (1997) in an early estimation of a factor model on economic activity data for the G7
countries, detected a significant common factor across countries. Bergman, Bordo and Jonung (1998), analyzing more
than one hundred years of data, found that the synchronization in activity across 13 industrialized countries remains
strong regardless of the monetary regime. Forni, Hallin, Lippi and Reichlin (2000), proposing a generalized dynamic
factor model and applying it to data of 10 European economies, find that a common European activity factor explains
between 35% and 96% of the volatility in countries’ GDP. Clark and Shin (2000), similarly find that a common factor
accounts substantial variations in industrial production of European economies, and Lumsdaine and Prasad (2003),
examining correlations between industrial output in 17 OECD countries and a common component, find evidence of
a world business cycle and of a European business cycle. Canova, Ciccarelli and Ortega (2004), estimating a Bayesian
panel VAR model on G7 data find also a significant world business cycle, but find no evidence of a cycle specific to
the Euro area, in contrast to some of the other studies.




                                                         3
volatility of common international shocks since in the early 1980s, compared to the 1960s and 1970s,
provides an important explanation for the reduced synchronization among G7 countries since the
early 1980s, and that the correlation in output across countries would have been larger, had the
international common shocks been as important in the 1980s and the 1990s, as they were in the

1960s and 1970s.
   In addition, some authors have argued that the development of trade in goods and services,
especially with low-cost producing economies such as China and India may have altered the rela-
tionship between some measure of the output gap and domestic inflation (see, e.g., Rogoﬀ (2004),
Borio and Filardo (2006), Ihrig et al. (2007)).
   While we also seek to characterize changes US macroeconomic dynamics due to global forces,

our paper distinguishes itself from the papers just mentioned in several respects.
   First, in general, global co-movements among macro variables could arise from the presence of
exogenous global – or worldwide – shocks, or from the international transmission of domestic
shocks. Our central focus in this paper is the implications for monetary policy of the changes in
the role of global forces. It is thus important to stress that while we allow for the presence of global
shocks like in many of the papers just cited, our interest will be mainly on the characterization of
the international transmission of regional shocks. In particular, we determine to what extent the
transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks – as measured by exogenous changes in the Federal
funds rate – to key US economic variables such as long-term interest rates, output, inflation, and
so on, has been altered by global forces.

   Second, in order to identify the monetary transmission mechanism, we jointly model multiple
dimensions of the US economy. Thus, rather than restricting ourself to the comparison of a single
type of measures across regions of the world – e.g. only economic activity measures or only inflation

measures – we adopt a more general and encompassing approach which allows us to compare a set
of factors summarizing the US macroeconomic dynamics with those summarizing the rest of the
world’s macroeconomic dynamics. Another contribution is hence to consider a much broader set

of macroeconomic indicators than has been used before in order to document the changes in the
importance of global forces for the determination of US measures of real activity, inflation, interest

rates and various other series.


                                                   4
      Finally, we focus on the evolution since 1984. Our sample includes the period during which
the globalization of financial flows accelerated significantly and allows us to sidestep an important
issue: the considerable changes that occurred in the preceding decade. The period of large common
shocks, in the 1970s and the early 1980s, during which the business cycles of many countries were

strongly correlated, was followed in the US by a rapid adjustment – called “great moderation” –
to a regime characterized by lower output volatility.3 Some studies have explained the reduction
in volatility with a reduced volatility of shocks (e.g., Stock and Watson (2002a), Sims and Zha
(2006), Justiniano and Primiceri (2006), Smets and Wouters (2007)). In addition, as documented
in Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000), Boivin (2006), Cogley and Sargent (2001, 2005), Boivin and
Giannoni (2002, 2006a), the systematic response of US monetary policy to fluctuations in inflation
and output has changed significantly around 1980, revealing a greater tendency to stabilize inflation
fluctuations. As Boivin and Giannoni (2006a) emphasize, such a change in policy can explain in
large part why the responses of output and inflation to an unexpected change in the Federal funds
rate of a given size have been much smaller since the early 1980s, than they were in the 1960s
and 1970s. By considering the period after 1984, i.e., a period during which both the variance of

the shocks may reasonably be assumed to have remained constant and the systematic monetary
policy rule has not been found to have dramatically changed, we hope to better isolate the eﬀect
of international factors.

      It is important to stress, however, that our sample is relatively short: it contains a bit more
than 20 years of quarterly data. We expect a priori that this will make statistical relationships
harder to detect and will constitute an important constraint on the richness of the models that we
can contemplate in the empirical exercise below. This is an important sense in which we see our
analysis as an exploration of how important global forces might have become for the US economy.

But as the results seem to suggest, there is still suﬃcient statistical information in the sample that
allows us to learn something useful about changes in the economy in the recent past.
      Our findings can be summarized as follows. First, we find that common factors capture on
  3
     Many researchers have documented a sharp drop in the volatility of the US real GDP in the early 1980s (see,
e.g., McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000), Blanchard and Simon (2001), Boivin and Giannoni (2002), Stock and
Watson (2002a)). Stock and Watson (2005) show that other G7 countries with the exception of France have similarly
experienced lower output volatility since the mid-1980s compared to the previous decades.




                                                       5
average a sizable fraction of the fluctuations in US macroeconomic indicators. This provides support
for the use of our empirical model. Second, there is evidence that the role of international factors
in explaining US variables has been changing over the 1984-2005 period, but this evolution is
not systematic across series, and it is diﬃcult to see a pattern suggesting that they have become

generally more important. Some variables such as the long-term interest rates, as well as import
and export prices, however, do display a systematic increase of their correlation with global factors
throughout our sample.
    We don’t find strong statistical evidence of a significant change in the transmission mechanism
of monetary policy due to global forces. Taking our point estimates literally, global forces do not
seem to have played an important role in the US monetary transmission mechanism between 1984

and 1999. Also, since 2000, the initial response of the US economy following a monetary policy
shock – the first 6 to 8 quarters – is essentially that same as the one that has been observed
in the 1984-1999 period. However, point estimates suggest that the growing importance of global
forces might have contributed to reducing some of the persistence in the responses, two or more
years after the shocks.
    Overall, we conclude that if global forces have had an eﬀect on the monetary transmission
mechanism, this is a recent phenomenon. This means however that we will need more data before
we can get strong statistical conclusions on this question.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the econometric frame-
work adopted and the estimation approach. In Section 3, we present empirical results on the

comovements between international factors and US data, and document changes in these relation-
ships over the last two decades. In Section 4, we document to what extent the role of global factors
has changed the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Section 5 concludes.



2    Econometric Framework: FAVAR

One key objective of this study is to evaluate the importance of the rest of the world in the

transmission of US monetary policy. That is, we seek to estimate to what extent the response of
the rest of the world’s economy enhances or mitigates the eﬀect of US monetary policy on the US



                                                 6
economy, and, importantly, whether this has changed over time. The FAVAR model described in
Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005) (BBE) provides a natural framework to address these questions.
In this section, we describe the empirical model and our estimation approach.


2.1   Description of FAVAR

The econometric framework that we consider is based on the FAVAR extended to include interna-
tional factors. We consider two regions: the US economy and the rest of the world, which we denote
with *. We assume that in each region, the state of the economy, which is possibly unobserved, can
be summarized by a K ×1 vector Ct in the US, and a K ∗ ×1 vector Ct∗ for the rest of the world. We

measure the state of the economy in each region with large vectors of macroeconomic indicators,
denoted by Xt for the US, and Xt∗ for the rest of the world. These vectors are of dimension N × 1
and N ∗ × 1 respectively. The indicators are assumed to relate to the state of the economy in each

region according to the observation equations


                                         Xt = ΛCt + et                                           (1)

                                        Xt∗ = Λ∗ Ct∗ + e∗t                                       (2)


where Λ and Λ∗ are matrices of factor loadings of appropriate dimensions, and the N ×1 (respectively
N ∗ × 1) vectors et and e∗t contain (mean-zero) series-specific components that are uncorrelated with
the common components Ct (respectively Ct∗ ), but are allowed to be serially correlated and weakly

correlated across indicators. The number of common factors is assumed to be small relative to the
number of indicators, i.e., N > K and N ∗ > K ∗ .

   Under this structure, Ct and Ct∗ constitute two sets of components which are common to all data
series in the respective region and in general correlated across regions. Equations (1)—(2) reflect
the fact that the common factors represent pervasive forces that drive the common dynamics of
the data, and summarize at each date the state of the economy in each region. The variables in Xt
are thus noisy measures of the underlying unobserved factors Ct . Note that it is in principle not
restrictive to assume that Xt depends only on the current values of the factors, as Ct can always




                                                 7
capture arbitrary lags of some fundamental factors.4 The unobserved factors should reflect general
region-specific economic conditions such as “economic activity,” the “general level of prices,” the
level of “productivity,” and key dimensions of the interest-rate term structure, which may not easily
be captured by a few time series, but rather by a wide range of economic variables.

      The dynamics of the common factors are modeled as a structural VAR
                                         ⎡         ⎤        ⎡           ⎤   ⎡         ⎤
                                        ⎢    Ct∗   ⎥         ⎢
                                                                  ∗
                                                                 Ct−1   ⎥ ⎢     vt∗   ⎥
                                     Φ0 ⎣          ⎦ = Φ (L) ⎣          ⎦+⎣           ⎦             (3)
                                             Ct                  Ct−1           vt


where Φ0 is a matrix of appropriate size on which we will later impose some restrictions, Φ(L) is
a conformable lag polynomial of finite order, and the “structural” shocks vt and vt∗ are assumed

to be iid with mean zero and diagonal covariance matrix Q and Q∗ respectively. While these
shocks are uncorrelated, anyone of these shocks may aﬀect common factors of the other region

immediately or over time, through the oﬀ-diagonal elements of Φ0 and Φ (L) . This structural VAR
has a reduced-form representation obtained by premultiplying on both sides of (3) by Φ−1
                                                                                      0 :

                           ⎡         ⎤   ⎡                        ⎤⎡            ⎤     ⎡         ⎤
                           ⎢   Ct∗⎥ ⎢ Ψ11 (L) Ψ12 (L) ⎥ ⎢      ⎥ ⎢    ⎥
                                                                         ∗
                                                                        Ct−1              u∗t
                           ⎣      ⎦=⎣                 ⎦⎣       ⎦+⎣    ⎦                             (4)
                               Ct     Ψ21 (L) Ψ22 (L)     Ct−1     ut


where the reduced-form innovations ut and u∗t are cross-correlated.
      Since we will ultimately be interested in characterizing the eﬀects of monetary policy on the

economy, we include in the vector of US common components an observable measure of the mon-
etary policy stance. As in most related VAR applications, we assume that the Federal funds rate,
Rt , is the policy instrument. The latter will be allowed to have pervasive eﬀect throughout the

economy and will thus be considered as a common component of all US data series. We thus write
                                                           ⎡      ⎤
                                                            ⎢ Ft ⎥
                                                       Ct = ⎣    ⎦,
                                                              Rt


where Ft is a vector of latent macroeconomic factors summarizing the behavior of the US economy.
  4
      This is why Stock and Watson (1999) refer to (1) as a dynamic factor model.



                                                            8
2.2      Interpreting the FAVAR structure in an international context

The empirical model we just laid out is a dynamic factor model that links a large set of observable
indicators to a small set of common components through the observation equations (1)—(2). The
evolution of these common components is specified by the transition equation (3) or its reduced-
form representation (4). It is useful to spell out more clearly the economic interpretation of this
empirical model and, in particular, the relationship with possible underlying structural models.
       As in Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005) and in Boivin and Giannoni (2006b), we interpret
the unobserved factors, Ct and Ct∗ as corresponding to theoretical concepts or variables that would
enter a structural macroeconomic model. For instance, open-economy dynamic general equilibrium
models such as those of Benigno and Benigno (2001), Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2002), Lubik and
Schorfheide (2005), and those of many papers collected in Galí and Gertler (2007) fully characterize
the equilibrium evolution of inflation, output, interest rates, net exports and other variables in two
regions. In terms of the notation in our empirical framework, all of these variables would be in Ct
and Ct∗ . The dynamic evolution of these variables implied by such open-economy models can be
approximated by an unrestricted VAR of the form (4).5 If all of these macroeconomic concepts were
perfectly observed, the system (4) would boil down to a standard multi-country VAR and could
be estimated directly, as in, e.g., Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), Grilli and Roubini (1995,1996),
Cushman and Zha (1997), Kim and Roubini (2000), Scholl and Uhlig (2006). In such a case, there
would be no need to use the large set of indicators Xt .

       However, there are reasons to believe that not all relevant concepts are perfectly observed. First,
some macroeconomic concepts are simply measured with error.6 Second, some of the macroeco-
nomic variables which are key for the model’s dynamics may be fundamentally latent. For instance,

the concept of “potential output” often critical in monetary model cannot be measured directly. By
using a large data set, one is able to extract empirically the components that are most important
in explaining fluctuations in the entire data set. While each common component does not need to

represent any single economic concept, the common components Ct and Ct∗ should constitute a
   5
     For a formal description of the link between the solution of a DSGE model in state-space form and a VAR see,
e.g., Fernández-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramírez, Sargent and Watson (2007) and references therein.
   6
     Boivin and Giannoni (2006b) argue, for example, that inflation is imperfectly measured by any single indicator,
and that it is important to use multiple indicators of it for proper inference.



                                                         9
linear combination of all of the relevant latent variables driving the set of noisy indicators Xt and
Xt∗ , to the extent that we extract the correct number of common components from the data set.

   An advantage of this empirical framework is that it provides, both for the US and the inter-
national data sets, summary measures of the state of these economies at each date, in the form

of factors which may summarize many features of the economy. We thus do not restrict ourselves
simply to measures of inflation or output. Another advantage of our approach, as BBE argue,
is that this framework should lead to a better identification of the monetary policy shock than

standard VARs, because it explicitly recognizes the large information set that the Federal Reserve
and financial market participants exploit in practice, and also because, as just argued, it does not
require to take a stand on the appropriate measures of prices and real activity which can simply be
treated as latent common components. Moreover, for a set of identifying assumptions, a natural
by-product of the estimation is to provide impulse response functions for any variable included
in the data set. This is particularly useful in our case, since we want to understand the eﬀect of
globalization on the transmission of monetary policy to a wide range of economic variables.
   The empirical model (1)—(2) and (4) provides a convenient decomposition of all data series into
components driven by the US factors Ct (i.e., the Federal funds rate and other US latent factors Ft ),
non-US latent factors Ct∗ , and by series-specific components unrelated to the general state of the
economies, et or e∗t . For instance, (1) specifies that indicators of measures of US economic activity

or inflation are driven by the Federal funds rate Rt , US latent factors Ft , and a component that
is specific to each individual series (representing e.g., measurement error or other idiosyncrasies of

each series). The dynamics of the US common components are in turn specified by (4).
   Note that the factors Ct and Ct∗ summarizing macroeconomic conditions in the US, respectively
in the rest of the world, may be aﬀected both by their own region-specific shocks and by worldwide

or “global” shocks. In fact, since reduced-form innovations ut and u∗t may be cross-correlated, they
could be expressed as the sum of a component that is common both the US and the rest of the
world, possibly due to “global” shocks and a component that is exclusively region specific. The




                                                 10
reduced-from VAR may thus be rewritten as


                             Ct∗ = Ψ11 (L) Ct−1
                                            ∗
                                                + Ψ12 (L) Ct−1 + Γ1 gt + ε∗t                                     (5)
                                            ∗
                              Ct = Ψ21 (L) Ct−1 + Ψ22 (L) Ct−1 + Γ2 gt + εt                                      (6)


where gt is a vector of “global” exogenous shocks, and ε∗t , εt are disturbances that are specific to
each region and uncorrelated across regions.7


2.3      Estimation

As in Stock and Watson (2002b) and BBE, we estimate our empirical model using a variant of a
two-step principal component approach which we briefly outline here. We refer to these papers for
a more detailed description.

       The first step consists of extracting principal components from Xt and Xt∗ to obtain consistent
estimates of the common factors under the structure laid out. In the second step, the Federal funds

rate is added to the estimated factors and the VAR in equation (4) is estimated. Note that in the
first step, BBE do not impose the constraint that the Federal funds rate is one of the common
components. So if this interest rate is really a common component, it should be captured by the
principal components. To remove the Federal funds rate from the space covered by the principal
components, BBE perform a transformation of the principal components exploiting the diﬀerent
behavior of what they call “slow moving” and “fast moving” variables, in the second step. Our
implementation is slightly diﬀerent, however. We adopt a more direct approach which consists of
imposing the constraint that Federal funds rate is one of the factors in the first-step estimation.
This guarantees that the estimated latent factors recover dimensions of the common dynamics not
captured by the Federal funds rate.8 To do so, we adopt the following procedure in the first step
                                                                                    (0)
of the estimation. Starting from an initial estimate of Ft , denoted by Ft                and obtained as the first

K − 1 principal components of Xt , we iterate through the following steps:
   7
     In this respect, Ct and Ct∗ have a diﬀerent interpretation than the world factors estimated by, e.g., Gregory et
al. (1997), Forni et al. (2000), Kose et al., (2003), Ciccarelli and Mojon (2005). While these authors estimate a
world factor and orthogonal region (or country)-specific factors, our estimated Ct and Ct∗ contain both fluctuations
in regional and world factors.
   8
     We thank Olivier Blanchard for pointing us in that direction.



                                                         11
                             (0)                       (0)
   1. Regress Xt on Ft             and Rt , to obtain λ̂R

                     (0)               (0)
   2. Compute X̃t          = Xt − λ̂R Rt

                    (1)                                                       (0)
   3. Estimate Ft          as the first K − 1 principal components of X̃t

   4. Back to 1.


    Having estimated the factors Ct and Ct∗ and the factor loadings Λ, Λ∗ , we can estimate the VAR
(4). As we will argue in Section 4, the matrix polynomial Ψ21 (L) will be of particular interest to us,
as it captures the eﬀects of international factors on domestic variables. For now, note that the VAR
coeﬃcients Ψij (L) are identified provided that the variance-covariance matrix of the innovations
[u∗0   0 0                                                                                            ∗
  t , ut ] is nonsingular. A suﬃcient condition for this is that the variance-covariance matrices of εt

and εt be both full-ranked in the VAR representations (5)—(6).9 In that case, Ct∗ Granger causes
Ct , and the domestic factors Ct do not constitute suﬃcient statistics to uncover the dynamics of the
domestic economy. In other words, the domestic economy is not a statistical “island.” Alternatively,

if the rest of the world had no region-specific shocks, so that E (ε∗t ε∗0
                                                                        t ) = 0, then Ψ21 (L) would not

be identified, as international factors would bring no additional information. The estimate of the
VAR coeﬃcients Ψ21 (L) will thus rely on the presence of independent variations originating in the

rest of the world, and the Granger-causality tests that we report below will guarantee that there is
indeed suﬃcient such variation.


2.4    Data

The data we use for the estimation of the FAVAR are a balanced panel of 720 quarterly series for the

period running from 1984:1 to 2005:2. The data series are listed in the Appendix. They comprise
671 US series. Among these, there are 129 macroeconomic indicators that measure economic

activity, employment, prices, interest rates, exchange rates and other key financial variables. In
addition, we include the 542 series of disaggregate consumption, and consumer and producer price
series used in Boivin, Giannoni and Mihov (2007). As discussed in that paper, disaggregate price
   9
     In terms of IV intuition, to estimate Ψ12 (L) , we need some independent variation in Ct∗ in order to be able to
use it as an instrument for itself in equation (6). For a formal treatment of this argument, see Hausman and Taylor
(1983).



                                                             12
data provide useful information for the appropriate estimation of the monetary policy shocks, and
are found to mitigate the price puzzle obtained in conventional VARs or factor models which omit
that information. For the rest of the world, we consider a panel of 49 quarterly data series for the
15 main US trade partners. This data set includes for each country, measures of economic activity,

prices, and short and long-term interest rates (if available). All data series have been transformed
to induce stationarity, and the transformations applied are indicated in the Appendix.


2.5   Preferred specification of the FAVAR

For the model selection, there are two important observations to keep in mind. First, the sample
size severely constrains the class of specifications we can consider, especially the number of lags
in (4), as the number of factors gets large. Second, in trying to identify the monetary policy
transmission mechanism, we are more worried about bias than eﬃciency. Available information
criteria for selecting the number of factors are thus not clearly adequate in that respect. Our
general approach for selecting our preferred specification has thus been to try with up to twenty
domestic factors and up to 10 foreign factors.
    It turns out that irrespective of the number of factors that we include, the Bayesian information
criterion selects 1 lag in (4) over the post-1984 sample. We found that including more than 10
domestic factors and 4 global factors did not change substantially the dynamic response of the
economy to monetary policy, although, obviously, the uncertainty around the estimates increases
with more factors. In fact, very similar results are obtained with as few as 6 domestic factors and
3 foreign factors, although point estimates suggest some price puzzle for some of the price series.
    Our preferred specification thus includes 10 domestic latent factors and 4 global factors, and
the transition equation (4) has 1 lag.



3     International Factors and US Economic Dynamics

Several studies have recently attempted to the determine the degree of comovement of a few macro-

economic series across countries. For instance Kose, Otrok, Whiteman (2003, 2005), Stock and
Watson (2005) study the comovement of economic activity measures and Ciccarelli and Mojon


                                                 13
(2005) focus on inflation. In this paper, rather than restricting ourself to the comparison of a single
type of measures across regions of the world, we use our FAVAR framework to compare how the
factors summarizing the US macroeconomic dynamics relate to the rest of the world’s factors.10 If
global forces are important to describe the dynamics of the US economy, they should be captured
by the latent factor space of the FAVAR. We use the common factors extracted from our large
data set and determine the fraction of fluctuations in US indicators of real activity, inflation and
interest rates that can be explained by US and global factors respectively. After showing to what
extent key US economic variables co-move with US and international factors, we determine whether
these relationships have changed since the mid-1980s. We then attempt to measure whether foreign
factors do “cause” (in a Granger sense) fluctuations in US factors. In the next section, we report

how monetary policy shocks aﬀect a large number of variables, how the transmission mechanism
has changed over time, and to what extent the change is due to international factors.


3.1      Comovements between US and international factors

We first start by determining to what extent US variables are correlated with US and foreign
factors. Table 1 reports the fraction of the volatility in the series listed in the first column that is
explained by the 11 US factors Ct (i.e., 10 latent factors and the Federal funds rate), the 4 foreign

factors Ct∗ , and all factors taken together. This corresponds to the R2 statistics obtained by the
regressions of these variables on the appropriate set of factors, for the entire 1984:1-2005:2 sample.
Note that since the US and international factors are allowed to be correlated, the fraction of the

variance in any given variable explained by the US factors (first column) plus that explained by the
international factors (second column) do not correspond to the fraction of the variance explained
jointly by both sets of factors (third column). However, by comparing the numbers in the third

column to the sum of the other two columns, we may have a rough sense of how the determinants
of the variable of interest may be correlated across countries.

       Looking at Table 1, several observations are worth mentioning. First, the entire US data set Xt
is on average quite strongly correlated with the common factors. On average, all factors explain 45%
  10
    Justiniano (2004) similarly studies the comovement of multiple macroeconomic series between Canada, Australia,
and the rest of the world.




                                                       14
                                                         US factors   Intl. factors   All factors
   All US data Xt (average over all US data)               0.39            0.13          0.45
   Selected US indicators
   Interest rate (Federal funds)                            1.00          0.65           1.00
   GDP                                                      0.30          0.18           0.37
   Consumption                                              0.28          0.14           0.33
   Investment                                               0.50          0.08           0.51
   Exports                                                  0.38          0.31           0.57
   Imports                                                  0.45          0.18           0.55
   GDP deflator                                             0.54          0.33           0.69
   Consumption deflator (PCE)                               0.66          0.37           0.70
   Investment deflator                                      0.53          0.11           0.58
   Export deflator                                          0.58          0.08           0.65
   Import deflator                                          0.42          0.06           0.49
   Consumer price index (CPI)                               0.50          0.23           0.56
   Producer price index (PPI)                               0.78          0.03           0.81
   Industrial production                                    0.79          0.12           0.84
   Employment (total nonfarm)                               0.84          0.34           0.85
   Real personal expenditures: durable goods                0.29          0.01           0.29
   Real personal expenditures: nondurable goods             0.77          0.09           0.80
   Price of personal expenditures: durable goods            0.58          0.43           0.68
   Price of personal expenditures: nondurable goods         0.85          0.03           0.87
   Price of personal expenditures: services                 0.67          0.46           0.74
   Long-term interest rate (10 years)                       0.91          0.86           0.93
   US dollar (trade-weighted nominal exchange rate)         0.74          0.27           0.78

Table 1: R2 for regressions of selected US series on various sets of factors (sample 1984:1- 2005:2)




                                                15
of the variance of US series. Most of the common fluctuations in US series is however provided by
US factors, as the R2 for these factors amounts to 0.39. However, foreign factors do also appear to

be correlated with US data series, with an R2 of 0.13. Note that, at this point, we do not attempt
to determine the origin of the fluctuations in the factors and the direction of causality between
US and international factors. We realize that in general US variables may be aﬀected by global
economic shocks which impact simultaneously US and international factors. Instead, we attempt
to assess to what extent international factors can explain fluctuations in various US macroeconomic
variables with information that is not contained in US factors.
   Looking at selected US indicators, we find that quarterly growth rates of measures of real
economic activity such as quarterly averages of industrial production and employment display very

high correlations with the US factors (R2 statistics of 0.79 and 0.84 respectively). It may be
surprising that other activity measures such as real GDP or consumption from the national income

accounts do not appear as strongly correlated with the US factors, especially when compared with
existing evidence based on similar factor models. However, this is purely an artifact of our use of
quarterly growth for GDP components mixed with quarterly averages of monthly data. In fact,
the quarterly growth rates of the GDP components display more high-frequency variability than
those of (the quarterly averages of) employment and industrial production. Since that variability
is not well captured by US factors, a large fraction of these series volatility is explained by the
idiosyncratic terms. Were we to consider year-over-year growth rates of the variables, GDP and
consumption would display much larger contributions of US factors. The important point, however,
is that most of the fluctuations in industrial production, consumption, investment or employment
indicators are determined by domestic factors. While these indicators display some correlation with
the international factors, the additional explanatory power of the latter factors is relatively low.

In fact, The R2 obtained for these variables by them regressing on all factors are not much higher
than those found by regressing only on the US factors.
   Quite naturally, the picture is diﬀerent for US real exports and imports, as they appear to be

much more strongly related to international factors. Adding the international factors to the US
factors increases the fraction of the variance of exports explained from 0.38 to 0.57, and raises the

R2 of imports from 0.45 to 0.55. These global factors thus contain substantial information not


                                                 16
already contained in US factors, and which is correlated with real exports and imports. Real GDP
then reflects the descriptions of its underlying components: while domestic factors are certainly
key, adding the international factors increases the R2 by 7 percentage points.
   For US quarterly inflation rates, the importance of international factors varies sensibly depend-
ing on the price index used. Inflation of the producer price index, for instance is well described by
US factors and displays very little correlation with international factors. However, growth rates of
the US GDP deflator and of consumer prices, whether based on the CPI or the personal PCE defla-
tor, are more correlated with international factors. The latter factors explain 37% of fluctuations
in inflation of the PCE deflator. Nonetheless, the international factors don’t seem to explain much
more of consumer price inflation than what is explained by US domestic factors. This suggests

that the US and international factors which explain well inflation are strongly correlated. This is
consistent with Ciccarelli and Mojon (2005), who find that an important component of consumer

price inflation is shared globally. For the GDP deflator, however, global factors contain information
not included in US factors. In fact, regressing this indicator on all factors raises the R2 to 0.69
compared to 0.54, when we consider only US factors. One possible explanation is that export prices

depend sensibly on international factors in a way that is not captured by US factors. The inflation
rate of the exports’ deflator does however not appear to be strongly correlated with international
factors, over our entire sample. As we will see below, though, this low correlation with international
factors is deceptive as it appears to be due to considerable instability over the sample.
   The nominal exchange rate is strongly correlated with domestic factors, and the R2 with inter-

national factors is 0.27, but these global factors seem to contain surprisingly little information no
already contained in the domestic factors, and the R2 with all factors is only a little higher than
the one with only US factors.

   Finally for nominal interest rates, the Federal funds rate is by assumption a US factor, but it
is also strongly correlated with international factors. Similarly, the long-term US interest rate is
very strongly correlated with US and international factors. This suggests that all of the countries
considered in our data set are aﬀected by a common factor resembling US interest rates.




                                                 17
3.2   Have US and international forces become more strongly correlated?

Overall, the evidence reported in Table 1 indicates that most selected key US variables are strongly
correlated with US factors and to a lesser extent with international factors. Such results have been
obtained for the sample that runs from 1984:1 to 2005:2. As mentioned in the introduction, though,
the US economy’s trade in goods and services with the rest of the world has expanded considerably,
and the financial globalization, as measured by the sum of external assets and liabilities, has
developed at an unprecedented pace, during this period.
   Such dramatic developments are likely to have aﬀected the relationship between US variables
and international factors. To date, however, the evidence about change in the synchronization of

the US economy with the rest of the world is mixed. While Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003)
find stronger comovements of output in industrialized countries with a world factor, since the early

1980’s, than in the preceding two decades, Doyle and Faust (2005) little evidence of statistically
significant changes, and Helbling and Bayoumi (2003), Monfort, Renne, Ruﬀer and Vitale (2003),
Heathcote and Perri (2004), Stock and Watson (2005), and Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2005) find

reductions in the synchronization of output fluctuations across countries. In addition, these studies
typically consider the period subsequent to the mid-1980s as a whole, and do not allow for changes
during that period.
   Several observers have nonetheless suggested that key macroeconomic variables might have
become more dependent on the state of the economy in the rest of the world, in the last few
years. Chairman Bernanke (2007) pointed out that long-term interest rates in the US have become
sensibly more correlated with those of Germany and other industrialized economies. Some have
argued that US inflation may have become more strongly aﬀected by international developments,

such as the rise of China as a source of goods and services sold in the US (see, e.g., Rogoﬀ (2004),
Kamin, Marazzi, Schindler (2006), Borio and Filardo (2006), Ihrig et al. (2007)). While some US
variables may well have become more strongly correlated with international factors, our framework

allows us to assess whether a large number of macroeconomic variables in the US have become
systematically more synchronized with the factors of its major trade partners.

   It is important to keep in mind that a formal empirical analysis of the recent changes due



                                                 18
to the greater globalization is diﬃcult, and faces limits, as the data samples are still very short.
Nevertheless, our framework provides a rich account of these changes since 1984, which can show
to what extent the global components have revealed changes in the correlations with US variables.
Figures 1-2 document the comovement of US variables with global forces over time. They show the

fraction of the variability in US variables explained by the global factors, where the estimation is
done using a 10 year rolling window. The dates correspond to the mid-point of that window.


   These figures reveal several interesting results. First, they show that international factors have
not become more strongly correlated with a broad set of US variables since 1984. The regressions
of the US common components on all international components result in R2 statistics that have not

increased on average. Second, despite a fairly constant correlation between international and US
factors, when taken as a whole, the importance of global forces on some individual US variables has
varied considerably over the sample. Part of that variation certainly reflects the short samples, and
may exaggerate the nature of the true changes. Nonetheless, the R2 of the regression of real GDP
growth on international factor fell from 1995 (corresponding to the period that spans 1990-2000)

to 2000 (i.e., the period that spans 1995-2005). A similar evolution can be found for consumption,
investment and imports, though the R2 found at the end of the sample are not very diﬀerent from
those obtained at the beginning of the sample. US exports, however, do seem to be more strongly

correlated with international factors after the mid-1990s, with R2 doubling from approximately
0.20 to 0.40.

   In terms of prices, inflation in export prices is increasingly more correlated with the international
factors throughout the sample. While international factors explain only about 20% of the variance
of the export prices’ inflation rate around 1990, they explain close to 70% of this variance a decade
later. Import prices similarly see their correlation with international factors steadily increase over
time. This is consistent with the idea that import prices have been rising more slowly than other
consumer prices due in part to an increase in imports from low-cost emerging economies. In fact,
Kamin, Marazzi and Schindler (2006) find that trade with China has reduced inflation in import
prices by about 1 percentage point. This ends up being reflected in a greater correlation the

international factors with US inflation as measured by the CPI, but surprisingly, there is no such


                                                  19
                  US Common Components                               GDP                                   Consumption
           1                                      1                                          1

          0.8                                    0.8                                        0.8

          0.6                                    0.6                                        0.6

          0.4                                    0.4                                        0.4

          0.2                                    0.2                                        0.2

           0                                      0                                          0
                1990       1995           2000         1990          1995            2000         1990         1995            2000



                         Investment                                 Exports                                   Imports
           1                                      1                                          1

          0.8                                    0.8                                        0.8

          0.6                                    0.6                                        0.6

          0.4                                    0.4                                        0.4

          0.2                                    0.2                                        0.2

           0                                      0                                          0
                1990       1995           2000         1990          1995            2000         1990         1995            2000



                        GDP deflator                          Consumption deflator                       Investment deflator
           1                                      1                                          1

          0.8                                    0.8                                        0.8

          0.6                                    0.6                                        0.6

          0.4                                    0.4                                        0.4

          0.2                                    0.2                                        0.2

           0                                      0                                          0
                1990       1995           2000         1990          1995            2000         1990         1995            2000



                       Exports deflator                         Imports deflator                    Consumer Price Index (CPI)
           1                                      1                                          1

          0.8                                    0.8                                        0.8

          0.6                                    0.6                                        0.6

          0.4                                    0.4                                        0.4

          0.2                                    0.2                                        0.2

           0                                      0                                          0
                1990       1995           2000         1990          1995            2000         1990         1995            2000



Figure 1: Fraction of the variance of indidual series explained by global factors, in regressions with
10-year rolling windows.




                                                                    20
                Producer Price Index (PPI)                 Industrial production (total)              Total nonfarm employment
         1                                        1                                            1

       0.8                                       0.8                                          0.8

       0.6                                       0.6                                          0.6

       0.4                                       0.4                                          0.4

       0.2                                       0.2                                          0.2

         0                                        0                                            0
             1990         1995            2000         1990           1995             2000         1990          1995            2000



              Real pers. exp.: Durable goods           Real pers. exp.: Nondurable goods               Real pers. exp.: Services
         1                                        1                                            1

       0.8                                       0.8                                          0.8

       0.6                                       0.6                                          0.6

       0.4                                       0.4                                          0.4

       0.2                                       0.2                                          0.2

         0                                        0                                            0
             1990         1995            2000         1990           1995             2000         1990          1995            2000



               PCE prices: Durable goods                PCE prices: Nondurable goods                       PCE prices: Services
         1                                        1                                            1

       0.8                                       0.8                                          0.8

       0.6                                       0.6                                          0.6

       0.4                                       0.4                                          0.4

       0.2                                       0.2                                          0.2

         0                                        0                                            0
             1990         1995            2000         1990           1995             2000         1990          1995            2000



               Interest rate (Federal Funds)           Long-term interest rate (10-year)       Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate
         1                                        1                                            1

       0.8                                       0.8                                          0.8

       0.6                                       0.6                                          0.6

       0.4                                       0.4                                          0.4

       0.2                                       0.2                                          0.2

         0                                        0                                            0
             1990         1995            2000         1990           1995             2000         1990          1995            2000



Figure 2: Fraction of the variance of indidual series explained by global factors, in regressions with
10-year rolling windows.




                                                                       21
eﬀect on the inflation rate of PCE prices. In addition, there is no evidence that the GDP deflator
has become more strongly correlated with international factors since the mid-1990s. If anything,
the R2 statistic has decreased since 1995 for the inflation based on the GDP deflator and on the
PCE deflator. These findings contrast sharply with the claims often made that US inflation may
have become increasingly determined in the rest of the world (e.g., Borio and Filardo (2006)), but
are consistent with the results of Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner and Marquez (2007).
   Regarding interest rates, the Federal funds rate appears very strongly correlated with interna-
tional factors until the mid-1995s, and again by the year 2000. But in the second half of the 1990s,
the Federal funds rate appears to disconnect from the international factors for several years. For
10-year rates, the correlation with international factors seems to increase by the late 1990s, a fact

consistent with the finding by Bernanke (2007) that long-term yields in industrialized countries
have become more strongly correlated in the last few years. While we do not attempt to determine

why that correlation has increased, we note that it does not necessarily imply that US rates are
determined to a greater extent on foreign capital market. In fact, such a finding is also consistent
with the idea that US monetary policy may now have larger eﬀects on international bond markets

at the same time as it aﬀects US financial markets (see Ehrmann, Fratzscher and Rigobon, 2005;
Faust et al. 2006).
   Finally, while the value of the US dollar seems to have been strongly correlated with international
factors for a large part of the 1990s, the recent decline in the value of the dollar appears to have
had little relation with global factors. Instead, it has been much more determined by US domestic
factors.
   While these Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2 have provided an interesting account of the relationship
between various US macroeconomic variables and international factors, the numbers reported are

however merely correlations, and do not imply that fluctuations in US variables such as the Federal
funds rate are caused by changes in international conditions. It may well be that changes in US
conditions may be suﬃciently important to cause changes in foreign factors.




                                                 22
                                          Full sample    84:1-94:4   95:1-05:2
                        Factor 1              0.00         0.00        0.00
                        Factor 2              0.00         0.00        0.00
                        Factor 3              0.00         0.00        0.18
                        Factor 4              0.04         0.06        0.01
                        Factor 5              0.07         0.24        0.35
                        Factor 6              0.00         0.00        0.00
                        Factor 7              0.01         0.10        0.00
                        Factor 8              0.03         0.29        0.04
                        Factor 9              0.05         0.38        0.00
                        Factor 10             0.00         0.00        0.03
                        Fed. funds rate       0.00         0.00        0.00

Table 2: Granger-causality tests for international factors aﬀecting US factors. Table reports p-
values.

3.3     Testing the relevance of global forces for US fluctuations

3.3.1    Granger causality tests

To check formally whether global forces do matter for US fluctuations, we now turn to Granger
causality tests. Results are presented in Table 2. In Panel A, we test whether the lags of all
                        ∗ , jointly have predictive power for the current values of US factors C
international factors, Ct−1                                                                     t

listed in the first column, over and beyond lags of domestic factors, Ct−1 . Under the null hypothesis,
foreign factors have no predictive power. The table suggests that all but one US common factors,
including the Fed funds rate, are Granger-caused by international factors at the 5% level over the
entire sample considered. The evidence is somewhat weaker when we perform the test over the
1984:1 to 1994:4 period. At this stage, this might only be reflecting lower power of the test over the

smaller sub-samples. Interestingly, however, combined with the evidence that we report in Section
4, it seems that global factors were not very important to explain US economic dynamics before
the late 1990’s.

   This evidence implies that the feedback from the rest of the world to the US economy as
measured by Ψ21 (L) , and to which we return in Section 4, are identified.




                                                  23
3.3.2      Has the influence of international factors on US factors increased over the last
           two decades?

As the comparison of the Granger causality tests between the two subsamples crudely suggests,

the relationship of the global factors with the US economy might have changed over time. In fact,
if there is any content to the claims that the greater economic integration between the US and
the rest of the world has aﬀected the dynamics of US economic variables, the Granger causality

relationship must have changed over time.
    One way to get formal evidence on this question is to test for the stability of the Granger
causality relationships. We do so using the Quandt likelihood ratio test (QLR), the asymptotic

distribution of which has been derived by Andrews (1993).11 We apply the test jointly to all global
factors.

    The results are reported in Table 3. As is clear from the table, we reject stability at the 5%
level in most cases. Based on this, one important observation is that even though we have a fairly
short sample, the latter contains suﬃcient information to allow us to detect statistically significant
changes. It remains to be investigated whether these changes have been suﬃciently important,
economically speaking, to aﬀect the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Interestingly, the
Federal funds rate is the only variable for which the stability is not rejected. The data thus suggests
that while the setting of the Federal funds rate is has been aﬀected by global factors, the role of
the latter factors does not seem to have changed significantly in our sample.



4    Implications for the Monetary Transmission Mechanism

In the last section, we determined that some of US factors have become more synchronized with

international factors over the last two decades. A natural question that arises then is to what
extent has US monetary policy become more constrained by the expansion of international trade,
and to a larger extent by the much greater globalization of finance. Do global forces mitigate the

eﬀects of US monetary policy more than they used to?
    There is little doubt that, despite this globalization, the Federal Reserve has retained its capacity
  11
     In doing so, we ignore the uncertainty in the factor estimates. When the cross section of macro indicators is
large, the uncertainty in the factor estimates should be negligible asymptotically (see Bai and Ng (2006)).


                                                       24
                                                           Joint-Global
                                      Factor 1               41.59**
                                      Factor 2               85.17**
                                      Factor 3               47.53**
                                      Factor 4               38.14**
                                      Factor 5               102.15**
                                      Factor 6               34.92**
                                      Factor 7               30.90**
                                      Factor 8               20.78**
                                      Factor 9                17.44*
                                      Factor 10              62.20**
                                      Fed. funds rate          15.94

Table 3: Stability tests for Granger-causality coeﬃcients of international factors aﬀecting future
US factors. Table reports QLR statistics and confidence level (* = 10 percent; ** = 5 percent).


to align the Federal funds rate with its target rate by managing the supply of funds in the interbank
market. It is thus still reasonable to think of the Federal funds rate as being the instrument of
monetary policy. As other short-term rates such as yields on 3-month or 6 month US Treasury
securities remain very strongly correlated with actual Federal funds rate (the correlation between
the Federal funds rate and 3-months securities is above 0.99 for the period 1984-2007 and has
remained as high since 2000) they can still be viewed as primarily aﬀected by monetary policy.
    Clearly, longer-term interest rates reflect at least in part expectations of future short-term
rates, and depend on announcements provided by central bankers. Longer-term rates have however
become more strongly correlated with international factors in recent years, as mentioned above.
Part of this change may reflect a greater influence of international capital markets on US long-term
rates.12 Alternatively, US factors may have more impact on international capital markets (see

Ehrmann, Fratzscher, Rigobon (2005), Faust et al. (2006)). At the same time, since monetary
policy’s eﬀect on other variables such as economic activity and inflation is believed to depend
partly on long-term rates, it is possible that these other variables might have become less aﬀected by
Federal funds rate movements. In addition, the increase in international trade in goods and services
may explain why US import and export prices have become more correlated with international
factors. A natural question then is what are the implications of these changes for the transmission
  12
     See, e.g., Bernanke (2005) for an argument that increased saving in emerging economies and in oil-producing
countries has contributed to maintaining low long-term US interest rates.



                                                      25
of US monetary policy?


4.1   Empirical strategy

In the context of our FAVAR framework, we can characterize the transmission mechanism of mon-

etary policy by computing the response of selected macroeconomic series to an identified monetary
policy shock. In the spirit of VAR analyses, we impose only the minimum number of restrictions
needed to identify the policy shock. This allows us to document some facts about the evolution

of the monetary transmission mechanism that should not be otherwise contaminated by auxiliary
assumptions.

   Recall that the structural representation of our VAR transition equation takes the form (3),
where again Ct = [Ft0 , Rt ]0 . To identify monetary policy shocks, i.e., the surprise changes in the
Federal funds rate, we assume that the latent factors Ft and Ct∗ cannot respond to innovations in Rt

in the period of the shock. The Fed funds rate, however, is allowed to respond to contemporaneous
fluctuations in such factors. We thus impose the restriction that the matrix Φ0 in (3) has ones
on the main diagonal, and zeroes in the last column, except for the lower right element, which is

one. This has the implication that the monetary policy shock enters only in the last element of the
innovations vector ut in the reduced-form VAR (4), which we repeat here for convenience:
                      ⎡         ⎤   ⎡                 ⎤⎡          ⎤   ⎡         ⎤
                      ⎢   Ct∗⎥ ⎢ Ψ11 (L) Ψ12 (L) ⎥ ⎢
                                                            ∗
                                                           Ct−1
                                                          ⎥ ⎢    ⎥        u∗t
                      ⎣      ⎦=⎣                 ⎦⎣       ⎦+⎣    ⎦.
                          Ct     Ψ21 (L) Ψ22 (L)     Ct−1     ut


   As mentioned above, the matrix polynomials Ψ12 (L) and Ψ21 (L) determine the magnitude of
the spillovers between the US and the rest of the world’s economic variables. When Ψ21 (L) = 0, the

rest of the world has no spillovers on the US economy, meaning that fluctuations in foreign economic
variables do not cause (in the sense of Granger) any fluctuations in US variables. Following a US
monetary policy shock, Ψ21 (L) measures the extent to which the rest of the world contributes to

the transmission of the US monetary policy domestically.
   Our strategy involves computing impulse response functions to a monetary policy shock in the
system above, and comparing them to those obtained with diﬀerent values of Ψ21 (L) . The diﬀerence



                                                 26
between these impulse responses provides a measure of the importance of the endogenous response
of the rest of the world in the US transmission of monetary policy. (Note that in both cases, Ct∗

is allowed to move only in response to the monetary shock.) In addition, to the extent that the
greater integration of the world economies has changed the role played by the rest of the world
in the transmission of US monetary policy, this should imply a change in Ψ21 (L). Consequently,
by documenting the changes over time in Ψ21 (L) and its implications on the impulse response
functions, it is possible to evaluate whether globalization has reduced the ability of US monetary
policy to aﬀect domestic variables.
   To illustrate more directly the exercise we perform, let us consider a simplified version of this
model in which the macroeconomic factors are actually observed. To fix ideas more concretely,
think of the set of relevant domestic factors Ct as being given by the domestic (or world) interest
rate Rt and domestic real activity Yt , and the foreign factors Ct∗ as corresponding foreign real

activity Yt∗ . Let us assume that the structural model relating these variables is as follows:


                          Yt∗ = ψ 11 Yt−1
                                       ∗
                                          + ψ 12 Yt−1 + ψ 13 Rt−1 + gt + ε∗t
                                       ∗
                           Yt = ψ 21 Yt−1 + ψ 22 Yt−1 + ψ 23 Rt−1 + gt + εt

                          Rt = φYt−1 + η t


where ε∗t and εt are region-specific output shocks and gt is a worldwide shock. The first two
equations are reduced-form equations determining output in both regions, while the third equation
can be interpreted as an interest-rate rule, so that η t can be viewed as a monetary policy shock.

   In this context, our approach consists of comparing the impulse response functions of Yt and Rt
implied by this unrestricted system, with those obtained for diﬀerent values of ψ 21 . For instance,
setting ψ 21 = 0 is equivalent to assuming that domestic variables are not aﬀected by international
developments. Comparing the two sets of impulse response functions thus provides a way to as-
sess the importance of the “feedback” or “spillover” from the rest of the world in explaining the

transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
   In this simple context, whether or not our strategy identifies the eﬀect of international factors
– i.e. the eﬀect of Yt∗ – in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy depends solely on


                                                 27
whether the parameter ψ 21 is identified. As mentioned in section 2, ψ 21 is identified provided
that the variances of εt and ε∗t are nonzero. If var(ε∗t ) were equal to zero, the system would be

reduced-ranked and it would not be possible to identify separately all the parameters ψ ij , as Yt∗
and Yt would be perfectly collinear. Notice that the condition that var(εt ) > 0 and var(ε∗t ) > 0 is

equivalent to saying that Yt∗ Granger causes Yt (conditional on past values of Yt ).
   It is important to note that our analysis does not identify directly “worldwide shocks” which
would aﬀect simultaneously domestic and international factors (such as the shock gt ) in the example

above, in the absence of further restrictions. It is however not necessary to identify such global
shocks in order to quantify the eﬀects of international factors of the transmission of US monetary
policy shocks.
   For illustration purposes, in this simple example, we assumed that the factors Ct and Ct∗ were
perfectly observed. In our application, however, these factors are unobserved and relate to a large

set informative variables according to (1) and (2). This does not change any of the arguments just
made in the context of the simple example. Once we have estimates of Ct and Ct∗ , we are back in
the world described in the previous example. The matrix polynomial Ψ21 (L) is similarly identified

when the matrix var(ε∗t ) is full rank or, alternatively, provided that Ct∗ Granger causes Ct .


4.2   Implementation

In estimating the FAVAR over the sample 1984:1-2005:2, we allow for the possibility that the
international factors may aﬀect US variables diﬀerently after the year 2000. More specifically, we

expand the VAR system of our FAVAR with a dummy variable interacted with all the lags of the
foreign factors. More precisely, we estimate the following system
           ⎡         ⎤   ⎡                 ⎤⎡          ⎤   ⎡              ⎤       ⎡         ⎤
           ⎢   Ct∗⎥ ⎢ Ψ11 (L) Ψ12 (L) ⎥ ⎢
                                                 ∗
                                                Ct−1
                                               ⎥ ⎢         ⎥   Ψd11 (L)
                                                                 ∗    ⎢    ⎥          u∗t
           ⎣      ⎦=⎣                 ⎦⎣       ⎦+⎣         ⎦ dt Ct−1 +⎣    ⎦,
               Ct     Ψ21 (L) Ψ22 (L)     Ct−1      d
                                                   Ψ21 (L)              ut


where dt takes the value 0 for the period 1984:1-1999:4 and 1 after. That means that the coeﬃcients
on the lag international factors in the equations for Ct are equal to Ψ21 (L) for 1984:1-1999:4, and
to Ψ21 (L) + Ψd21 (L) thereafter. Given that our preferred specification has only one lag, notice that



                                                 28
allowing for this form of instability requires estimating 4 additional parameters per equation, so it
is not too costly in terms of degrees of freedom.


4.3      The eﬀects of monetary policy shocks

Figures 3 and 4 show the estimated impulse responses of a set of macroeconomic indicators to
a tightening of monetary policy, that is, an innovation in the Federal funds rate corresponding
to an unexpected increase of 25 basis points. The solid lines represent the responses computed

using the relationship between the US factors and the international factors as estimated during
the 1984:1 to 1999:4 period, along with the 70% confidence intervals.13 The dashed lines, instead,

display the responses using the same FAVAR, but assuming that the US and international factors
relate as estimated after 2000. A comparison of these two sets of impulse responses allows us
to gauge the eﬀects on the monetary transmission mechanism of the changes in the relationship
between international factors and US variables. In fact, between the two sets of responses, the only
relationships that are allowed to change are those that describe how foreign factors end up aﬀecting
US data. Note that by doing so, we maximize the length of our sample in the estimation, yet we
allow for a change in the role of international factors.


      As the impulse responses based on the eﬀects of international factors estimated for the 1984:1
- 1999:4 sample reveal in Figures 3 and 4, an unexpected tightening in monetary policy results
in a gradual decline in real GDP, which tends to revert back to the original level after about 3
years. Other measures of activity, such as industrial production and employment both respond in
a similar way. Consumption also shows a similar although smaller response, while investment falls
much more. Together with the fall in domestic demand, imports fall in response to the interest

rate increase. The reduction in imports appears to be reinforced by a significant appreciation in
the value of the US dollar, lasting about 2 years following the shock. Exports to the rest of the

world also fall significantly following the monetary tightening. This is consistent with the fact that
the US dollar appreciates, and that output in foreign trade partners falls (not reported).
      All price indices (reported in levels) show little response on impact, but also tend to fall pro-
 13
      The confidence intervals were obtained using Kilian’s (1998) bootstrap procedure.


                                                         29
            Interest rate (Federal Funds)                             GDP                                       Consumption
   30                                              0.1                                         0.2

                                                                                               0.1
   20                                                0
                                                                                                 0
   10                                             -0.1
                                                                                              -0.1
    0                                             -0.2
                                                                                              -0.2

 -10                                              -0.3                                        -0.3
        1      4          8           12    16           1   4          8           12   16          1      4        8         12     16

                     Investment                                      Exports                                      Imports
  0.5                                              0.5                                         0.5

    0
                                                     0
                                                                                                 0
 -0.5
                                                  -0.5
   -1
                                                                                              -0.5
                                                    -1
 -1.5

   -2                                             -1.5                                          -1
        1      4          8           12    16           1   4          8           12   16          1      4        8         12     16

                    GDP deflator                             Consumption deflator                            Investment deflator
  0.1                                              0.1                                         0.2

                                                  0.05
 0.05                                                                                          0.1
                                                     0
    0                                                                                            0
                                                 -0.05
-0.05                                                                                         -0.1
                                                  -0.1

 -0.1                                            -0.15                                        -0.2
        1      4          8           12    16           1   4          8           12   16          1      4        8         12     16

                   Exports deflator                              Imports deflator                        Consumer Price Index (CPI)
    0                                              0.5                                         0.2


 -0.2                                                                                          0.1
                                                     0

 -0.4                                                                                            0

                                                  -0.5
 -0.6                                                                                         -0.1


 -0.8                                               -1                                        -0.2
        1      4          8           12    16           1   4          8           12   16          1      4        8         12     16



                   Figure 3: Impulse responses to an identified monetary policy shock


                                                                   30
              Producer Price Index (PPI)                         Industrial production (total)                    Total nonfarm employment
 0.05                                              0.05                                                 0.1

                                                      0
    0                                                                                                  0.05
                                                  -0.05
-0.05                                                                                                     0
                                                   -0.1
 -0.1                                                                                                 -0.05
                                                  -0.15

-0.15                                              -0.2                                                -0.1
        1       4         8        12        16            1       4          8          12      16           1     4         8        12      16

            Real pers. exp.: Durable goods                  Real pers. exp.: Nondurable goods                     Real pers. exp.: Services
  0.4                                               0.1                                                 0.1


  0.2                                              0.05                                                0.05


    0                                                 0                                                   0


 -0.2                                             -0.05                                               -0.05


 -0.4                                              -0.1                                                -0.1
        1       4         8        12        16            1       4          8          12      16           1     4         8        12      16

             PCE prices: Durable goods                         PCE prices: Nondurable goods                         PCE prices: Services
  0.1                                              0.05                                                0.06

                                                                                                       0.04
 0.05                                                 0
                                                                                                       0.02
    0                                             -0.05
                                                                                                          0
-0.05                                              -0.1
                                                                                                      -0.02

 -0.1                                             -0.15                                               -0.04
        1       4         8        12        16            1       4          8          12      16           1     4         8        12      16

        Long-term interest rate (10-year)
   10
                                                          Trade-weighted nominal exchange rate
                                                     15

    5                                                10

                                                      5
                                                                                                                           No global factors
    0
                                                      0                                                                    00:1-05:2

   -5                                                -5                                                                    84:1-99:4
        1       4         8        12        16            1       4          8         12       16



                Figure 4: Impulse responses to an identified monetary policy shock (cont.)


                                                                              31
gressively, and in a persistent way, following the monetary tightening. However, while the import
and export price deflators seem to respond rapidly to the shock, it takes about 3 quarters for the
GDP deflator and the CPI to show any movement. While the import price response may reflect
a slowing domestic economy, the response of export prices may be explained by a drop in foreign

demand for US goods, due both to an appreciating US dollar and to a slowing foreign economy.


4.4   Has the role of global forces on the US monetary transmission changed?

We find little overall evidence that global forces have had a important eﬀect on the US monetary
transmission mechanism, and find little evidence of change over the last several years. To determine
to what extent the response of macroeconomic variables to a monetary tightening has changed re-
cently, we compare the impulse responses based on the FAVAR involving the link between domestic
and international factors as estimated since 2000 (dashed lines) to those based on international
factors in the 1984-1999 period (solid lines). One interesting conclusion that emerges from this
exercise is that the variables display in both cases almost identical responses in the first 6 to 7
quarters following the shock. After that, the responses based on the most recent international

factors reveal a slightly more rapid return to the initial level. The output and various measures of
prices, for instance, show less persistent responses to the monetary tightening. But most changes

are not statistically significant. Only for the Federal funds rate, the long-term interest rate and
the exchange rate do we have sharper evidence that the impulse responses have changed after 3 or
4 years, when using the more recent factors. And the expectation of a higher Federal funds rate

three or more years following the shock is reflected in a slightly higher value of the 10-year yield.
   The changes in the impulse responses just documented were obtained by allowing a diﬀerent
relationship between the US and international factors starting in the year 2000. For robustness,

we checked with alternative break dates, and found that in all cases, the changes were similar or
smaller than those reported in the figures. This suggests that if there has been a change in the

response to monetary policy shock, this phenomenon is very recent.
   In brief, we found no evidence that the responses of a large number of key US variables to
monetary policy shocks have changed in the first 6-7 quarters following the shock. However, we

found some evidence that the relationship between US and international factors has changed in


                                                 32
such a way as to imply a lower persistence in the response to monetary policy shocks 8 or more
quarters after the shock.
   How important are global forces for the monetary transmission? When the Federal Reserve
changes the course of monetary policy, it aﬀects both US and international factors. The response

of the latter may in turn constrain the response of the US economy. A crude way of assessing
the role of global forces in the transmission of US monetary policy it to report the responses of
US macroeconomic variables to a monetary policy shock, but assuming that the US factors do
not respond to global factors. Specifically, we compute the responses of the monetary shock by
setting to zero the submatrices Ψ21 and Ψd21 referring to the international factors Ct∗ . These impulse
responses that abstract from international factors are shown with dashed-dotted lines in Figures 3

and 4.
   A striking conclusion is that these responses almost perfectly replicate those estimated with
the international factors in the 1984-1999 period (solid lines). It follows that the global factors in
that period don’t seem to have more than a marginal impact on the response of the US economy
to monetary shocks. Of course, we are not saying that global factors do not have an impact on the
economy, and that the Federal Reserve does not need to give any consideration to the international
economic situation. In fact, as we reported in the previous section, several key variable are strongly
correlated with international factors. Our results suggest, however, that conditional on changing

the Federal funds rate in a particular way, the response of the main US macroeconomic variables
have been little aﬀected by the response of international factors.
   It is important, however, to keep in mind that in the counterfactual experiment just described
as well as in our assessment of the change over time in the eﬀect of foreign factors, we assume that
the coeﬃcients measuring the response of US variables to US factors as well as those characterizing
the dynamics of the US factors do not change. While we would in principle want to allow for
possible changes over time in the latter coeﬃcients, such exercises are unfortunately unlikely to
provide reliable results in our empirical model, given the number of extra parameters that we

would need to estimate, and given our relatively short sample. Such an assumption may well not
be satisfied. For instance, several authors have argued that the slope of the Phillips curve relating

US inflation to domestic measures of marginal costs or of activity may have changed following the


                                                  33
greater economic integration of the US with the rest of the world. However, Sbordone (2007) and
Woodford (2007) argue, in simple calibrated models, that such changes are unlikely to be large.
Another possibility is that the processes determining expectations about future domestic variables
be altered by the greater openness of the domestic economy. By not letting the relationships

among domestic variables change in our empirical model with the increased globalization, we are
technically subject to the Lucas critique. One would thus need a fully-specified forward-looking
structural model to account for this issue.



5    Conclusion

It has been widely documented that international trade has continued to advance, and that the
globalization of finance has seen an extraordinary expansion since the mid 1980s. In this context,
several observers have argued that global factors may now have a greater influence than in the
past on the determination of key US macroeconomic variables, and that conditions in international
capital markets may impose more constraints on the transmission of monetary policy.
    In this paper, we have attempted to quantify the changes in the relationship between interna-
tional forces and the US economy over the 1984-2005 period. To do so, we have used an empirical

model that allows us to summarize the macroeconomic conditions of the US economy and of the
rest of the world with a small number of factors. This framework allows us to quantify the ex-

tent of comovement between many key US macroeconomic variables and international factors. It
allows us to characterize empirically the transmission of monetary policy shocks to a large set of
macroeconomic indicators.
    Our findings can be summarized as follows. First, we find that common factors capture on
average a sizable fraction of the fluctuations in US macroeconomic indicators. This provides support
to the use of our empirical model. Second, there is evidence that the role of international factors

in explaining US variables has been changing over the 1984-2005 period, but this evolution is not
systematic across series, and it is diﬃcult to see a pattern suggesting that international factors have

become generally more important. Some variables such as the long-term interest rates, as well as
import and export prices, however, do display a systematic increase of their correlation with global



                                                  34
factors throughout our sample.
   We don’t find strong statistical evidence of a significant change in the transmission mechanism
of monetary policy due to global forces. Taking our point estimates literally, global forces do not
seem to have played an important role in the US monetary transmission mechanism between 1984

and 1999. This does not mean that global factors do not have an impact on the economy, as
other shocks, such as international shocks, may have an important eﬀect on US economic variables.
However, our results suggest that conditional on a monetary policy shock in the US, the response
of the main US macroeconomic variables have been little aﬀected by the response of international
factors.
   In addition, since the year 2000, the initial response of the US economy following a monetary

policy shock – the first 6 to 8 quarters – is essentially the same as the one that has been observed
in the 1984-1999 period. However, point estimates suggest that the growing importance of global
forces might have contributed to reducing some of the persistence in the responses, two or more
years after the shocks.
   Overall, we conclude that if global forces have had an eﬀect on the monetary transmission
mechanism, this is a recent phenomenon. This means however that we will need more data before
we can get strong statistical conclusions on this question.




References

 [1] Abeysinghe, T. and R. Gulasekaran (2004), “Quarterly real GDP estimates for China and
     ASEAN4 with a forecast evaluation,” Journal of Forecasting, 23: 431-447.

 [2] Andrews, Donald W. K. (1993), “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change With
     Unknown Change Point,” Econometrica 61(4): 821-856.

 [3] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland (1995), “International Business
     Cycles: Theory and Evidence,” in Thomas F. Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research,
     Princeton University Press, 331-357.


                                                 35
 [4] Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng (2006), “Confidence Intervals for Diﬀusion Index Forecasts and
    Inference for Factor Augmented Regressions,” Econometrica 74(4): 1133—1150.

 [5] Baxter, Marianne (1995), “International Trade and Business Cycles,” in Gene M. Grossman

    and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland,
    vol. 3: 1801-64.

 [6] Benigno, Gianluca, and Benigno Pierpaolo, “Monetary Policy Rules and the Exchange Rate,”
    CEPR Discussion Paper no. 2807.

 [7] Bergman, U. Michael, Michael D. Bordo and Lars Jonung (1998), “Historical Evidence on
    Business Cycles: The International Experience,” in Jeﬀrey C. Fuhrer and Scott Schuh, eds.,

    Beyond Shocks: What Causes Business Cycles? Boston, MA: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
    Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 42: 65—113.

 [8] Bernanke, Ben S. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
    Remarks at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, Missouri, April 14, 2005

 [9] Bernanke, Ben S. (2007), “Globalization and Monetary Policy,” Remarks at the Fourth Eco-
    nomic Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March

    2, 2007.

[10] Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin and Piotr Eliasz (2005), “Measuring Monetary Policy: A Fac-
    tor Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    120(1): 387-422.

[11] Blanchard, Olivier, and John Simon (2001), “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output
    Volatility,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 135-164.

[12] Boivin, Jean (2006), “Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coeﬃcients

    and Real-Time Data,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38(5): 1149-1173, August.

[13] Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2002), “Assessing Changes in the Monetary Transmission
    Mechanism: A VAR Approach,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review
    8(1): 97-112.

                                              36
[14] Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006a), “Has Monetary Policy Become More Eﬀective?,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3): 445-462.

[15] Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006b), “DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment,”

    NBER Working Paper no. 12772.

[16] Boivin, Jean, Marc P. Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov (2007), “Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy:

    Evidence from Disaggregated U.S. Data,” NBER Working Paper no. 12824.

[17] Borio, Claudio and Andrew Filardo (2006), “Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country
    Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation,” Bank for International Settle-
    ments, Basel, Switzerland.

[18] Canova, Fabio, Matteo Ciccarelli, and Eva Ortega (2003), “Similarities and Convergence in
    G-7 Cycles,” Working Paper, University of Pompeu Fabra.

[19] Ciccarelli, Matteo, and Benoît Mojon (2005), “Global Inflation,” European Central Bank
    Working Paper Series no. 537.

[20] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000), “Monetary Policy Rules and Macro-
    economic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(1):
    147-80.

[21] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2002), “A Simple Framework for International
    Monetary Policy Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 879-904.

[22] Clark, Todd E. and Kwanho Shin (2000), “The Sources of Fluctuations Within and Across

    Countries,” in Gregory Hess and Eric van Wincoop, eds., Intranational macroeconomics,
    Boston, MA: Cambridge University Press, pp. 189—220.

[23] Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2001), “Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation
    Dynamics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16: 331-373.

[24] Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent (2005), “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies
    and Outcomes in the Post WWII US,” Review of Economic Dynamics 8: 262—302.


                                               37
[25] Cushman, David O. and Tao Zha (1997), “Identifying Monetary Policy in a Small Open
    Economy Under Flexible Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39(3): 433-448.

[26] Doyle, Brian M., and Jon Faust (2005), “Breaks in the Variability and Comovement of G-7

    Economic Growth,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4): 721-740.

[27] The Economist (2005), “A Foreign Aﬀair: Inflation is Increasingly Determined by Global

    Rather Than Local Economic Forces,” Economic Focus, October 20.

[28] Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roberto Rigobon (2005), “Stocks, Bonds, Money
    Markets and Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission,” European
    Central Bank Working Paper Series no. 452.

[29] Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles L. Evans (1995), “Some Empirical Evidence on the Eﬀects of
    Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4):
    975-1009.

[30] Faust, Jon, John H. Rogers, Shing-Yi B. Wang, and Jonathan Wright (2006), “The High-
    Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announce-
    ments,” forthcoming in Journal of Monetary Economics.

[31] Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez, Thomas J. Sargent, and Mark W. Wat-
    son (2007), “ABCs (and Ds) of Understanding VARs,” American Economic Review 97(3):
    1021-26.

[32] Fisher, Richard W., and W. Michael Cox (2007), “The New Inflation Equation,” The Wall
    Street Journal, Opinion, p. A11, April 6, 2007.

[33] Forni, Mario, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi, and Lucrezia Reichlin (2000), “The Generalized
    Dynamic Factor Model: Identification and Estimation,” Review of Economics and Statistics

    82(4): 540—554.

[34] Galí, Jordi and Mark Gertler (eds.) (2007), International Dimensions of Monetary Policy,
    forthcoming.


                                               38
[35] Gerlach, Stefan (1988), “World Business Cycles Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates,”
    Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 20(4): 621—32.

[36] Gregory, Allan W., Allen C. Head, and Jacques Raynauld (1997), “Measuring World Business
    Cycles,” International Economic Review 38(3): 677—702.

[37] Grilli, Vittorio and Nouriel Roubini (1995), “Liquidity and Exchange Rates: Puzzling Evidence
    from the G-7 Countries, ” mimeo, Yale University.

[38] Grilli, Vittorio and Nouriel Roubini (1996), “Liquidity Models in Open Economies: Theory

    and Empirical Evidence,” European Economic Review 40(3-5): 847-859.

[39] Hausman, Jerry A. and William E. Taylor (1983), “Identification in Linear Simultaneous

    Equations Models with Covariance Restrictions: An Instrumental Variables Interpretation,”
    Econometrica 51(5): 1527-1549.

[40] Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri (2004), “Financial Globalization and Real Regional-
    ization,” Journal of Economic Theory, 119: 207—243.

[41] Helbling, Thomas F. and Tamim A. Bayoumi (2003), “Are They All in the Same Boat? The
    2000—2001 Growth Slowdown and the G-7 Business Cycle Linkages,” Manuscript, International
    Monetary Fund.

[42] Ihrig, Jane, Steven Kamin, Deborah Lindner, Jaime Marquez (2007), “Some Simple Tests
    of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
    System, International Finance Discussion Papers, forthcoming.

[43] Justiniano, Alejandro (2004), “Sources and Propagation Mechanisms of Foreign Disturbances
    in Small Open Economies: A Dynamic Factor Analysis,” mimeo, Board of Governors of the
    Federal Reserve System.

[44] Justiniano, Alejandro, and Giorgio E. Primiceri (2006), “The Time Varying Volatility of Macro-
    economic Fluctuations,” NBER Working Paper no. 12022.

[45] Kamin, Steven B., Mario Marazzi, and John W. Schindler (2006), “The Impact of Chinese
    Exports on Global Import Prices,” Review of International Economics 14(2): 179-201.

                                                39
[46] Kilian, Lutz (1998), “Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 80(2): 218-230.

[47] Kim, Soyoung and Nouriel Roubini (2000), “Exchange Rate Anomalies in the Industrial Coun-

    tries: A Solution With a Structural VAR Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics 45(3):
    561-586.

[48] Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles H. Whiteman (2003), “International Business
    Cycles: World, Region, and Country Specific Factors,” American Economic Review 93(4):
    1216—39.

[49] Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles H. Whiteman (2005), “Understanding the

    Evolution of World Business Cycles,” IMF Working Paper no. 05-211.

[50] Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad; Marco E. Terrones (2003), “How Does Globalization Aﬀect
    the Synchronization of Business Cycles?,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
    93(2): 57-62.

[51] Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2006), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
    Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970—2004,” IMF Working

    Paper 06-69.

[52] Lubik, Thomas and Frank Schorfheide (2005), “A Bayesian Look at New Open Economy
    Macroeconomics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005: 313-366.

[53] Lumsdaine, Robin L. and Eswar S. Prasad (2003), “Identifying the Common Component in
    International Economic Fluctuations,” Economic Journal 113(484): 101—27.

[54] McConnell, Margaret M., and Gabriel Perez-Quiros (2000), “Output Fluctuations in the
    United States: What Has Changed Since the Early 1980’s?,” American Economic Review

    90(5): 1464-76.

[55] Monfort, Alain, Jean-Paul Renne, Rasmus Rüﬀer, and Giovanni Vitale (2003), “Is Economic
    Activity in the G7 Synchronized? Common Shocks vs. Spillover Eﬀects,” CEPR Discussion
    Paper 4119.

                                               40
[56] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (2004), “Globalization and Global Disinflation,” in Federal Reserve Bank of
    Kansas City, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, Papers and
    Proceedings of the 2003 Jackson Hole Conference.

[57] Sbordone, Argia M. (2007), “Globalization and Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Perspective,”
    mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

[58] Scholl, Almuth and Harald Uhlig (2006), “New Evidence on the Puzzles: Monetary Policy and
    Exchange Rates,” Computing in Economics and Finance 2006(5), Society for Computational

    Economics.

[59] Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha (2006), “Were there Regime Switches in US Monetary
    Policy?” American Economic Review 96(1): 54-81.

[60] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
    Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97(3): 586-606.

[61] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1999), “Forecasting Inflation,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics 44: 293-335.

[62] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2002a), “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002 : 159-218.

[63] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2002b), “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diﬀusion
    Indexes,” Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 20(2): 147-162.

[64] Stock James H., and Mark W. Watson (2005), “Understanding Changes in International Busi-

    ness Cycle Dynamics,” Journal of the European Economic Association 3(5): 968—1006.

[65] Woodford, Michael (2007), “Globalization and Monetary Control,” mimeo, Columbia Univer-

    sity.




                                               41
APPENDIX: Data Sets

1 – US Macroeconomic series
Format contains series number; series mnemonic; data span (in quarters); transformation code
and series description as appears in the database. The transformation codes are: 1 – no
transformation; 2 – first difference; 4 – logarithm; 5 – first difference of logarithm. Second
differencing of logarithms was not used. Our main data set contains 17 quarterly series and 112
monthly series with no missing observations. Quarterly averages of monthly series were taken.
The series were taken from DRI/McGraw Hill’s Basic Economics database, and Data Insight’s
US Central database.

      National Income and Products Accounts   (NIPA)
  1   GDPR.Q             1983:4-2005:2         5  Real Gross Domestic Product Billions of Chained (2000) Dollars, SAAR
  2   CR.Q               1983:4-2005:2         5  Real Personal Consumption Expenditures Billions of Chained (2000) Dollars, SAAR
  3   IR.Q               1983:4-2005:2         5  Real Gross Private Domestic Investment Billions of Chained (2000) Dollars, SAAR
  4   XR.Q               1983:4-2005:2         5  Real Exports Billions of Chained (2000) Dollars, SAAR
  5   MR.Q               1983:4-2005:2         5  Real Imports Billions of Chained (2000) Dollars, SAAR
  6   GR.Q               1983:4-2005:2         5  Real Government Consumption Exp. & Gross Invest., Bil. of Chained (2000) Dollars, SAAR
  7   X.Q                1983:4-2005:2         5  Exports of Goods and Services Billions of Dollars, SAAR
  8   XFY.Q              1983:4-2005:2         5  Income Receipts from the Rest of the World Billions of Dollars, SAAR
  9   M.Q                1983:4-2005:2         5  Imports of Goods and Services Billions of Dollars, SAAR
 10   MFY.Q              1983:4-2005:2         5  Income payments to the Rest of the World Billions of Dollars, SAAR
 11   MTAXATRF.Q         1983:4-2005:2         5  Current Taxes And Transfer Payments To Rest of the World (net) Bil. of Dollars, SAAR

 12   JPGDP.Q             1983:4-2005:2       5   Gross Domestic Product Price Index (2000=100), SA
 13   JPC.Q               1983:4-2005:2       5   Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index (2000=100), SA
 14   JPI.Q               1983:4-2005:2       5   Gross Private Domestic Investment Price Index (2000=100), SAAR
 15   JPX.Q               1983:4-2005:2       5   Exports Price Index (2000=100), SA
 16   JPM.Q               1983:4-2005:2       5   Imports Price Index (2000=100), SA
 17   JPG.Q               1983:4-2005:2       5   Government Consumption Expenditures & Gross Investment Price Index (2000=100), SA

      OUT ----------- Real Output and Income
 18   IPS11                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Products, Total
 19   IPS299               1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Final Products
 20   IPS12                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Consumer Goods
 21   IPS13                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Durable Consumer Goods
 22   IPS18                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Consumer Goods
 23   IPS25                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Business Equipment
 24   IPS32                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Materials
 25   IPS34                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Durable Goods Materials
 26   IPS38                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Goods Materials
 27   IPS43                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Manufacturing (SIC)
 28   IPS67e               1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Mining NAICS=21
 29   IPS68e               1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Electric and Gas Utilities
 30   IPS10                1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Total Index
 31   PMI                  1983:4-2005:2     5    Purchasing Managers' Index (SA)
 32   PMP                  1983:4-2005:2     5    NAPM Production Index (Percent)
 33   PYQ                  1983:4-2005:2     5    Personal Income (Chained) (Bil 2000$, SAAR)
 34   MYXPQ                1983:4-2005:2     5    Personal Income Less Transfer Payments (Chained) (Bil 2000$,SAAR)
 35   IPS307               1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Residential Utilities
 36   IPS316               1983:4-2005:2     5    Industrial Production Index - Basic Metals

      EMP ------------- Employment and Hours
 37   LHEL                1983:4-2005:2     5     Index of Help-Wanted Advertising In Newspapers (1967=100;SA)
 38   LHELX               1983:4-2005:2     4     Employment: Ratio; Help-Wanted Ads: No. Unemployed Clf
 39   LHEM                1983:4-2005:2     5     Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Total (Thous., SA)
 40   LHNAG               1983:4-2005:2     5     Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Nonagric. Industries (Thous., SA)
 41   LHUR                1983:4-2005:2     1     Unemployment Rate: All Workers, 16 Years & Over (%, SA)
 42   LHU680              1983:4-2005:2     1     Unemploy. by Duration: Average(Mean) Duration in Weeks (SA)
43   LHU5                    1983:4-2005:2   1   Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.Less Than 5 Wks (Thous., SA)
44   LHU14                   1983:4-2005:2   1   Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.5 To 14 Wks (Thous., SA)
45   LHU15                   1983:4-2005:2   1   Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.15 Wks + (Thous., SA)
46   LHU26                   1983:4-2005:2   1   Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.15 To 26 Wks (Thous., SA)
47   BLS_LPNAG               1983:4-2005:2   5   Total Nonfarm Employment (SA) - CES0000000001
48   BLS_LP                  1983:4-2005:2   5   Total Private Employment (SA) - CES0500000001
49   BLS_LPGD                1983:4-2005:2   5   Goods-Producing Employment (SA) - CES0600000001
50   BLS_LPMI                1983:4-2005:2   5   Natural Resources and Mining Employment (SA) - CES1000000001
51   BLS_LPCC                1983:4-2005:2   5   Construction Employment (SA) - CES2000000001
52   BLS_LPEM                1983:4-2005:2   5   Manufacturing Employment (SA) - CES3000000001
53   BLS_LPED                1983:4-2005:2   5   Durable Goods Manufacturing Employment (SA) - CES3100000001
54   BLS_LPEN                1983:4-2005:2   5   Nondurable Goods Manufacturing Employment (SA) - CES3200000001
55   BLS_Ser.-EMP            1983:4-2005:2   5   Service-Providing Employment (SA) - CES0700000001
56   BLS_Tra.EMP             1983:4-2005:2   5   Trade, Transportation, and Utilities Employment (SA) - CES4000000001
57   BLS_Ret.- EMP           1983:4-2005:2   5   Retail Trade Employment (SA) - CES4200000001
58   BLS_Whol. EMP           1983:4-2005:2   5   Wholesale Trade Employment (SA) - CES4142000001
59   BLS_Fin.-EMP            1983:4-2005:2   5   Financial Activities Employment (SA) - CES5500000001
60   BLS_P-Ser.EMP           1983:4-2005:2   5   Private Service-Providing Employment (SA) - CES0800000001
61   BLS_LPGOV               1983:4-2005:2   5   Government Employment (SA) - CES9000000001
62   BLS_LPHRM               1983:4-2005:2   1   Manufacturing Average Weekly Hours of Production Workers (SA) - CES3000000005
63   BLS_LPMOSA              1983:4-2005:2   1   Manufacturing Average Weekly Overtime of Production Workers (SA) - CES3000000007
64   PMEMP                   1983:4-2005:2       NAPM Employment Index (Percent)

     HSS -------------- Housing Starts and Sales
65   HSFR                 1983:4-2005:2      4   Housing Starts: Nonfarm (1947-58); Total Farm&Nonfarm(1959-); (Thous. U., SA)
66   HSNE                 1983:4-2005:2      4   Housing Starts: Northeast (Thous. U., SA)
67   HSMW                 1983:4-2005:2      4   Housing Starts: Midwest (Thous. U., SA)
68   HSSOU                1983:4-2005:2      4   Housing Starts: South (Thous. U., SA)
69   HSWST                1983:4-2005:2      4   Housing Starts: West (Thous. U., SA)
70   HSBR                 1983:4-2005:2      4   Housing Authorized: Total New Private Housing Units (Thous., SAAR)
71   HMOB                 1983:4-2005:2      4   Mobile Homes: Manufacturers' Shipments (Thous. U., SAAR)

     INV ---------------- Real Inventories and Inventory-Sales Ratios
72   PMNV                  1983:4-2005:2      1    NAPM Inventories Index (Percent)

     ORD--------------- Orders and Unfilled Orders
73   PMNO                 1983:4-2005:2      1    NAPM New Orders Index (Percent)
74   PMDEL                1983:4-2005:2      1    NAPM Vendor Deliveries Index (Percent)
75   MOCMQ                1983:4-2005:2      5    New Orders (Net) - Consumer Goods & Materials, 1996 Dollars (BCI)
76   MSONDQ               1983:4-2005:2      5    New Orders, Nondefense Capital Goods, In 1996 Dollars (BCI)

     SPR --------------- Stock Prices
77   FSPCOM                1983:4-2005:2     5   S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Composite (1941-43=10)
78   FSPIN                 1983:4-2005:2     5   S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Industrials (1941-43=10)
79   FSDXP                 1983:4-2005:2     1   S&P's Composite Common Stock: Dividend Yield (% Per Annum)
80   FSPXE                 1983:4-2005:2     1   S&P's Composite Common Stock: Price-Earnings Ratio (%, NSA)
81   FSDJ                  1983:4-2005:2         Common Stock Prices: Dow Jones Industrial Average

     EXR ----------------   Exchange Rates
82   JRXTWCNS@06.M           1983:4-2005:2   1   Trade-weighted value of the US Dollar (Nominal, 1995=100)
83   EXRSW                   1983:4-2005:2   5   Foreign Exchange Rate: Switzerland (Swiss Franc Per U.S.$)
84   EXRJAN                  1983:4-2005:2   5   Foreign Exchange Rate: Japan (Yen Per U.S.$)
85   EXRUK                   1983:4-2005:2   5   Foreign Exchange Rate: United Kingdom (Cents Per Pound)
86   EXRCAN                  1983:4-2005:2   5   Foreign Exchange Rate: Canada (Canadian $ Per U.S.$)

     INT ---------------- Interest Rates
87   FYFF                   1983:4-2005:2    1   Interest   Rate:   Federal Funds (Effective) (% Per Annum, NSA)
88   FYGM3                  1983:4-2005:2    1   Interest   Rate:   U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,3-Mo.(% Per Ann, NSA)
89   FYGM6                  1983:4-2005:2    1   Interest   Rate:   U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,6-Mo.(% Per Ann, NSA)
90   FYGT1                  1983:4-2005:2    1   Interest   Rate:   U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,1-Yr.(% Per Ann, NSA)
91   FYGT5                  1983:4-2005:2    1   Interest   Rate:   U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,5-Yr.(% Per Ann, NSA)
 92   FYGT10                 1983:4-2005:2    1   Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,10-Yr.(% Per Ann, NSA)
 93   FYAAAC                 1983:4-2005:2    1   Bond Yield: Moody's AAA Corporate (% Per Annum)
 94   FYBAAC                 1983:4-2005:2    1   Bond Yield: Moody's BAA Corporate (% Per Annum)
 95   SFYGM3                 1983:4-2005:2    1   Spread FYGM3 - FYFF
 96   SFYGM6                 1983:4-2005:2    1   Spread FYGM6 - FYFF
 97   SFYGT1                 1983:4-2005:2    1   Spread FYGT1 - FYFF
 98   SFYGT5                 1983:4-2005:2    1   Spread FYGT5 - FYFF
 99   SFYGT10                1983:4-2005:2    1   Spread FYGT10 - FYFF
100   SFYAAAC                1983:4-2005:2    1   Spread FYAAAC - FYFF
101   SFYBAAC                1983:4-2005:2    1   Spread FYBAAC - FYFF

      MON ----------------   Money and Credit Quantity Aggregates
102   FM1                    1983:4-2005:2     5    Money Stock: M1(Curr,Trav.Cks,Dem Dep,Other Ck'able Dep) (Bil$, SA)
103   FM2                    1983:4-2005:2     5    Money Stock:M2(M1+O'nite Rps,Euro$,G/P&B/D Mmmfs&SAv&Sm Time Dep (Bil$, SA)
104   FM3                    1983:4-2005:2     5    Money Stock: M3(M2+Lg Time Dep,Term Rp's&Inst nnly Mmmfs) (Bil$, SA)
105   FM2DQ                  1983:4-2005:2     5    Money Supply - M2 In 1996 Dollars (BCI)
106   FMFBA                  1983:4-2005:2     5    Monetary Base, Adj for Reserve Requirement Changes (Mil$, SA)
107   FMRRA                  1983:4-2005:2     5    Depository Inst Reserves: Total,Adj For Reserve Req Chgs (Mil$, SA)
108   FMRNBA                 1983:4-2005:2     5    Depository Inst Reserves: Nonborrowed,Adj Res Req Chgs (Mil$, SA)
109   FCLBMC                 1983:4-2005:2     1    Wkly Rp Lg Com'l Banks: Net Change Com'l & Indus Loans (Bil$, SAAR)
110   CCINRV                 1983:4-2005:2     5    Consumer Credit Outstanding - Nonrevolving(G19)
111   IMFCLNQ                1983:4-2005:2          Commercial & Industrial Loans Oustanding In 1996 Dollars

      PRI --------------- Price Indexes
112   PMCP                   1983:4-2005:2    1   NAPM Commodity Prices Index (Percent)
113   PWFSA                  1983:4-2005:2    5   Producer Price Index: Finished Goods (82=100,SA)
114   PWFCSA                 1983:4-2005:2    5   Producer Price Index: Finished Consumer Goods (82=100,SA)
115   PWIMSA                 1983:4-2005:2    5   Producer Price Index: Intermed Mat.Supplies & Components (82=100,SA)
116   PWCMSA                 1983:4-2005:2    5   Producer Price Index: Crude Materials (82=100,SA)
117   PUNEW                  1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: All Items (82-84=100,SA)
118   PU83                   1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: Apparel & Upkeep (82-84=100,SA)
119   PU84                   1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: Transportation (82-84=100,SA)
120   PU85                   1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: Medical Care (82-84=100,SA)
121   PUC                    1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: Commodities (82-84=100,SA)
122   PUCD                   1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: Durables (82-84=100,SA)
123   PUXF                   1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: All Items Less Food (82-84=100,SA)
124   PUXHS                  1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: All Items Less Shelter (82-84=100,SA)
125   PUXM                   1983:4-2005:2    5   CPI-U: All Items Less Medical Care (82-84=100,SA)
126   PSCCOM                 1983:4-2005:2    5   Spot Market Price Index: BLS & CRB: All Commodities (1967=100)

      AHE ------------- Average Hourly Earnings
127   BLS_LEHCC            1983:4-2005:2      5    Construction Average Hourly Earnings of Production Workers (SA) - CES2000000006
128   BLS_LEHM             1983:4-2005:2      5    Manufacturing Average Hourly Earnings of Production Workers (SA) - CES3000000006

      OTH ------------- Miscellaneous
129   HHSNTN               1983:4-2005:2      1   U. of Michigan Index of Consumer Expectations (Bcd-83)
2 – US Personal Consumption Expenditures
(price indexes and nominal expenditure)

Format is as above: series number; series; data span (in quarters); transformation code and
series description as appears in the database. The transformation for all data was first
difference of logarithms, which is coded as 5. This data set contains 194 monthly price series on
Personal Consumption Expenditures with no missing observations, and 194 monthly real
consumption series on Personal Consumption Expenditures. Quarterly averages were taken of
all series. We describe here the 194 price series. The 194 corresponding real consumption
series were ordered and transformed in a similar fashion. Series were downloaded from the
underlying tables of the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   1   P1NDCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   New domestic autos
   2   P1NFCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   New foreign autos
   3   P1NETG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Net transactions in used autos
   4   P1MARG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Net purchases of used autos: Used auto margin
   5   P1REEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Net purchases of used autos: Employee reimbursement
   6   P1TRUG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Trucks, new and net used
   7   P1REVG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Recreational vehicles
   8   P1TATG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tires and tubes
   9   P1PAAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Accessories and parts
  10   P1FNRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Furniture, including mattresses and bedsprings
  11   P1MHAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Major household appliances
  12   P1SEAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Small electric appliances
  13   P1CHNG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   China, glassware, tableware, and utensils
  14   P1RADG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Video and audio goods, including musical instruments, and computer goods
  15   P1FLRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Floor coverings
  16   P1CLFG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Clocks, lamps, and furnishings
  17   P1TEXG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Blinds, rods, and other
  18   P1WTRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Writing equipment
  19   P1HDWG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tools, hardware, and supplies
  20   P1LWNG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Outdoor equipment and supplies
  21   P1OPTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Ophthalmic products and orthopedic appliances
  22   P1GUNG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Guns
  23   P1SPTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sporting equipment
  24   P1CAMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Photographic equipment
  25   P1BCYG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Bicycles
  26   P1MCYG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Motorcycles
  27   P1BOAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Pleasure boats
  28   P1AIRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Pleasure aircraft
  29   P1JRYG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Jewelry and watches
  30   P1BKSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Books and maps
  31   P1GRAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Cereals
  32   P1BAKG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Bakery products
  33   P1BEEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Beef and veal
  34   P1PORG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Pork
  35   P1MEAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other meats
  36   P1POUG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Poultry
  37   P1FISG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fish and seafood
  38   P1GGSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Eggs
  39   P1MILG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fresh milk and cream
  40   P1DAIG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Processed dairy products
  41   P1FRUG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fresh fruits
  42   P1VEGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fresh vegetables
  43   P1PFVG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Processed fruits and vegetables
  44   P1JNBG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Juices and nonalcoholic drinks
  45   P1CTMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Coffee, tea and beverage materials
  46   P1FATG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fats and oils
  47   P1SWEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sugar and sweets
  48   P1OFDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other foods
  49   P1PEFG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Pet food
  50   P1MLTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Beer and ale, at home
  51   P1WING3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Wine and brandy, at home
  52   P1LIQG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Distilled spirits, at home
  53   P1ESLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Elementary and secondary school lunch
  54   P1HSLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Higher education school lunch
  55   P1OPMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other purchased meals
  56   P1APMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Alcohol in purchased meals
  57   P1CFDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Food supplied to employees: civilians
 58   P1MFDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Food supplied to employees: military
 59   P1FFDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Food produced and consumed on farms
 60   P1SHUG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Shoes
 61   P1WGCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Clothing for females
 62   P1WICG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Clothing for infants
 63   P1WSGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sewing goods for females
 64   P1WUGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Luggage for females
 65   P1MBCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Clothing for males
 66   P1MSGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sewing goods for males
 67   P1MUGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Luggage for males
 68   P1MICG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Standard clothing issued to military personnel (n.d.)
 69   P1GASG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Gasoline and other motor fuel
 70   P1LUBG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Lubricants
 71   P1OILG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fuel oil
 72   P1LPGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Liquefied petroleum gas and other fuel
 73   P1TOBG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tobacco products
 74   P1SOAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Soap
 75   P1CSMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Cosmetics and perfumes
 76   P1OPHG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other personal hygiene goods
 77   P1SDHG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Semidurable house furnishings
 78   P1CLEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Cleaning preparations
 79   P1LIGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Lighting supplies
 80   P1PAPG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Paper products
 81   P1RXDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Prescription drugs
 82   P1NRXG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Nonprescription drugs
 83   P1MDSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Medical supplies
 84   P1GYNG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Gynecological goods
 85   P1DOLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Toys, dolls, and games
 86   P1AMMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sport supplies, including ammunition
 87   P1FLMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Film and photo supplies
 88   P1STSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Stationery and school supplies
 89   P1GREG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Greeting cards
 90   P1ARTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Expenditures abroad by U.S. residents: Government expenditures abroad
 91   P1ARSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Expenditures abroad by U.S. residents: Other private services
 92   P1REMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Less: Personal remittances in kind to nonresidents
 93   P1MGZG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Magazines and sheet music
 94   P1NWPG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Newspapers
 95   P1FLOG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Flowers, seeds, and potted plants
 96   P1OMHG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Owner occupied mobile homes
 97   P1OSTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Owner occupied stationary homes
 98   P1TMHG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tenant occupied mobile homes
 99   P1TSPG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tenant occupied stationary homes
100   P1TLDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tenant landlord durables
101   P1FARG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Rental value of farm dwellings
102   P1HOTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Hotels and motels
103   P1HFRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Clubs and fraternity housing
104   P1HHEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Higher education housing
105   P1HESG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Elem and second education housing
106   P1TGRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tenant group room and board
107   P1TGLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tenant group employee lodging
108   P1ELCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electricity
109   P1NGSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Gas
110   P1WSMG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Water and sewerage maintenance
111   P1REFG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Refuse collection
112   P1LOCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Local and cellular telephone
113   P1INCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Intrastate toll calls
114   P1ITCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Interstate toll calls
115   P1DMCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Domestic service, cash
116   P1DMIG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Domestic service, in kind
117   P1MSEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Moving and storage
118   P1FIPG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Household insurance premiums
119   P1FIBG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Less: Household insurance benefits paid
120   P1RCLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Rug and furniture cleaning
121   P1EREG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electrical repair
122   P1FREG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Reupholstery and furniture repair
123   P1PSTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Postage
124   P1MHOG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Household operation services, n.e.c.
125   P1ARPG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Motor vehicle repair
126   P1RLOG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Motor vehicle rental, leasing, and other
127   P1TOLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Bridge, tunnel, ferry, and road tolls
128   P1AING3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Insurance premiums for user-operated transportation
129   P1IMTG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Local transportation: Mass transit systems
130   P1TAXG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Taxicab
131   P1IRRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Railway
132   P1IBUG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Bus
133   P1IAIG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Airline
134   P1TROG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other
135   P1PHYG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Physicians
136   P1DENG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Dentists
137   P1OPSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other professional services
138   P1NPHG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Hospitals: Nonprofit
139   P1FPHG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Hospitals: Proprietary
140   P1GVHG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Hospitals: Government
141   P1NRSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Nursing homes
142   P1MING3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Health insurance: Medical care and hospitalization
143   P1IING3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Health insurance: Income loss
144   P1PWCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Health insurance: Workers' compensation
145   P1MOVG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Admissions to motion picture theaters
146   P1LEGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Admissions to theaters and opera, and entertainments of nonprofit instit. (except athletics)
147   P1SPEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Admissions to spectator sports
148   P1RTVG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Radio and television repair
149   P1CLUG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Clubs and fraternal organizations
150   P1SIGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sightseeing
151   P1FLYG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Private flying
152   P1BILG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Bowling and billiards
153   P1CASG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Casino gambling
154   P1OPAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other commercial participant amusements
155   P1PARG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Pari-mutuel net receipts
156   P1REOG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other recreation
157   P1SCLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Shoe repair
158   P1DRYG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Drycleaning
159   P1LGRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Laundry and garment repair
160   P1BEAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Beauty shops, including combination
161   P1BARG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Barber shops
162   P1WCRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Watch, clock, and jewelry repair
163   P1CRPG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Miscellaneous personal services
164   P1BROG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Brokerage charges and investment counseling
165   P1BNKG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Bank service charges, trust services, and safe deposit box rental
166   P1IMCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Commercial banks
167   P1IMNG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other financial institutions
168   P1LIFG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Expense of handling life insurance and pension plans
169   P1GALG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Legal services
170   P1FUNG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Funeral and burial expenses
171   P1UNSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Labor union expenses
172   P1ASSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Profession association expenses
173   P1GENG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Employment agency fees
174   P1AMOG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Money orders
175   P1CLAG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Classified ads
176   P1ACCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tax return preparation services
177   P1THEG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Personal business services, n.e.c.
178   P1PEDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Private higher education
179   P1GEDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Public higher education
180   P1ESCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Elementary and secondary schools
181   P1NSCG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Nursery schools
182   P1VEDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Commercial and vocational schools
183   P1REDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Foundations and nonprofit research
184   P1POLG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Political organizations
185   P1MUSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Museums and libraries
186   P1FOUG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Foundations to religion and welfare
187   P1WELG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Social welfare
188   P1RELG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Religion
189   P1FTRG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Foreign travel by U.S. residents (110)
190   P1EXFG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Less: Expenditures in the United States by nonresidents (112)
191   P1TDGG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Durable goods
192   P1TNDG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Nondurable goods
193   P1TSSG3   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Services
194   PPCE      1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Personal Consumption Expenditures (all items)
3 – US Producer Price Indices

Format is above: series number; series mnemonic (NAICS code); data span (in quarters);
transformation code and series description as appears in the database. Quarterly averages were
taken of all series. The transformation for all data was first difference of logarithms, which is
coded as 5. This data set contains 154 monthly series with no missing observations. All series
are downloaded from the website of BLS.
1     311119    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other animal food manufacturing
2     311119p   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other animal food manufacturing (primary products)
3     311211    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Flour Milling
4     311212    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Rice milling
5     311213    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Malt mfg
6     311223a   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other oilseed processing (cottonseed cake and meal and other byproducts)
7     311225p   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fats and oils refining and blending (primary products)
8     311311    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sugarcane mills
9     311313    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Beet sugar manufacturing
10    311412    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Frozen specialty food manufacturing
11    311520    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Ice cream and frozen dessert mfg
12    311920    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Coffee and tea manufacturing
13    312140    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Distilleries
14    32211-    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Pulp mills
15    32213-    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Paperboard mills
16    325620p   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Toilet preparation mfg (primary products)
17    325920    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Explosives manufacturing
18    32731-    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Cement mfg
19    327320    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Ready mixed concrete mfg and dist
20    327410    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Lime
21    327420    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Gypsum building products manufacturing
22    327910    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Abrasive product manufacturing
23    331210    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Iron steel pipe & tube mfg from purch steel
24    333210    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sawmill & woodworking machinery mfg
25    334310    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Audio & video equipment mfg
26    335110    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electric lamp bulb & part mfg
27    336370    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Motor vehicle metal stamping
28    337910    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Mattress mfg
29    311421    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fruit and vegetable canning
30    311423    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Dried and dehydrated food manufacturing
31    311513    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Cheese manufacturing
32    311611    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Animal except poultry slaughtering
33    311612    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Meat processed from carcasses
34    311613    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Rendering and meat byproduct processing
35    311711    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Seafood canning
36    311712    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fresh & frozen seafood processing
37    311813p   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Frozen cakes pies & other pastries mfg (Primary products)
38    3118233   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Dry pasta manufacturing (macaroni spaghetti vermicelli and noodles)
39    312111p   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Soft drinks manufacturing (primary products)
40    312221    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Cigarettes
41    3122291   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other tobacco product mfg (cigars)
42    313111    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Yarn spinning mills
                                          Broadwoven fabric finishing mills
43    3133111   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   (finished cotton broadwoven fabrics not finished in weaving mills)
44    315111    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Sheer hosiery mills
45    315191    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Outerwear knitting mills
46    315223    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Men's boy's cut & sew shirt excl work mfg
47    315224    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Men's boy's cut & sew trouser slack jean mfg
48    315993    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Men's and boys' neckwear mfg
49    316211    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Rubber and plastic footwear manufacturing
50    316213    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Men's footwear excl athletic mfg
51    316214    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Women's footwear excl athletic mfg
52    316992    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Women's handbag & purse mfg
53    321212    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Softwood veneer or plywood mfg
54    3212191   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Reconstituted wood product mfg (particleboard produced at this location)
                                          Other millwork including flooring
55    3219181   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   (wood moldings except prefinished moldings made from purchased moldings)
56    321991    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Manufactured homes mobile homes mfg
57    3221211   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Paper except newsprint mills (clay coated printing and converting paper)
58    322214    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fiber can tube drum & other products mfg
59    324121    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Asphalt paving mixture & block mfg
60    324122    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Asphalt shingle & coating materials mfg
61    324191p   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Petroleum lubricating oils and greases (primary products)
62    325181    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Alkalies and chlorine
63    3251881   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   All other basic inorganic chemical manufacturing (sulfuric acid gross new and fortified)
64    3251921   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Cyclic crude and intermediate manufacturing (cyclic coal tar intermediates)
65    325212    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Synthetic rubber manufacturing
66    325222    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Manufactured noncellulosic fibers
67    325314    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fertilizer mixing only manufacturing
68    3254111   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Medicinal & botanical mfg (synthetic organic medicinal chemicals in bulk)
69    3261131   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Unsupported plastics film sheet excluding packaging manufacturing
70    326192    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Resilient floor covering manufacturing
71    326211    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Tire manufacturing except retreading
72    327111    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Vitreous plumbing fixtures access ftg mfg
73    327121    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Brick and structural clay tile
74    327122    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Ceramic wall and floor tile
75    327124    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Clay refractories
76    327125    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Nonclay refractory manufacturing
77    327211    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Flat glass manufacturing
78    327213    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Glass container manufacturing
79    327331    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Concrete block and brick manufacturing
80    3279931   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Mineral wool manufacturing
81    331111    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Iron and steel mills
82    331112    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electrometallurgical ferroalloy product mfg
83    331221    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Rolled steel shape manufacturing
84    331312    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Primary aluminum production
85    331315    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Aluminum sheet plate & foil mfg
86    331316    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Aluminum extruded products
87    331421    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Copper rolling drawing & extruding
                                          Other nonferrous metal roll draw extruding
88    3314913   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   (titanium and titanium base alloy mill shapes excluding wire)
89    3314923   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other nonferrous secondary smelt refine alloying (secondary lead)
90    331511    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Iron foundries
91    3322121   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Hand and edge tools except machine tools and handsaws (mechanics' hand service tools)
92    332213    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Saw blade & handsaw mfg
                                          Prefabricated metal building and component manufacturing (prefabricated
93    3323111   1983:4 - 2005:2       5   metal building systems excluding farm service bldgs & residential buildings)
94    332321    1983:4 - 2005:2       5   Metal window and door manufacturing
95    332431    1983:4 - 2005:2       5   Metal can mfg
                                          Other metal container manufacturing
96    324393    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   (steel shipping barrels & drums excl beer barrels more than 12 gallon capacity)
97    332611    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Spring heavy gauge mfg
98    3326122   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Spring light gauge mfg (precision mechanical springs)
99    3327224   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Bolt nut screw rivet & washer mfg (externally threaded metal fasteners except aircraft)
100   332913    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Plumbing fixture fitting & trim mfg
101   332991    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Ball and roller bearings
102   332992    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Small arms ammunition mfg
103   332996    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Fabricated pipe & pipe fitting mfg
104   332998    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Enameled iron & metal sanitary ware mfg
105   333111    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Farm machinery & equipment mfg
106   333131    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Mining machinery & equipment mfg
107   333132    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Oil and gas field machinery and equipment mfg
108   333292    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Textile machinery
109   333293    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Printing machinery & equipment mfg
110   3332941   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Food products machinery mfg (dairy and milk products plant machinery)
111   3332981   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   All other industrial machinery mfg (chemical manufacturing machinery equip. and parts)
                                          Automatic vending machine mfg
112   3333111   1983:4 - 2005:2       5   (automatic merchandising machines coin operated excluding parts)
113   333512    1983:4 - 2005:2       5   Machine tool metal cutting types mfg
114   333513    1983:4 - 2005:2       5   Machine tool metal forming types mfg
                                          Cutting tool & machine tool accessory mfg
115   3335151   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   (small cutting tools for machine tools and metalworking machinery)
116   333612    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Speed changer industrial high speed drive & gear mfg
117   333618    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Other engine equipment mfg
118   3339111   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Pump & pumping equipment mfg (indus. pumps except hydraulic fluid power pumps)
119   333922    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Conveyor & conveying equipment mfg
                                          Overhead crane hoist & monorail system mfg
120   3339233   1983:4 - 2005:2       5   (overhead traveling cranes and monorail systems)
                                          Industrial truck tractor trailer stacker machinery mfg
121   3339241   1983:4   -   2005:2   5   (industrial trucks and tractors motorized and hand powered)
122   333992    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Welding & soldering equipment mfg (welding & soldering equipment mfg)
123   333997    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Scale & balance except laboratory mfg
124   334411    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electron tube mfg
125   334414    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electronic capacitor mfg
126   334415    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electronic resistor mfg
127   334417    1983:4   -   2005:2   5   Electronic connector mfg
                                          Electricity measuring testing instrument mfg
128   3345153   1983:4 - 2005:2       5   (test equipment for testing electrical radio & communication circuits & motors)
129   334517p   1983:4 - 2005:2       5   Irradiation apparatus manufacturing (primary products)
                                          Residential electric lighting fixture mfg
130   3351211   1983:4 - 2005:2       5   (residential electric lighting fixtures except portable & parts)
131      335122       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Commercial electric lighting fixture mfg
132      335129       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Other lighting equipment mfg
133      335212       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Household vacuum cleaner mfg
134      335221       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Household cooking appliance mfg
135      335311       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Power distribution specialty transformer mfg
136      335312       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Motor & generator mfg
137      335314p      1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Relay & industrial control mfg (primary products)
138      335911       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Storage battery mfg
                                                  Other communication and energy wire mfg
139      3359291      1983:4   -   2005:2   5     (power wire and cable made in plants that draw wire)
140      335932       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Noncurrent carrying wiring device mfg
141      335991p      1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Carbon & graphite product mfg (primary products)
142      336321p      1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Vehicular lighting equipment mfg (primary products)
143      337121       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Upholstered household furniture mfg
144      337122       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Wood household furniture except upholstered
145      337124       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Metal household furniture
146      337211       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Wood office furniture mfg
147      3372141      1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Nonwood office furniture (office seating including upholstered nonwood)
                                                  Jewelry except costume mfg
148      3399111      1983:4   -   2005:2   5     (jewelry made of solid platinum metals and solid karat gold)
149      3399123      1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Silverware & hollowware mfg ( Flatware and carving sets made wholly of metal)
150      339931       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Doll & stuffed toy mfg
151      339932       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Game toy & children's vehicle mfg
152      339944       1983:4   -   2005:2   5     Carbon paper & inked ribbon mfg
                                                  Fastener button needle & pin mfg
153      3399931      1983:4 - 2005:2       5     (Buttons and parts except for precious or semiprecious metals and stones)
154      3399945      1983:4 - 2005:2       5     Broom brush & mop mfg (other brushes)




4 – International Data

Format is as above: contains series number; series mnemonic; data span (in quarters);
transformation code and series description as appears in the database. The transformation
codes are: 1 – no transformation; 2 – first difference; 4 – logarithm; 5 – first difference of
logarithm. Our international data set contains 50 quarterly series. The series were taken mainly
from Data Insight’s IMF (International Financial Statistics, IFS), OECD (Main Economic
Indictators, MEI) databases. Some series were obtained from national statistics agencies
(NatS), Global Insight (GI), and the European Central Bank (ECB).

America
Brazil
   1   NatS        SCN4_PIBPMAS4                1983:4-2005:2        5    Real Gross Domestic Product, SA (average 1990 = 100)
   2   IFS         L64A@C223.M                  1983:4-2005:2        5    Consumer Price Index
   3   IFS         L60B@C223.Q                  1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Money Market Rate
Canada
   4   GI          CANSIM 3800002               1983:4-2005:2        5    Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Chained $1997, SAAR
   5   IFS         L64@C156.M                   1983:4-2005:2        5    Consumer Price Index
   6   IFS         L60C@C156.Q                  1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate
   7   IFS         L61@C156.Q                   1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Govt. Bond Yield, Long Term > 10 years
Mexico
   8   NatS                                     1983:4-2005:2        5    Real Gross Domestic Product, MIL. 1993 Mexican Pesos
   9   IFS         L64@C273.M                   1983:4-2005:2        5    Consumer Price Index
  10   IFS         L60C@C273.Q                  1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate

Europe
France
                   ESA.Q.FR.Y.0000.B1QG0
  11   ECB         0.1000.TTTT.Q.N.A            1983:4-2005:2        5    Real Gross Domestic Product
  12   IFS         L64@C132.M                   1983:4-2005:2        5    Consumer Price Index
  13   IFS         L60C@C132.Q                  1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate, 3 months
  14   IFS         L61@C132.Q                   1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Govt. Bond Yield, Long Term
Germany
 15  GI            L99BV&R@C134.Q               1983:4-2005:2        5    Real Gross Domestic Product, Index (2000=100)
 16  IFS           L64D@C134.M                  1983:4-2005:2        5    Consumer Price Index (combined with L64@C134.M)
 17  IFS           L60C@C134.Q                  1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate
 18  IFS           L61@C134.Q                   1983:4-2005:2        1    Interest Rate, Govt. Bond Yield, Long Term
 Italy
                  ESA.Q.IT.Y.0000.B1QG0
  19  ECB         0.1000.TTTT.L.N.A         1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, chain linked
  20  IFS         L64@C136.M                1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
  21  IFS         L60C@C136.Q               1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate
  22  IFS         L61@C136.Q                1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Govt. Bond Yield, Long Term
 Netherland
                  ESA.Q.NL.Y.0000.B1QG0
   23  ECB        0.1000.TTTT.Q.N.A         1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, constant prices
   24  IFS        L64@C138.M                1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
   25  IFS        L61@C138.Q                1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Govt. Bond Yield
 United
 Kingdom
                  ESA.Q.GB.Y.0000.B1QG
   26    ECB      00.1000.TTTT.Q.N.A        1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, constant prices
   27    IFS      L64@C112.M                1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
   28    IFS      L60C@C112.Q               1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate
   29    IFS      L61@C112.Q                1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Govt. Bond Yield, Long Term

 Asia
 China (see *)
  30   DRI        JGDPRZNS@CH.Q                                   *   Real Gross Domestic Product, constant prices
  31   IFS        L60L@C924.Q               1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Deposit Rate
 Hong Kong
  32   IFS        L99B&P&W@C532.Q           1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, 2000 prices
  33   IFS        L64@C532.M                1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
  34   DRI        RMIB3S@HK.M               1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Interbank Offered Rate
 Japan
  35   IFS        L99BV&R@C158.Q            1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, 2000 prices
  36   IFS        L64@C158.M                1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
  37   MEI        JPN.IR3TCD01.ST           1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, 3-months rates on CDs
  38   IFS        L61@C158.Q                1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Govt. Bond Yield, Long Term
 Korea
  39   GI         GDPR@KO.Q                 1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, 2000 prices
  40   IFS        L64@C542.M                1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
   41  IFS        L61@C542.Q                1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate Yield on National Housing Bond
 Malaysia
  42   IFS        L99BV&P@C548.Q            1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, 2000 prices
   43  IFS        L60C@C548.Q               1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate, 3 months
 Singapore
  44   GI         GDPR@SI.Q                 1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, 2000 prices
  45   IFS        L64@C576.M                1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
  46   IFS        L60C@C576.Q               1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Treasury Bill Rate
 Taiwan
   47  NatS                                 1983:4-2005:2         5   Real Gross Domestic Product, 2001 prices
   48  DRI        CPI@TA.M                  1983:4-2005:2         5   Consumer Price Index
   49  DRI        RMCP180S@TA.Q             1983:4-2005:2         1   Interest Rate, Commercial Papers, 3-6 months, sec. mkt.

* For China, real GDP numbers are based on GDP growth numbers from DRI database and estimates of the level of GDP from
Abeysinghe and Gulasekaran (2004). Consumer Price Index: no series starting in 1984 found.
