                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HIGH IDIOSYNCRATIC VOLATILITY AND LOW RETURNS:
                   INTERNATIONAL AND FURTHER U.S. EVIDENCE

                                            Andrew Ang
                                          Robert J. Hodrick
                                            Yuhang Xing
                                           Xiaoyan Zhang

                                        Working Paper 13739
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13739


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




We thank Tobias Adrian, Kewei Hou, Soeren Hvidjkaer, and Joshua Rosenberg for kindly providing
data. We thank Tim Johnson and seminar participants at the CRSP Forum at the University of Chicago,
the American Finance Association, Columbia University, NYU, SAC Capital, and the University of
Toronto for helpful comments. The paper has benefited from the excellent comments of an anonymous
referee. Andrew Ang acknowledges support from the NSF. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Andrew Ang, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
High Idiosyncratic Volatility and Low Returns: International and Further U.S. Evidence
Andrew Ang, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 13739
January 2008
JEL No. F3,G12,G15

                                               ABSTRACT

Stocks with recent past high idiosyncratic volatility have low future average returns around the world.
Across 23 developed markets, the difference in average returns between the extreme quintile portfolios
sorted on idiosyncratic volatility is -1.31% per month, after controlling for world market, size, and
value factors. The effect is individually significant in each G7 country. In the U.S., we rule out explanations
based on trading frictions, information dissemination, and higher moments. There is strong comovement
in the low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks across countries, suggesting that broad, not
easily diversifiable, factors may lie behind this phenomenon.


Andrew Ang                                             Yuhang Xing
Columbia Business School                               Jones School of Management, MS 531
3022 Broadway 805 Uris                                 Rice University
New York NY 10027                                      6100 Main Street
and NBER                                               Houston, TX 77004
aa610@columbia.edu                                     yx35@columbia.edu

Robert J. Hodrick                                      Xiaoyan Zhang
Graduate School of Business                            Johnson Graduate School of Management
Columbia University                                    366 Sage Hall
3022 Broadway                                          Cornell University
New York, NY 10027                                     Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER                                               xz69@cornell.edu
rh169@columbia.edu
1.      Introduction
In a recent paper, Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang (2006) (hereafter AHXZ) show that volatility
of the market return is a priced cross-sectional risk factor. After demonstrating this fact, AHXZ
sorted firms on the basis of their idiosyncratic stock return volatility, measured relative to the
Fama and French (1993) model. They reasoned that the idiosyncratic errors of a misspecified
factor model would contain the influence of missing factors, and hence, by sorting on idiosyn-
cratic volatility, they might develop a set of portfolios that would be mispriced by the Fama and
French (1993) model, but that might be correctly priced by the new aggregate volatility risk
factor. AHXZ found that U.S. stocks with high lagged idiosyncratic volatility earn very low
future average returns, and these assets were indeed mispriced by the Fama-French model.
      The AHXZ results are surprising for two reasons. First, the difference in average returns
across stocks with low and high idiosyncratic volatility is large. In particular, the average return
on the first quintile portfolio of stocks with the lowest idiosyncratic volatility exceeds the aver-
age return on the fifth quintile portfolio of stocks with the highest idiosyncratic volatility by over
1% per month. Second, AHXZ demonstrate that their findings could not be explained either by
exposure to aggregate volatility risk or by other existing asset pricing models. AHXZ’s find-
ings are particularly puzzling for financial theories that link idiosyncratic volatility to expected
returns. While idiosyncratic volatility is not priced in a correctly specified factor model, in envi-
ronments with frictions and incomplete information, the idiosyncratic volatility of a stock may
be linked to its expected return. For example, Merton (1987) shows that in the presence of mar-
ket frictions where investors have limited access to information, stocks with high idiosyncratic
volatility have high expected returns because investors cannot fully diversify away firm-specific
risk. But, AHXZ find the exact opposite relation.
      The paper contains three main contributions. Our first goal is to see if the anomalous relation
between lagged idiosyncratic volatility and future average returns in U.S. data exists in other
markets. As with any empirical results, there is a danger that AHXZ’s finding may be dependent
only on a particular small sample. AHXZ’s results could be data-snooping, as argued by Lo and
MacKinlay (1990).1 If a relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatility and future average
returns exists in international markets, it is more likely that there is an underlying economic
source behind the phenomenon. Thus, we examine if stock returns in international markets
  1
      AHXZ’s results could also have just been wrong, but the AHXZ results for U.S. stocks have been indepen-
dently confirmed by Brown and Ferreira (2003), Bali and Cakici (2005), Jiang, Tao and Yao (2005), Huang et al.
(2006), and Zhang (2006).


                                                      1
sorted on idiosyncratic volatility conform to the same pattern observed in the U.S. cross-section.
   We present evidence that the negative relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatility and
future average returns is observed across a broad sample of international developed markets.
In particular, for each of the largest seven equity markets (Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the U.S., and the U.K.), stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility tend to have low average
returns. The negative idiosyncratic volatility–average return relation is strongly statistically
significant in each of these countries and is also observed in the larger sample of 23 developed
markets. From these strong international results, it is hard to explain the low returns to high
idiosyncratic volatility stocks as a small sample problem.
   Our second, and perhaps most interesting, contribution is that the negative spread in re-
turns between stocks with high and low idiosyncratic volatility in international markets strongly
comoves with the difference in returns between U.S. stocks with high and low idiosyncratic
volatilities. The large commonality in comovement shared by the spread in returns between
stocks with high and low idiosyncratic volatility across countries suggests that broad, not easily
diversifiable, factors may lie behind this effect. However, we do not claim that the low average
returns to stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility represents a priced risk factor because we
do not yet have a theoretical framework to understand why agents have high demand for high
idiosyncratic volatility stocks, causing these stocks to have low expected returns.
   Finally, in detailed analysis of the U.S. market where more data are available, we rule out
explanations based on market frictions, information dissemination, and an option pricing ex-
planation. We consider the effects of transaction costs by using the incidence of zero returns
proposed by Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999). To characterize the severity of market fric-
tions, we control for Hou and Moskowitz’s (2005) delay with which a stock’s price responds
to information. Since the extent of analyst coverage and institutional ownership are important
determinants for trading volume (see Chordia, Huh and Subrahmanyam, 2005) and can proxy
for the proportion of informed agents (see Brennan and Subrahmanyam, 1995), we investigate
if the idiosyncratic volatility effect persists after controlling for both of these variables. We
also investigate the relation to the amount of private information in trading activity (see Easley,
Hvidkjaer and O’Hara, 2002) and to skewness (see Barberis and Huang, 2005). An alterna-
tive explanation suggested by Johnson (2004) is that the idiosyncratic volatility effect is due to
idiosyncratic volatility interacting with leverage, motivated from the fact that equity is a call
option on a firm’s underlying assets. None of these explanations can entirely account for the
high idiosyncratic volatility and low average returns relation.


                                                2
       In our analysis, we investigate the relation between future returns and past idiosyncratic
volatility. Thus, the idiosyncratic volatility effect that we document both in the U.S. and in-
ternational markets is not necessarily a relation that involves expected volatility (see Fu, 2005;
Spiegel and Wang, 2005), which is unobservable and must be estimated. In contrast, past id-
iosyncratic volatility is an observable, easily calculated stock characteristic. Since idiosyncratic
volatility is persistent, we expect that our lagged measure is correlated with future idiosyncratic
volatility that agents might assess in determining expected returns. Thus, we also examine the
contemporaneous relation between expected future idiosyncratic volatility and realized returns.
Our investigation indicates that a strong negative relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatil-
ity and future returns remains even after controlling for the information that past idiosyncratic
volatility provides about future idiosyncratic volatility.
       Our results are related to a literature that investigates if idiosyncratic volatility can predict
future aggregate market returns (see, for example, Goyal and Santa-Clara, 2003; Bali et al.,
2005; Wei and Zhang, 2005; Guo and Savickas, 2007). Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003) find
that average idiosyncratic volatility predicts aggregate market excess returns.2 However, unlike
these papers, our focus is on the cross-sectional, as opposed to the aggregate time-series, relation
between firm-level idiosyncratic volatility and expected returns. Other authors, like Campbell
et al. (2001), Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2005), and Brandt, Brav and Graham (2005) have
examined trends in average idiosyncratic volatility, but they do not link idiosyncratic volatility
to cross-sectional returns.
       Idiosyncratic volatility has been used to proxy for various economic effects. For example,
building on Miller (1977), idiosyncratic volatility has been used as an instrument to measure
differences in opinion (see, for example, Baker, Coval and Stein, 2007). We do not investigate
the success of idiosyncratic volatility to proxy for different economic effects.3 Our focus is
on how idiosyncratic volatility itself is related to expected returns in the cross-section of in-
ternational stock returns. Similarly, idiosyncratic volatility may be related to other economic
factors, like liquidity risk (see, for example, Spiegel and Wang, 2005). Hence, we specifically
   2
       According to an ICAPM, a factor which predicts stock returns in the cross section should also predict aggre-
gate market returns (see Campbell, 1993). However, if returns are tied to firm characteristics rather than factor
loadings as advocated by Daniel and Titman (1997), then because idiosyncratic volatility is a firm characteristic, a
relation between idiosyncratic volatility and returns at the firm level does not imply a relationship between average
idiosyncratic volatility and market returns at the aggregate level.
   3
     AHXZ show that differences in opinion measured by analyst dispersion (see Diether, Malloy and Scherbina,
2002) cannot account for the idiosyncratic volatility effect.



                                                          3
control for the effect of other risk loadings or risk characteristics in our analysis of idiosyncratic
volatility.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2. describes how we measure
the idiosyncratic volatility of a stock and discusses the international stock return data. Section 3.
explains our cross-sectional version of the Fama and MacBeth (1973) methodology. Section 4.
shows that the negative relation between idiosyncratic volatility and future returns is observed
across the world, while Section 5. examines how the difference in returns between foreign
stocks with high and low idiosyncratic volatilities covaries with the analogous difference in U.S.
stock returns. In Section 6., we examine in detail some potential economic explanations for the
effect using U.S. data. We rule out market frictions, asymmetric information, skewness, and an
interaction with leverage as complete explanations for the idiosyncratic volatility phenomenon.
Section 7. concludes.


2.     Measuring Idiosyncratic Volatility
This section discusses how we measure the idiosyncratic volatility of a firm using, local, re-
gional, and global versions of the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model. It also introduces
the international data. In most of our analysis, we work with returns and factors expressed in
U.S. dollars, and we compute excess stock returns using U.S. T-bill rates. We also report the re-
lation between idiosyncratic volatility measured in local currency and excess returns expressed
in local currency terms for robustness.


2.1.    The Local Fama-French Model
In each country, we specify a local version of the Fama-French model (L-FF hereafter) with
three factors: a local market excess return factor, a local size factor, and a local value factor.
When we analyze only U.S. stocks, our L-FF model is just the model of Fama and French
(1993). The construction of the L-FF models for other countries is similar, and we follow Fama
and French (1993, 1998). The market factor for country j, M KT j , is computed as the value-
weighted excess return of the local market portfolio over the one-month U.S. T-bill rate. Within
each country j, we compute the return on zero-cost portfolios SM B j and HM Lj , measuring
size and value premiums, respectively. The country-specific factor SM B j is the return of the
smallest 1/3rd of local firms less the return on the firms in the top third ranked by market
capitalization. In country j, the value factor HM Lj is the return of the portfolio that goes long

                                                  4
the top third of local firms with the highest book-to-market ratios and shorts the bottom third of
local firms with low book-to-market ratios.
   Similar to AHXZ, we define idiosyncratic volatility with respect to the L-FF model using
the following regression:

                     ri = αiL + βiL M KT L + sLi SM B L + hLi HM LL + εLi ,                    (1)

where ri is the daily excess U.S. dollar return of stock i and the L-FF factors are also expressed
in U.S. dollars. The idiosyncratic volatility for stock i is measured as the standard deviation of
the residuals εLi after estimating Eq. (1) using daily excess returns over the past month.


2.2.   The Regional Fama-French Model
Brooks and Del Negro (2005) show that country-specific factors within regions can be mostly
explained by regional factors. We specify a regional Fama-French model (R-FF hereafter) as a
linear factor model comprising three factors, M KT R , SM B R , and HM LR . To compute the
regional factors, we group the 23 countries into three regions: North America (the U.S. and
Canada), Europe, and the Far East. These regional factors are computed as value-weighted
sums of the country factors within each of the three regions.
   We define idiosyncratic volatility with respect to the R-FF model to be the standard deviation
of the residual εR
                 i in the regression:

                    ri = αiR + βiR M KT R + sR     R   R     R   R
                                             i SM B + hi HM L + εi ,                           (2)

using daily U.S. dollar excess returns of stock i over the past month and expressing all of the
R-FF factors in U.S. dollars.


2.3.   The World Fama-French Model
Our world version of the Fama-French model (W-FF hereafter) uses the value-weighted world
market excess return, M KT W , and the world size and value factors, SM B W and HM LW ,
computed as the value-weighted sums of the three regional Fama-French factors. We define id-
iosyncratic volatility with respect to the W-FF model to be the standard deviation of the residual
εW
 i in the regression:

                  ri = αiW + βiW M KT W + sW
                                           i SM B
                                                  W
                                                    + hW
                                                       i HM L
                                                              W
                                                                + εW
                                                                   i ,                         (3)

using daily U.S. dollar excess returns of stock i over the past month and expressing all of the
W-FF factors in U.S. dollars.

                                                5
2.4.       Data
Our stock return data comprise daily returns on firms from 23 developed markets. We select
these countries as they comprise the universe of the MSCI Developed Country Index. We study
both local currency and U.S. dollar denominated returns, but we compute excess returns using
the U.S. one-month T-bill rate. Individual stock returns for the U.S. are obtained from CRSP,
and other U.S. firm-level data are from COMPUSTAT. International stock return data are from
Datastream. For the international data, the sample period is January 1980 to December 2003,
except for Finland, Greece, New Zealand, Portugal, Spain and Sweden, which begin in the
mid-1980s. In all non-U.S. countries, we exclude very small firms by eliminating the 5% of
firms with the lowest market capitalizations. For the more detailed analysis using U.S. data, the
sample period is July 1963 to December 2003.
       Panel A of Table 1 presents summary statistics for the stock returns and other data across
countries. We provide time-series means for the average firm size and book-to-market ratio,
and the average number of firms. There is moderate variation in the firm characteristics across
countries. The average firm size ranges from $182 million in Greece to $1,632 million in the
Netherlands. In comparison, the size of the average U.S. firm is $975 million. Japanese firms
tend to have the lowest book-to-market ratios (at 0.70), whereas Belgium firms have the largest
(at 1.40). Note that the average number of U.S. firms, 5,441, dwarfs the number of firms in
any other market. The next largest equity market is Japan, which has an average of 1,453
firms. Because of the dominant number of U.S. firms, we are careful in our empirical work to
disentangle the effect of the U.S. on any result involving data pooled across markets.
   In Panel A, we report summary statistics for three different average volatility measures,
                                          √
which are all annualized by multiplying by 250. The first measure is total volatility, which is
computed as the volatility of daily raw returns over the previous month. The second and third
measures are idiosyncratic volatility computed with respect to the R-FF model (Eq. (2)) and
the W-FF model (Eq. (3)). All three volatility measures are highly correlated with each other,
with the correlations all above 95% in each country. The U.K. has the lowest idiosyncratic
volatility (26% per annum with respect to W-FF), compared to the average W-FF idiosyncratic
volatility across countries of 41% per annum.4 There is also quite a wide range in the dispersion
of idiosyncratic volatility across markets. For the U.S., the interquartile range (the difference
   4
       While Campbell et al. (2001) report a time trend in idiosyncratic volatility over the late 1990s, Brandt, Brav
and Graham (2005) report that there is no time trend extending the sample into the 2000s. Bekaert, Hodrick and
Zhang (2005) find similar results in international markets.


                                                          6
between the 75th and 25th percentiles) of W-FF idiosyncratic volatility is 61.1% − 25.0% =
36.1%, compared to an average interquartile range of 38.4% − 18.5% = 19.9% for the other
22 countries. Stock-level volatility is only weakly correlated with aggregate volatility in each
country. In the U.S., the average correlation of L-FF idiosyncratic volatility with aggregate
market volatility using monthly data, where both measures are computed using daily returns
over the month, is only 16.5%.
     In Panel B of Table 1, we report monthly means and standard deviations of R-FF and W-
FF factors, all expressed in U.S. dollars. The mean of the SM B factor for North America is
slightly negative, at -0.08% per month, indicating that small firms have not out-performed large
firms in the United States over the post-1980 sample, in contrast to the results first reported by
Banz (1981). The evidence for the size effect is stronger in the post-1980 sample for Europe
and the Far East, where the regional SM B factors have positive means. Value strategies have
also performed better in overseas markets than in the U.S., with high book-to-market stocks
significantly underperforming low book-to-market stocks during the late 1990s bull market in
the United States. The value premium is particularly strong in the Far East, where the mean
regional HM L factor is 0.72% per month. In comparison, the mean of the world HM L factor
is 0.42% per month.


3.     The Cross-Sectional Regression Methodolgy
We examine the relation between total volatility and idiosyncratic volatility with respect to the
L-FF, R-FF, and W-FF models using a series of two-stage Fama and MacBeth (1973) regres-
sions. In the first stage, for every month, we regress the cross-sectional firm excess returns onto
idiosyncratic volatility together with various risk factor loadings, some firm characteristics, and
other control variables. In the second stage, we use the time series of the regression coefficients
and test if the average coefficient on the lagged idiosyncratic volatility measure is significantly
different from zero. To take into account serial correlation in the coefficient estimates, we com-
pute Newey-West (1987) standard errors with four lags in the second stage.
     The Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions take the form:

             ri (t, t + 1) = c + γ σi (t − 1, t) + λ0β βi (t, t + 1) + λ0z zi (t) + εi (t + 1),   (4)

where ri (t, t + 1) is stock i’s excess return from month t to t + 1, σi (t − 1, t) is stock i’s
idiosyncratic volatility computed using daily data over the previous month from t − 1 to t,

                                                     7
βi (t, t + 1) is a vector of risk factor loadings over the month t to t + 1, and zi (t) is a vector of
firm characteristics observable at time t. We use the notation (t−1, t) and (t, t+1) to emphasize
the timing of the statistics that are computed using data from month t − 1 to t and over month
t to t + 1, respectively. The cross-sectional regressions for a particular country and month use
all available firm level data for that country and month.
   We are especially interested in the coefficient γ on idiosyncratic volatility, which should be
zero under the null hypothesis of a correctly specified factor model. Each month, we run the
regression in Eq. (4) with returns measured in percentage terms and use annualized volatility
numbers as dependent variables. Because our volatility measures are known at the beginning
of the month, σi (t − 1, t) is a measurable statistic at time t. Eq. (4) controls for exposures to
risk factors by including contemporaneous factor loadings estimated over the current month,
βi (t, t + 1) (see Shanken, 1992), but we obtain almost identical results if we use past factor
loadings, βi (t − 1, t). These results are available upon request.
   We use contemporaneous factor loadings because a factor model explains high average re-
turns over a time period with contemporaneous high covariation in factor exposure over the
same period if the factor commands a positive risk premium. Using contemporaneous factor
loadings is similar to the Fama-MacBeth regressions run by Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972),
Fama and French (1992), and Jagannathan and Wang (1996), among others. We use firm factor
loadings from the W-FF model using M KT W , SM B W , and HM LW as factors, where the
W-FF regression (3) is run using daily returns over the month from t to t + 1. For the U.S., we
also consider contemporaneous L-FF factor loadings from Eq. (1) computed using daily data
over the month from t to t + 1.
   Daniel and Titman (1997) report that factor loadings may not account for all variation in
expected returns compared to firm-level characteristics. Hence, we also include other firm
characteristics in the vector zi (t) in the Fama-MacBeth regression. All of these characteristics
are known at time t. The firm characteristics include log size, book-to-market ratios, and a
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) momentum characteristic measured by lagged returns over the
previous six months. All of these firm characteristics are measured in U.S. dollars. We also
include country-specific dummies as fixed effects.
   We investigate the relation between idiosyncratic volatility and expected returns by exam-
ining the sign and statistical significance of the mean value of γ, the coefficient on the volatility
statistic in Eq. (4). Another approach taken by AHXZ to measure the relation between aver-
age returns and idiosyncratic volatility is to form portfolios ranked on idiosyncratic volatility


                                                  8
and then examine holding-period returns of these portfolios. AHXZ consider controlling for
other effects using a series of double-sorted portfolios, but they do not consider Fama-MacBeth
regressions.
     While the Fama-MacBeth regressions capture variation in cross-sectional expected returns,
residual variation and components of returns related to other factors also enter portfolio returns.
One advantage of cross-sectional regressions is that they allow for controls for multiple factor
loadings and characteristics in a setting that retains power, whereas creating portfolios that have
dispersion on more than two dimensions generally results in some portfolios with only a few
stocks and consequently, a lot of noise. This is especially true for countries with only a small
number of listed stocks. In our analysis of portfolio returns, we will form portfolios aggregated
across geographic areas to ensure that we have a reasonable number of stocks in our portfolios.


4.     Idiosyncratic Volatility and Expected Returns in Interna-
       tional Markets
We begin our analysis by examining the relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatility and
future stock returns across the world. Section 4.1. examines the G7 countries in detail, while
Section 4.2. considers all 23 countries.


4.1.    Firms in Large, Developed Countries
Table 2 reports results of the Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions in Eq. (4) using stock returns
within each of the G7 countries. The regressions in Panel A of Table 2 use excess stock returns
denominated in U.S. dollars. Panel B repeats the cross-sectional regressions using local cur-
rency denominated excess returns. All regressions are run using monthly data. Because of data
requirements on lagged firm characteristics, the dependent variable returns of the regressions
span September 1980 to December 2003, but data on the independent variables, particularly
book values and past returns, begin from January 1980.
     The first result in Table 2 is that a strong negative relation between lagged idiosyncratic
volatility and average future excess returns exists in each of the non-U.S. G7 countries. For the
U.S., the estimated coefficient on W-FF idiosyncratic volatility is -2.01, with a robust t-statistic
of -6.67. After the U.S., the negative lagged idiosyncratic volatility–expected return relation is
statistically strongest for Japan, which has a point estimate of -1.96 with a robust t-statistic of


                                                 9
-5.18. The coefficient on W-FF idiosyncratic volatility ranges from -0.87 for the U.K. to less
than -2.00 for Germany. In all cases, the coefficients are statistically significant at the 95% level,
with the smallest magnitude of the t-statistic of -2.10 occurring for Italy.
   Second, in contrast to the strong predictive power of lagged idiosyncratic volatility, the
coefficients on factor loadings and characteristics are often insignificant. In fact, Table 2 shows
that two of the coefficients on SM B W have the wrong sign from those predicted by Fama and
French (1993). This is partly because the small stock effect and the value premium in the post-
1980 sample are relatively weak, and possibly because betas contain significant measurement
error. The book-to-market and lagged return characteristics generally have greater statistical
significance than the coefficients on the factor betas, consistent with the findings of Daniel
and Titman (1997). Examining the coefficients on the characteristics, there is a statistically
significant size effect in Canada and the U.S., and five of the seven book-to-market effects
are statistically significant. The relatively weak evidence of momentum in international stock
returns presumably arises because we take relatively large firms where the momentum effect is
weaker compared to small firms (see Rouwenhorst, 1998; Hong, Lim and Stein, 2000).
   To interpret the magnitude of the coefficient on volatility, we measure the cross-sectional
distribution of volatility. Panel A of Table 2 reports the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile
of W-FF idiosyncratic volatility in each country. Using these percentiles, we can translate the
coefficients on L-FF idiosyncratic volatility to an economic effect by asking the question: if a
firm were to move from the 25th to the 75th idiosyncratic volatility percentile while its other
characteristics were held constant, what is the predicted decrease in that firm’s expected return?
The U.S. coefficient of -2.01 translates to a decrease in expected returns of | − 2.01| × (0.611 −
0.250) = 0.73% per month. These are economically very large differences in average excess
returns. Of course, this increase in idiosyncratic volatility is large, and news that caused such a
change would probably also be associated with changes in other firm characteristics.
   While the German and Japanese coefficients on idiosyncratic volatility of -2.00 and -1.96
are similar to the -2.01 coefficient for the U.S., the range of idiosyncratic volatility in the U.S. is
much larger than in the other large, developed countries. This makes the idiosyncratic volatility
effect stronger in the U.S., but it still remains large in economic terms for the other countries.
The interquartile range of W-FF idiosyncratic volatility for the non-U.S. G7 countries is around
0.19, which is around half the average interquartile range in the U.S. of 0.36. Thus, although
the coefficients on W-FF idiosyncratic volatility are similar, the magnitude of the idiosyncratic
volatility effect is approximately half of the U.S. effect because the U.S. tends to have stocks


                                                  10
with a much wider dispersion of idiosyncratic volatility. The last row of Panel A illustrates this,
where across the non-U.S. G7 countries, moving from the 25th percentile to the 25th percentile
produces a reduction in expected returns of around 0.15-0.30% per month in magnitude, which
is less than half of the expected 0.73% per month decrease using only U.S. firms. Nevertheless,
these decreasing expected returns for higher idiosyncratic volatility are still economically large
for the non-U.S. G7 countries.
       Panel B of Table 2 repeats the cross-sectional regressions using firm excess returns that are
expressed in local currency terms. Panel B measures idiosyncratic volatility using the L-FF
model. We also use W-FF factors denominated in local currency to compute contemporaneous
factor loadings in Eq. (3).5 The coefficients on L-FF idiosyncratic volatility are similar to the
coefficients on W-FF idiosyncratic volatility in Panel A. All the coefficients on L-FF idiosyn-
cratic volatility are highly statistically significant. The biggest change occurs for France, where
the magnitude of the idiosyncratic volatility coefficient decreases from -1.44 in USD returns to
-1.06 in local returns. For Canada, Italy, Japan and the U.K., the volatility coefficients increase
in magnitude using L-FF idiosyncratic volatility.
       In summary, similar to the finding in AHXZ for the U.S., we find a strong negative rela-
tion between expected returns and past idiosyncratic volatility also exists in the other large,
developed markets. The economic effect is strongest in the U.S., not because the coefficient on
idiosyncratic volatility is much more negative in the U.S., but because the range of idiosyncratic
volatility is more dispersed in the U.S. than in other countries. The strong relation between id-
iosyncratic volatility and average returns in international data sets a high bar for any potential
explanation.
       For example, Jiang, Xu and Yao (2005) recently argue investors are not in a rational expec-
tations environment and must learn about firms’ earnings. They argue that firms with past high
idiosyncratic volatility tend to have more negative future unexpected earnings surprises, leading
to their low future returns. Given that non-U.S. financial reporting and accounting standards are
generally less rigorous than in the U.S., the scope for greater dispersion in future unexpected
earnings in non-U.S. countries seems larger. This seems particularly true for negative unex-
pected earnings surprises, which would imply a more negative relation between idiosyncratic
volatility and expected returns in other countries. Our international results show that this is not
the case.
   5
       The results are almost unchanged if R-FF or L-FF factors denominated in local currency are used. These
results are available upon request.



                                                      11
       Another potential explanation is that the negative relation between idiosyncratic volatility
and returns persists due to lack of overall liquidity. Yet, the U.S. has the most liquid markets of
the G7, and it has the largest negative reward to holding stocks with high idiosyncratic liquidity.
Therefore, the data seem inconsistent with this hypothesis.


4.2.       Results From Pooling Across Developed Countries
4.2.1.     Standard Fama-MacBeth (1973) Regressions

Table 3 extends our analysis to incorporate all 23 developed countries. We report Fama-
MacBeth coefficients for Europe and the Far East, the G7 (with and without the U.S.), and
all countries (with and without the U.S.). To control for cross-country differences, or fixed
effects, we include seven country dummies. The first six dummies correspond to non-U.S.
countries in the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the U.K.), and the last dummy
corresponds to all other developed countries. Thus, this approach implicitly treats the U.S. as a
benchmark and measures cross-country differences relative to the U.S. market. In all the regres-
sions, the country dummies are statistically insignificant indicating that there are only modest
country-specific effects after controlling for factor loadings and firm characteristics.6
       The first two columns of Table 3 show that high idiosyncratic volatility stocks in Europe and
the Far East also have low expected returns. The coefficients on idiosyncratic volatility are -0.67
and -1.18 for Europe and the Far East, respectively, and are somewhat smaller in magnitude than
the U.S. coefficient of -2.01. These coefficients are highly statistically significant. The third and
fourth columns pool together all the G7 countries and separately consider the effect of excluding
the United States. Across all the G7 countries, the coefficient on W-FF idiosyncratic volatility
is -1.75, with a very negative robust t-statistic of -6.40. By construction, this coefficient is an
average of the individual G7 country coefficients in Table 2. Clearly, the effect of low expected
returns to stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility is very strong across the largest developed
markets. However, Table 3 makes clear that the U.S. effect dominates, since the coefficient
on idiosyncratic volatility falls to -1.07 when U.S. firms are excluded. This coefficient has a
t-statistic of -4.14.
   6
       We have also included a dummy to represent technology, media, and telecommunications sectors following
Brooks and Del Negro (2004). Including this dummy variable has very little change on our results. We have
also excluded the late 1990s by ending the sample in 1997, and this also does not affect our results. In fact, the
coefficients on idiosyncratic volatility are slightly larger in absolute magnitude in the 1981-1997 sample compared
to the whole sample.



                                                       12
   The final two columns of Table 3 pool the data across all 23 developed countries. Pooling
across all countries, the coefficient on idiosyncratic volatility is -1.54 and is highly significant.
Because the interquartile range of W-FF idiosyncratic volatility is 50.5% − 20.3% = 30.2% per
annum over all countries, there is a large economic decrease of | − 1.54| × (0.505 − 0.203) =
0.47% per month in moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of W-FF idiosyncratic volatility.
When the U.S. is excluded, the coefficient on idiosyncratic volatility falls in absolute magnitude
to -0.60 from -1.54, but this is still significant with a robust t-statistic of -2.32. Thus, while the
idiosyncratic volatility effect is concentrated in the U.S., it is still strongly observed across the
world.


4.2.2. Robustness to Value Weighting

One potential concern about the use of cross-sectional regressions is that each stock is treated
equally in a standard Fama-MacBeth setting. Thus, even though we exclude very small stocks
in each country, a standard Fama-MacBeth regression places the same weight on a very large
firm as a small firm. Placing greater weight on small firms may generate noise, and although it
measures the effect of a typical firm, it may not reflect the effect of an average dollar. To allay
these concerns, we report value-weighted Fama-MacBeth regressions in Table 4, where each
return is weighted by the firm’s market capitalization in U.S. dollars at the start of the month.
In the first stage, we perform GLS regressions with a weighting matrix that is diagonal, with
the inverse of the firms’ market capitalization along the diagonal. These value-weighted Fama-
MacBeth regressions are analogous to creating value-weighted portfolios, whereas the standard
Fama-MacBeth regressions are analogous to creating equal-weighted portfolios.
   Table 4 reports that the coefficients on idiosyncratic volatility increase in magnitude mov-
ing from equal-weighted to value-weighted Fama-MacBeth regressions. The coefficients also
have correspondingly stronger statistical significance. For example, for the U.S. coefficient
on idiosyncratic volatility, the value-weighted coefficient is -2.24 in Table 4 compared to the
equal-weighted coefficient of -2.01 from Table 2, and the t-statistic goes from -6.67 to -7.00.
This result is also documented by Bali and Cakici (2005) for the U.S. only, but Table 4 shows
that the same effect holds true for all international markets. Similarly, the coefficient on id-
iosyncratic volatility for the Far East (the G7 countries) is -1.27 (-1.97) when using market
capitalization weights in Table 4, which are higher in magnitude than the equal-weighted id-
iosyncratic volatility coefficient -1.18 (-1.75) in Table 2. For all countries, the value-weighted
coefficient is -1.54 with an absolute robust t-statistic of 5.82. This implies that the volatility

                                                 13
effect is stronger among larger companies, rather than very small firms. This is unusual for a
CAPM anomaly because most mispricing effects are less pronounced in the universe of larger
firms with smaller trading frictions.


4.2.3.   Robustness to Different Formation Periods

In the analysis done so far, idiosyncratic volatility is computed using daily returns over the past
calendar month, controlling for market, size, and value factors. Since volatility is well known
to be persistent (see, for example, Engle, 1982), we expect that past idiosyncratic volatility
should still have predictive power when longer sample periods are used to compute idiosyncratic
volatility. Table 5 confirms that this is the case.
   Table 5 is similar to Table 3, except that instead of computing idiosyncratic volatility over
the past month (σi (t − 1, t)), we compute idiosyncratic volatility using daily returns over the
past 3, 6, or 12 months, denoted by (t − 3, t), (t − 6, t), and (t − 12, t), respectively. This is
done relative to the W-FF model of Eq. (3) with all volatilities expressed in annualized terms.
We report the results of the U.S., all countries, and all countries excluding the U.S.
   In all the regressions in Table 5, the coefficients on W-FF idiosyncratic volatility using
different formation periods are all negative and highly statistically significant. Not surprisingly,
as the formation period increases, the magnitude of the coefficients on idiosyncratic volatility
decreases. For the U.S., the coefficients decrease from -2.46 at a three-month formation period
to -2.09 using six months and -1.27 using the past year. For comparison, the Table 3 coefficient
is -2.01 for σi (t − 1, t), so using the past three months of daily returns actually makes the
idiosyncratic volatility effect stronger. These patterns are also repeated for all countries and
for all countries excluding the U.S. Like the results in previous tables, the magnitude of the
coefficients decrease when U.S. stocks are excluded, but the effects are still significant.
   Volatility does vary over time, but it is not the time-series persistence of stock volatilities
that is driving the results in Table 5. Rather, over a month to three months, the relative rankings
of stocks sorted by idiosyncratic volatility remain roughly the same because of the strong cross-
sectional persistence of idiosyncratic volatility. The results are slightly stronger using three-
month formation periods, rather than one-month, for all cases in Table 5 perhaps because using
three months of data allows for more accurate estimates of idiosyncratic volatility. However,
rankings of idiosyncratic volatility do change across longer sample periods, causing the effects
of the six- and 12-month ranking periods to produce less significant and weaker results.



                                                  14
4.2.4.    Summary

Across all 23 developed markets, stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility tend to have low
expected returns. The effect is most pronounced in the United States. It is economically and
statistically significant across the individual G7 countries, and it is also observed when data are
pooled across all 23 developed countries. The negative idiosyncratic volatility and expected
return relation is robust to controlling for factor loadings and firm characteristics using equal-
weighted or value-weighted cross-sectional regressions and to considering different formation
periods up to the past year for computing idiosyncratic volatility.


5.       International Portfolio Returns
The presence of an idiosyncratic volatility effect in a large cross-section of countries raises the
issue of whether these effects exhibit any comovement. To investigate this we create idiosyn-
cratic volatility portfolios across regions and across all 23 countries.


5.1.     Regional and World Idiosyncratic Volatility Portfolios
To create international idiosyncratic volatility portfolios, we first sort firms within each individ-
ual country into quintile portfolios ranked on W-FF idiosyncratic volatility using daily excess
returns over the previous month as in Eq. (3). For small countries, each quintile portfolio may
contain very few firms, so we focus on creating volatility portfolios across regions. We create
regional quintile W-FF idiosyncratic portfolios by forming value-weighted sums of the country
quintile portfolios, where the weights are the USD market capitalizations of the correspond-
ing quintile portfolio of each country. The quintile portfolios are rebalanced every month, are
expressed in U.S. dollars and cover the same period of returns as the Fama-MacBeth (1973)
regressions in Section 4. (September 1980 to December 2003).
     Table 6 lists the returns of the international quintile W-FF idiosyncratic volatility portfolios.
Panel A reports W-FF alphas using the full sample of monthly returns for each regional quintile
portfolio. These alphas are the estimates of the αiW coefficient in Eq. (3), where the regression
is estimated at a monthly frequency using each portfolio’s full series of returns in excess of the
one-month U.S. T-bill yield. We also report the W-FF alpha of the trading strategy 5–1 that goes
long the highest volatility quintile and short the quintile of stocks with the lowest idiosyncratic
volatilities. This trading strategy produces a W-FF alpha of -0.72% per month in Europe with a


                                                  15
robust t-statistic of -3.01. In the Far East, the trading strategy is less profitable, but it still has a
large W-FF alpha of -0.53% per month, with a t-statistic of -1.84.
    For the Far East, the difference between the modestly strong results for the tradeable port-
folios in Table 6 and the large, significantly negative Fama-MacBeth coefficient on the previous
month’s W-FF idiosyncratic volatility in Tables 3 and 4 arises because the significant Fama-
MacBeth coefficient does not take into account the smaller range of idiosyncratic volatility in
the Far East. We could obtain a higher dispersion of idiosyncratic volatility across portfolios by
creating more extreme portfolios, for example, by forming decile portfolios. The average annu-
alized W-FF idiosyncratic volatilities for the Far East first and fifth quintile portfolios are 17.1%
and 62.1%, respectively, compared to 16.7% and 92.0% per annum for forming portfolios over
the same sample period using only U.S. stocks. Despite the smaller range of idiosyncratic
volatility in Far Eastern stocks, the 5–1 W-FF alpha for the Far East is still economically large,
at -0.53% per month. When decile portfolios ranked on idiosyncratic volatility are formed in
the Far East, the 10-1 difference in the extreme decile portfolio W-FF alphas is 0.79%, with a
t-statistic of -2.23.
    Panel A of Table 6 also reports W-FF alphas for idiosyncratic volatility portfolios formed
across the G7 countries and across all 23 countries, with and without U.S. stocks. The returns
to the 5–1 strategy are considerably more negative when the U.S. is included. Without the U.S.,
the 5–1 W-FF alpha is -0.65% per month across the G7 countries and -0.67% per month across
all countries. Both of these alphas are significant with p-values less than 1%, indicating that
there are potentially large trading returns possible in going long (short) stocks with low (high)
idiosyncratic volatility in international markets.
    For completeness, we also report differences in raw returns between the first and fifth world
idiosyncratic volatility portfolios in Panel B of Table 6. Note that raw returns are not risk-
adjusted, unlike the W-FF alphas in Panel A, and hence they provide only a rough guide for a
naı̈ve implementation of a trading strategy based on sorting stocks by idiosyncratic volatility
which does not take into account exposure to risk factors. Thus, the numbers must be carefully
economically interpreted. The 5–1 differences in raw returns are economically large, and con-
sistent with the W-FF alphas in Panel A, the effect in the U.S. dominates. For example, the
average raw 5–1 return difference is -0.89% per month across all 23 countries, but the differ-
ence shrinks in magnitude to -0.40% when U.S. stocks are removed. Even without the U.S.,
this difference in raw returns is still economically large, but only when the U.S. is included are
the differences in raw returns statistically significant.


                                                   16
5.2.    International Comovement
This section investigates the degree of international comovement in returns of stocks with high
idiosyncratic volatilities. We construct 5–1 strategies that go long the quintile portfolio contain-
ing firms with the highest idiosyncratic volatility and go short the lowest idiosyncratic volatility
quintile portfolio in various regions. Since stocks with high (low) idiosyncratic volatility have
low (high) expected returns, these 5–1 strategies earn negative returns on average. All of these
strategies are denominated in U.S. dollars and are rebalanced at a monthly frequency over Jan-
uary 1980 to December 2003. We denote the 5–1 strategy in the U.S. as V OLU S .
   Panel A of Table 7 reports the results of time-series regressions using the W-FF model
where the W-FF alpha in Eq. (3) represents a tradeable return not explained by existing risk
factors. The alphas reported in Panel A correspond to the 5–1 alphas reported in Table 6.
These regressions serve as a base case for investigating how the international 5–1 idiosyncratic
volatility strategies are related to the 5–1 strategy in the U.S., V OLU S , in Panels B and C. In our
discussion, we focus on the geographic areas excluding the U.S., since, by construction, we can
always partly explain regional returns which include the U.S. with U.S. returns. Nevertheless,
we include all the regions in Table 7 for completeness.
   Panel B shows that there are large and significant comovements between the idiosyncratic
volatility portfolio returns in international markets and in the United States. If the 5–1 idiosyn-
cratic volatility portfolio returns are regressed only on a constant and V OLU S , the alphas are
all statistically insignificant. The V OLU S loadings range from 0.27 for the Far East to 0.36 for
the G7 countries excluding the U.S. market. All these V OLU S loadings are highly statistically
significant, with the lowest absolute t-statistic value occurring for the Far East at 7.29.
   Controlling for the W-FF factors in Panel C generally also does not remove the explanatory
power of the V OLU S returns for the international idiosyncratic volatility trading strategies. For
Europe, the loading of 0.32 on V OLU S is similar to the 0.37 loading without W-FF factors. The
coefficient on V OLU S for the G7 excluding the U.S. falls slightly from 0.72 to 0.63, while the
corresponding loading for all countries excluding the U.S. decreases from 0.67 to 0.58, when
the W-FF factors are added. These coefficients are still highly significant with t-statistics above
5.4. Only in the case of the Far East is the loading on V OLU S small, at 0.03, after adding the
W-FF factors.
   In summary, there are remarkably similar returns across the international idiosyncratic volatil-
ity portfolios. Trading strategies which go long stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility stocks



                                                 17
and go short low idiosyncratic volatility stocks in foreign markets have large exposures to the
same idiosyncratic volatility trading strategy using only U.S. stocks. After controlling for the
exposure to the U.S., there are no excess returns. But, without controlling for U.S. exposure,
the low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks cannot be explained by standard risk fac-
tors. This high degree of comovement suggests that what is driving the very low returns to
high idiosyncratic volatility stocks around the world cannot be easily diversified away and is
dominated by U.S. effects.


6.        A More Detailed Look at the U.S.
Sections 4. and 5. show that around the world, stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility have low
returns. The effect is strongest in the U.S., and we observe significant comovement between the
returns of high idiosyncratic volatility stocks in non-U.S. countries with the returns of high
idiosyncratic volatility stocks in the U.S. This warrants a detailed look at the effect in U.S. data,
where a relatively large number of firms allows for greater power in investigating the cross-
sectional determinants of the effect. The U.S. market also has more detailed data on trading
costs and other market frictions than other countries to facilitate the analysis.
       AHXZ already find that the U.S. idiosyncratic volatility effect is robust to controlling for
standard risk and firm characteristics such as size, value, liquidity, and coskewness. They find
that exposure to aggregate market volatility risk measured by VIX cannot explain the effect.7
Simple micro-structure measures, volume, turnover, and bid-ask spreads also cannot explain the
phenomenon. Dispersion in analysts’ forecasts is also not an explanation. AHXZ report that
the idiosyncratic volatility effect is robust to controlling for momentum strategies using one-,
six-, and 12-month past returns, and they show that the idiosyncratic volatility effect persists
for holding periods up to at least one year.
       In Section 6.1., we outline other potential economic explanations based on the costs of
trading and information dissemination. We go beyond AHXZ in using better measures of trans-
actions costs; in particular, we use a recently developed measure for assessing the amount of
   7
       AHXZ also include market volatility and liquidity risk factors in their analysis of U.S. data, and neither factor
explains the returns to portfolios sorted on past idiosyncratic volatility. Because these factors are difficult to
measure with international data, we did not include them in this paper. Adrian and Rosenberg (2007) argue that
the U.S. market volatility risk factor can be split into short-run and long-run components. Neither of these risk
factors explains the anomalous low returns of stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility. These results are available
upon request.


                                                           18
private information in trades. We also examine economic stories which involve how different
types of investor clienteles may analyze and process information. Stocks with different id-
iosyncratic volatility may have different exposures to these risk factors. We also consider the
effects of investor preferences for skewness. Examining these economic sources of risk is im-
portant because past research has established them to be important determinants of other CAPM
anomalies.
   Section 6.2. shows that the low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks survive after
controlling for these explanations. In Section 6.3., we construct investable portfolios based on
idiosyncratic volatility while controlling for other relevant variables. Section 6.4. focuses on
how lagged idiosyncratic volatility is related to expected future volatility and examines whether
an option hypothesis proposed by Johnson (2004) can explain our findings.


6.1.     Potential Economic Explanations
6.1.1.   Private Information

Easley and O’Hara (2004) argue that expected stock returns differ because of differences in the
amount of private information embedded in the trades of those stocks. Specifically, stocks with
more private information command higher expected returns. To measure the degree of private
information contained in the trading activity of each stock, Easley, Hvidkjaer and O’Hara (2002)
construct a measure of private information, denoted PIN. They show that stocks with high PINs
have significantly higher expected returns than stocks with low PINs. It is possible that stocks
with low idiosyncratic volatility are stocks whose trades contain very high amounts of private
information, and conversely, high idiosyncratic volatility could be stocks whose trades contain
very low amounts of private information. This situation would explain the relatively high returns
on low volatility stocks and low returns on high volatility stocks. One drawback of the PIN
measure is that it is constructed using intra-day trades, which restricts the sample to post-1984.


6.1.2.   Transactions Costs

Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999) construct a measure of transaction costs using the pro-
portion of daily returns equal to zero each month. They demonstrate that this measure is highly
correlated with spread and commission estimates of transactions costs. A major advantage of
their measure is that it only requires daily returns, allowing the use of long time series. We ex-
amine if the volatility effect is concentrated in stocks with the highest transactions costs where


                                               19
arbitrage is difficult.


6.1.3.   Analyst Coverage

Stocks with few analysts may incorporate new information into prices more slowly. Hou and
Moskowitz (2005) hypothesize that if investors value fast information dissemination, stocks
covered by fewer analysts will have higher returns than stocks tracked by many analysts. If
stocks with low volatility have low amounts of analyst coverage, these stocks would require
higher returns to compensate for the slower dissemination of news. Following Diether, Malloy
and Scherbina (2002), we define analyst coverage as the number of analysts providing current
fiscal year annual earnings estimates each month in the I/B/E/S database, which is available
from July 1976 onwards. Controlling for the amount of analyst coverage skews our sample
toward larger firms, which tend to be covered more by analysts than small firms.


6.1.4.   Institutional Ownership

Stocks with lower amounts of institutional ownership tend to be stocks with more uninformed
traders (see, for example, Kumar, 2007). Naturally, stocks with low institutional holdings tend
to be stocks that are followed less closely by analysts. These stocks also tend to be smaller
and more illiquid, and their prices could respond more slowly to news announcements. Stocks
with low idiosyncratic volatility could be stocks with low amounts of institutional ownership
causing these stocks to have high average returns. Institutional ownership comes from Standard
& Poors and starts in July 1981.


6.1.5.   Delay

Hou and Moskowitz (2005) develop a new measure which captures how fast a stock’s price
responds to information. To construct this measure, they regress each stock’s weekly returns on
contemporaneous and lagged market returns. If a stock responds immediately to market news,
coefficients on the lagged market returns will be equal to zero and there would be no improve-
ment in the R2 in adding the lagged market return to the regression. The Hou-Moskowitz (2005)
delay measure uses the ratio of the R2 from a regression with only a contemporaneous market
return to the R2 from a regression with both contemporaneous and lagged market returns. They
find that the most severely delayed firms command large return premiums. These stocks could
be low idiosyncratic volatility stocks, leading to low idiosyncratic volatility stocks having high


                                               20
returns because their prices respond with long delay to new information. We use the Hou and
Moskowitz delay measure starting from 1965.


6.1.6.     Skewness

Barberis and Huang (2005) develop a behavioral setting in which the individual skewness of
stock returns may be priced.8 Under the cumulative prospect theory preferences of Tversky
and Kahneman (1992), investors transform objective probabilities using a weighting function
that overweights the tails of the probability distribution. This causes positively skewed secu-
rities to become overpriced and to earn negative average excess returns. If high idiosyncratic
volatility stocks are stocks with positive skewness, the Barberis and Huang (2005) argument
would explain why stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility have low returns.


6.2.       Cross-Sectional Regression Results
In order to control for these potential economic explanations of the idiosyncratic volatility phe-
nomenon, we include the characteristic controls described above with other risk controls in
Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions along with the L-FF idiosyncratic volatility measured over
the past month. Table 8 reports time series average coefficients from seven cross-sectional re-
gression specifications for U.S. data. All of the specifications control for contemporaneous
L-FF factor loadings, and for past size, book-to-market, and momentum characteristics. The
specifications use different numbers of stocks because of data availability issues. In regressions
I-VI, we separately include the Easley, Hvidkjaer and O’Hara’s (2002) PIN measure, the per-
centage of zero returns, the number of analysts, the proportion of institutional ownership, the
Moskowitz and Hou (2005) delay measure, and the individual skewness of the return. Regres-
sions I, III, and IV control for these variables constructed by other authors, which approximately
halves our full sample period and takes many fewer stocks. In Regression VII, we include all of
the various control variables, except PIN because of its shorter sample. All the cross-sectional
regressions are rerun every month. Because of the data requirements of book values and past
six-month returns, the dependent variable returns of these regressions begin seven months after
the beginning of the sample period listed in Table 8.
       Panel A shows that in all of the regression specifications, the Fama-MacBeth coefficient
   8
       AHXZ rule out that exposure to coskewness (see Harvey and Siddique, 2000) can explain the low returns of
stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility.



                                                       21
on L-FF idiosyncratic volatility is negative and strongly significant. In contrast, in regressions
I-V, the coefficients on the control variables are actually insignificantly different from zero, and
some carry the wrong sign. For example, if expected returns increase with transactions costs as
measured by the Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999) proportion of zero returns, we would
expect a positive coefficient, but the estimate is -0.46, which indicates that average firm excess
returns decrease as transactions costs increase.9
       Looking individually at each regression I to VI, we observe that the coefficient on L-FF
idiosyncratic volatility is smallest in magnitude in regression IV, which controls for institu-
tional ownership, with a L-FF idiosyncratic volatility coefficient of -0.79. However, power is
of concern in this specification. Regression IV uses relatively few firms, on average only 776,
and these firms tend to be relatively very large. But, even for these firms, the -0.79 volatility
coefficient is significant with a robust t-statistic of -2.31. In regression IV, the coefficient on
the institutional ownership variable is close to zero and is statistically insignificant. The only
individually significant control variable is skewness in regression VI, and here, consistent with
the argument of Barberis and Huang (2005), we find that the more positively skewed are indi-
vidual returns, the lower is the expected return. The idiosyncratic volatility coefficient of -0.94
remains highly significant with a robust t-statistic of -4.17.
       Regression VII controls for all variables over July 1981 to June 2000. In this regression,
the percentage of zero returns and analyst coverage are significant variables, but the coefficients
have the wrong signs compared to the theoretical predictions. The institutional ownership,
delay measure, and past skewness have insignificant explanatory power. The coefficient on L-
FF idiosyncratic volatility is -1.81, with a robust t-statistic of -4.27. This is similar to the -2.01
coefficient on L-FF idiosyncratic volatility in Table 2 using the 1980-2003 sample. Given the
results in Table 8, it is unlikely that any of these variables can explain the idiosyncratic volatility
effect.
       Panels B and C of Table 8 investigate whether using different measures of volatility substan-
tially changes inference about the effects. For each regression specification, we use the same
variables as Panel A except we substitute either lagged total volatility or lagged W-FF idiosyn-
cratic volatility for L-FF idiosyncratic volatility. The Fama-MacBeth coefficients on the other
variables are not reported to save space. Panels B and C show that using total volatility or W-FF
idiosyncratic volatility produces very similar results across all the regressions. In particular, for
   9
       To take account of potential non-linearities in transactions costs, we also augment regression II with the square
of the proportion of zero returns. This has a coefficient of almost zero and does not change any results.



                                                           22
Regression VII using the largest set of controls, the coefficients on total volatility and W-FF
idiosyncratic volatility are -1.73 and -1.87, respectively, compared to -1.81 in Panel A for L-FF
idiosyncratic volatility.


6.3.    Idiosyncratic Volatility Portfolios
In this section, we form portfolios based on L-FF idiosyncratic volatility and examine actual
holding period returns. For each month, we sort firms into quintile portfolios based on L-FF
idiosyncratic volatility at the beginning of the month, computed as in Eq. (1) using daily returns
over the previous month, and we rebalance the portfolios each month. Each quintile portfolio
is value weighted using weights at the beginning of the month. After the resulting quintile
portfolio returns are formed in excess of the one-month U.S. T-bill return, we compute L-FF
alphas by running Eq. (2) at a monthly frequency over the whole sample. Since the L-FF factors
are traded factors, the L-FF alpha represents an investable return.
   The first row of Table 9 under “No Controls” reports the results of this procedure after
sorting firms into L-FF idiosyncratic quintile portfolios over the whole U.S. sample, with the
returns spanning August 1963 to December 2003. The table reports L-FF alphas of each quintile
portfolio with the column “5–1” reporting the difference in L-FF alphas between a trading
strategy that goes long stocks in the highest idiosyncratic volatility quintile and goes short
stocks in the lowest idiosyncratic volatility quintile. The no control row reports the AHXZ
result. The 5–1 difference in L-FF alphas is -1.29% per month with a robust t-statistic of -6.71.
For comparison, the difference in raw average returns between the first and the fifth volatility
quintile portfolios is a large -0.97% per month and is highly statistically significant.
   In the remaining rows of Table 9, we form portfolios that control for the various risk char-
acteristics (PIN, the proportion of zero returns, analyst coverage, institutional ownership, delay,
and skewness). We first sort stocks into quintiles based on the control variable, and then, within
each quintile, we sort stocks based on L-FF idiosyncratic volatility. The five idiosyncratic
volatility portfolios are then averaged over each of the five characteristic portfolios, and the re-
sults are idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolios that control for the characteristic. All these
portfolios are also value weighted. Note that this procedure only controls for a single charac-
teristic at a time, but the computation of the ex-post L-FF alpha also controls for the M KT ,
SM B, and HM L factor loadings.
   Controlling for the various characteristics slightly reduces the idiosyncratic volatility effect,



                                                 23
but not by much, and none of the characteristics can overturn the low returns to high idiosyn-
cratic volatility stocks. Some of these controls also result in a large drop in the average number
of firms in each portfolio. The differences in L-FF alphas after controlling for PIN, the propor-
tion of zero returns, institutional ownership, and skewness for the 5–1 strategy are very similar
to the no control returns. The PIN and proportion of zero return controls do almost nothing
to change the no control strategy L-FF alpha of -1.29% per month to -1.00% and -1.10% per
month, respectively. Similarly, institutional ownership and skewness have almost no effect.
    The variables that have the largest effect in shrinking the difference in the returns be-
tween stocks with high and low idiosyncratic volatility are analyst coverage and the Hou and
Moskowitz (2003) delay measure. Controlling for analyst coverage shrinks the L-FF alpha of
the 5–1 trading strategy to -0.69% per month, while controlling for delay shrinks it to -0.67%
per month. The robust t-statistics for both effects are still significantly above the 95% confi-
dence level, and both effects remain economically large. Thus, analyst coverage and delay help
the most to explain, but by no means remove, the low returns to stocks with high idiosyncratic
volatility.
    In summary, portfolios in the U.S. formed on idiosyncratic volatility exhibit large differ-
ences in returns between stocks with high and low idiosyncratic volatilities. These differences
are robust in portfolios that control for the degree of informed trading, transactions costs, analyst
coverage, institutional ownership, price responsiveness to information, and skewness.


6.4.    An Options Story
So far, we have measured idiosyncratic volatility as a lagged firm characteristic. Naturally,
since idiosyncratic volatility is persistent (see below), it is related to future volatility and some
component of lagged idiosyncratic volatility could be instrumenting expected volatility. Ex-
pected volatility may be related to future returns differently than lagged volatility. Indeed, Fu
(2005) and Spiegel and Wang (2005) find a positive relation between conditional idiosyncratic
volatility estimated using monthly frequency data and expected returns. Alternatively, lagged
volatility may be related negatively to future returns because equity is a call option on the firm’s
underlying assets, as suggested by Johnson (2004). In this section, we investigate this option
interpretation, which involves a leverage effect interacting with idiosyncratic volatility.
    Black and Scholes (1973) first interpret equity as a call option on the firm’s underlying
assets. Johnson (2004) takes this framework and, following Merton (1974), derives that the



                                                 24
return of a stock, dPt /Pt in excess of a constant risk free rate, rf , is given by:

                       dPt /Pt − rf dt = (π∆St /Pt )dt + (σa ∆St /Pt )dWt ,                     (5)

where π is the risk premium on the unlevered stock, St is the price of an unlevered claim
on the firm’s assets, σa is the firm’s underlying asset volatility, ∆ is a standard option delta,
∆ = ∂P/∂S, and dWt is a Brownian motion term. The total stock volatility, σ, comprises both
underlying asset volatility, σa , as well as the variance of uncertainty of the current value of the
firm’s assets, ω. The latter can be proxied by the dispersion of analysts’ earnings forecasts, as
Johnson investigates, or perhaps by idiosyncratic volatility, as we examine below.
   Johnson notes that ∆ is decreasing in the volatility of the stock return, just as ∂∆/∂σ < 0
in a standard Black-Scholes (1973) model. Thus, according to Johnson’s option interpretation,
leverage causes the expected stock return to decrease as idiosyncratic volatility increases, since
the sign of the partial derivative ∂∆/∂σ is negative. Furthermore, as leverage increases, the
strength of the negative association between returns and idiosyncratic volatility increases.
   This interpretation raises several issues. First, Johnson originally applies his result to the
negative relation between stock returns and the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts documented
by Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002). We would expect that the dispersion of beliefs is
positively correlated with idiosyncratic volatility and this is true in the data; the dispersion of
analysts’ forecasts as constructed by Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002) has a cross-sectional
correlation of 0.201 with lagged idiosyncratic volatility. Thus, Johnson’s interpretation for the
cross-sectional dispersion of beliefs could also apply to cross-sectional idiosyncratic volatility.
   Second, a richer option model need not produce a negative relation between volatility and
expected returns. In particular, models with mean-reverting stochastic volatility may produce
cases where ∆ is an increasing function of volatility (see comments by Ledoit, Santa-Clara and
Yan, 2002). For example, in results available from the authors, a Heston (1993) model produces
an upward-sloping ∆ as a function of σ for an out-of-the-money call option. The out-of-the-
money region would not be relevant in a simple model of equity as a call option because in
this region the face value of debt is greater than the asset value of the firm so the firm would be
bankrupt. This suggests that in more sophisticated models with endogenous default, the relation
between ∆ and volatility may change sign as firm approaches the default boundary. However,
this does not make the simple Johnson (2004) explanation invalid.
   Third, lagged volatility is not the appropriate parameter that enters the option pricing model.
The parameter of interest is conditional volatility, which is the expectations of quadratic varia-

                                                  25
tion over the next period. Since idiosyncratic volatility is persistent, any estimate of conditional
volatility will be correlated with lagged idiosyncratic volatility. In the next section, we try to
disentangle the predictive relation of lagged idiosyncratic volatility and returns versus the re-
lation between conditional estimates of future volatility and firm returns. We also investigate
the cross-sectional relation between stock returns and realized, rather than lagged, idiosyncratic
volatility.


6.4.1.   Idiosyncratic Volatility and Leverage

To investigate the leverage interaction effect, we first examine the coefficient on lagged volatil-
ity in Eq. (4) controlling for leverage and an interaction term between leverage and lagged
volatility. We define leverage following Johnson (2004) as the book value of debt over the sum
of book value of debt and market value of equity. Johnson’s model suggests that controlling for
leverage should remove the statistical significance of the coefficient on lagged volatility, and the
coefficient on the interaction between leverage and volatility should be negative.
    Table 10 reports the coefficients on lagged idiosyncratic volatility, leverage, and the interac-
tion term of leverage and idiosyncratic volatility after controlling for M KT , SM B, and HM L
contemporaneous factor loadings and size, book-to-market, and past return characteristics. Id-
iosyncratic volatility has a coefficient of -1.14 with a t-statistic of -4.45. Regression I reports
that the coefficient on idiosyncratic volatility without the leverage and interaction controls (but
retaining the M KT , SM B, and HM L factor loadings and size, book-to-market, and past re-
turn characteristics) is -0.94, with a t-statistic of -2.24. Thus, controlling for leverage does not
decrease the idiosyncratic volatility effect, but instead slightly strengthens its effect. Leverage
carries a negative coefficient of -0.92 and the interaction term has a positive coefficient of 1.59.
Both these coefficients are highly significant at the 95% level. These are opposite to the signs
predicted by Johnson, where the negative return to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks should
be greater in firms with higher leverage.
    In Table 11, we examine this relation between leverage and lagged idiosyncratic volatility
in more detail. We first sort firms into quintile portfolios according to leverage, and then, within
each leverage quintile, we sort stocks on σi (t − 1, t) in columns. Panel A reports the results
listing L-FF alphas of each of these 25 portfolios. The last column labelled “5–1” is the long-
short portfolio which goes long the highest σi (t − 1, t) portfolio and goes short the lowest
σi (t − 1, t) portfolio within each leverage quintile. If an option interpretation is correct, then the
most negative L-FF alphas should be observed in the portfolios with the highest leverage. We

                                                  26
observe the opposite pattern. The greatest spread between high and low idiosyncratic volatility
stocks is -1.59% per month in the portfolios with the lowest leverage.10 In the last row, we
construct idiosyncratic volatility portfolios that control for leverage, similar to those constructed
in Table 9 by averaging over the five leverage portfolios. Controlling for leverage does not
remove the idiosyncratic volatility effect.


6.4.2. Idiosyncratic Volatility and Conditional Volatility

Idiosyncratic volatility exhibits strong cross-sectional persistence and is highly correlated with
conditional volatility. We now disentangle the effect of lagged idiosyncratic volatility from pre-
dicted future volatility. We construct cross-sectional forecasts of future idiosyncratic volatility,
Et [σi (t, t + 1)], by running a cross-sectional regression of σi (t, t + 1) on firm characteristics
at time t. We use lagged idiosyncratic volatility, size, the book-to-market ratio, past six-month
return, stock return skewness, and turnover as characteristics. Skewness is measured using
daily returns over the previous month and turnover is defined as the trading volume over the
previous month divided by total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month. The
coefficients are estimated using data only up to time t to forecast volatility over t to t + 1, and
we run a new cross-sectional regression at each time period.11 We focus on cross-sectional
regression forecasts as our relation between future returns and lagged idiosyncratic volatility is
a cross-sectional effect.
       Not surprisingly, the best predictor of future idiosyncratic volatility is lagged idiosyncratic
volatility. The cross-sectional correlation of Et [σi (t, t + 1)] with σi (t − 1, t) is 0.95. This high
correlation would lead to colinearity problems in placing both these variables in a regression, but
we can separate the effect of lagged idiosyncratic volatility and predicted idiosyncratic volatility
in a double portfolio sort. Panel A of Table 12 first ranks stocks on Et [σi (t, t + 1)] and then
sorts stocks on σi (t − 1, t). Panel B shows that in each Et [σi (t, t + 1)] quintile, the stocks with
  10
       If we use predicted idiosyncratic volatility instead of lagged idiosyncratic volatility, we also do not find the
5–1 spread to be most pronounced for stocks with the highest volatility.
  11
     We also construct a time-series estimate of conditional idiosyncratic volatility at the firm level using a time-
series regression of σi (t, t + 1) on lagged idiosyncratic volatility, firm size, firm book-to-market ratio, past six-
month return, stock return skewness, and turnover over the previous month. All the RHS variables are measured
at time t. We obtain similar results using these time-series forecasts as the cross-sectional forecasts reported here.
These results are available upon request. Spiegel and Wang (2005) report a positive relation between conditional
volatility and returns using estimates of conditional volatility computed from past monthly frequency returns. In
unreported results, we obtain a negative relation between returns and an estimate of conditional volatility over the
next day from an EGARCH(1,1) model estimated on the previous month of daily data.


                                                           27
high lagged idiosyncratic volatility have low returns. Only in the lowest Et [σi (t, t + 1)] quintile
is the 5–1 difference not statistically significant. In row 5, which contains stocks in the highest
quintile of predicted volatility, the 5–1 spread in L-FF alphas is an extremely large -2.18%
per month. In the last row, we construct lagged idiosyncratic volatility portfolios that control
for Et [σi (t, t + 1)]. Here, the 5–1 spread is a large -1.07% per month. In summary, lagged
idiosyncratic volatility has strong predictive power in addition to the information it contains
about future idiosyncratic volatility.


6.4.3. Lagged and Future Idiosyncratic Volatility

Finally, we examine the relation between lagged idiosyncratic volatility, σi (t−1, t), and realized
idiosyncratic volatility, σi (t, t+1). Realized idiosyncratic volatility over the next month is equal
to expected idiosyncratic volatility at the beginning of the month plus a rational expectations
error, σi2 (t, t+1) = Et [(ri (t, t+1)−Et (ri (t, t+1))2 ]+ui (t+1). Since any unbiased estimator of
true conditional volatility will be equal to realized volatility plus noise, examining how future
realized idiosyncratic volatility is related to returns may be a stronger control than using an
estimate of conditional volatility.
      However, any relation between realized returns and realized volatility is complicated by the
fact that estimates of the realized mean and realized variance are correlated because stock return
skewness is non-zero.12 To illustrate this, we compute the sample skewness of firms using daily
simple returns over the full sample. The average skewness across firms using simple returns is
1.33. This positive skewness would impart a positive correlation to realized mean returns and
realized volatilities. Using log returns can reduce this skewness because log returns do not have
the limited liability truncation at -100% of simple returns. If monthly skewness is computed
using daily log returns, the average skewness across firms is nearly zero at 0.09.
      Of course, the predictive relation between past idiosyncratic volatility and future returns
does not change if we measure idiosyncratic volatility using log returns, rather than simple
returns. For example, if we use log returns to compute idiosyncratic volatility (with all returns
in Eq. (1) expressed as continuously compounded returns), then the spread between quintile
portfolio L-FF alphas of U.S. stocks ranked on lagged idiosyncratic volatility is -1.27% per
month, with a robust t-statistic of -6.68, compared to a spread of -1.29% per month, with a
robust t-statistic of -6.71 reported in the first row of Table 9. It is only the contemporaneous
relation between realized returns and realized volatility which is affected by the skewness of
 12
      We thank a referee for raising this point.


                                                   28
stock returns.
     Because of the effect of skewness, to investigate how the relation between realized id-
iosyncratic volatility and realized returns differs from the relation between lagged idiosyncratic
volatility and future returns, we consider the idiosyncratic volatility of log returns only, σiL ,
which we denote with an L to differentiate it from the idiosyncratic volatility of simple returns.
Panel B of Table 12 reports L-FF alphas of quintile portfolios of U.S. stocks sorted by realized
idiosyncratic volatility, σiL (t, t + 1), measured at the end of month t + 1, and then sorted on
lagged idiosyncratic volatility, σiL (t − 1, t). Note that these portfolios are not tradeable because
the portfolio sorts are done using forward-looking information at the end of the month. These
are the returns that would accrue to an investor with perfect foresight of future idiosyncratic
volatility over the next month. We examine these sorts because they help to disentangle the
effects of lagged versus contemporaneous idiosyncratic volatility.
     Panel B of Table 12 shows that in every σiL (t, t + 1) quintile, returns tend to become more
negative as lagged idiosyncratic volatility increases. The last column labelled “5–1” is the
long-short portfolio which goes long the highest σiL (t − 1, t) portfolio and short the lowest
σiL (t − 1, t) portfolio within each contemporaneous volatility quintile. This column shows that
there is a large, statistically significant, negative return spread to lagged idiosyncratic volatility
in each of the realized volatility quintiles. This 5–1 spread ranges from -0.41% per month for
the first σiL (t, t + 1) quintile portfolio to a very large -2.12% in the fourth σiL (t, t + 1) quintile
portfolio.
     In the last row of Panel B, we report L-FF alphas of quintile portfolios of σiL (t−1, t) control-
ling for the effect of contemporaneous volatility. Controlling for contemporaneous idiosyncratic
volatility, the 5–1 return spread is a large -1.21% per month, which is highly significant with a
t-statistic of -6.63. Thus, future exposure to high idiosyncratic volatility does not explain why
the rewards to holding stocks with low past idiosyncratic volatility are so low.


7.     Conclusion
Around the world, stocks with recent past high idiosyncratic volatility tend to have much lower
returns than stocks with recent past low idiosyncratic volatility. We measure idiosyncratic
volatility with respect to local, regional, or world versions of the Fama and French (1993, 1998)
factor model. After sorting stocks across 23 countries on past idiosyncratic volatility, the differ-
ence in alphas adjusting for market, size and book-to-market factors between the highest quin-


                                                  29
tile of idiosyncratic volatility stocks and the lowest quintile of idiosyncratic volatility stocks is
a very large -1.31% per month. This effect is also strongly statistically significant. These low
returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks simultaneously appear in different world regions
and are robust to controlling for additional factor loadings and firm characteristics. Since these
results are out-of-sample relative to the earlier U.S. findings of Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang
(2006), they suggest that the high idiosyncratic volatility and low return relation is not just a
sample-specific or country-specific effect, but it is observed world-wide.
   We find that the low returns earned by stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility around the
world comove significantly with the idiosyncratic volatility effect in the United States. In partic-
ular, after controlling for U.S. portfolios comprising long positions in stocks with high idiosyn-
cratic volatilities and short positions in stocks with low idiosyncratic volatilities, the alphas of
portfolio strategies trading the idiosyncratic volatility effect in various international markets
are insignificant. Thus, the global idiosyncratic volatility effect is captured by a simple U.S.
idiosyncratic volatility factor. In contrast, the low returns of high idiosyncratic stocks in inter-
national markets cannot be explained by standard factors or risk loadings.
   However, we are hesitant to claim that the low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks
results from exposure to systematic risk. In further analysis on U.S. data, we rule out complete
explanations based on trading or clientele structures, higher moments, and information dissem-
ination. The low returns of stocks with past high idiosyncratic volatility cannot be explained by
the leverage interaction story of Johnson (2004) or by future exposure to idiosyncratic volatil-
ity. Our strong international results suggest that market-specific stories are also unlikely to
hold. We conclude that the puzzle of why high idiosyncratic volatility stocks have low returns
is a global phenomenon. Further research must investigate if there are true economic sources of
risk behind the idiosyncratic volatility phenomenon causing stocks with high volatility to have
low expected returns.




                                                 30
References
Adrian, T., Rosenberg, J, 2007. Stock returns and volatility: pricing the short-run and long-run components of
  market risk. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ang, A., Hodrick, R.J., Xing, Y., Zhang, X., 2006. The cross-section of volatility and expected returns. Journal of
  Finance 51, 259-299.

Baker, M., Coval, J., Stein, J.C., 2007. Corporate financing decisions when investors take the path of least
  resistance. Journal of Financial Economics 84, 266-298.

Bali, T., Cakici, N., Yan, X., Zhang, Z., 2005. Does idiosyncratic volatility really matter? Journal of Finance 60,
  905-29.

Bali, T., Cakici, N., 2005. Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected returns. Journal of Financial and
  Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Banz, R.W., 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks. Journal of Financial
  Economics 9, 3-18.

Barberis, N., Huang, M., 2005. Stocks as lotteries: the implications of probability weighting for security prices.
  Unpublished working paper, Yale University.

Bekaert, G., Hodrick, R.J., Zhang, X., 2005. International stock return comovements. Unpublished working
  paper, Cornell University.

Black, F., Jensen, M., Scholes, M.S., 1972. The capital asset pricing model: some empirical tests. In: Jensen, M.
   (Ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets, Praeger, New York, pp. 79-121.

Black, F., Scholes, M.S., 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of Political Economy 81,
   637-659.

Brandt, M.W., Brav, A., Graham, J.R., 2005. The idiosyncratic volatility puzzle: time trend or speculative
  episodes? Unpublished working paper, Duke University.

Brennan, M., Subrahmanyam, A., 1995. Investment analysis and price formation in securities markets. Journal of
  Financial Econometrics 38, 361-381.

Brooks, R., Del Negro, M., 2005. Country versus region effects in international stock returns. Journal of Portfolio
  Management 31, 67-72.

Brown, D.P., Ferreira, M.A., 2003. Information in the idiosyncratic volatility of small firms. Unpublished
  working paper, ISCTE Business School.

Campbell, J.Y., 1993. Intertemporal asset pricing without consumption data. American Economic Review 83,
  487-512.

Campbell, J.Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B.G., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become more volatile? an
  empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance 56, 1-44.

Chorida, T., Huh, S.W., Subrahmanyam, A., 2005. The cross-section of expected trading activity. Review of
  Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Daniel, K., Titman, S., 1997. Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional variation in stock returns. Journal
  of Finance 52, 1-33.

Diether, K.B., Malloy, C.J., Scherbina, A., 2002. Differences of opinion and the cross section of stock returns.
  Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.

Easley, D., O’Hara, M., 2004. Information and the cost of capital. Journal of Finance 59, 1553-1583.

Easley, D., Hvidkjaer, S., O’Hara, M., 2002. Is information risk a determinant of asset returns? Journal of Finance
  57, 2185-2221.


                                                         31
Engle, R.F., 1982. Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of United
  Kingdom inflation. Econometrica 50, 987-1008.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of Financial
  Economics 33, 3-56.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1998. Value versus growth: the international evidence. Journal of Finance 53,
  1975-1999.

Fama, E.F., MacBeth, J.D., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests. Journal of Political Economy 71,
  607-636.

Fu, F., 2005. Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns. Unpublished working paper,
   Rochester University.

Goyal, A., Santa-Clara, P., 2003. Idiosyncratic risk matters! Journal of Finance 58, 975-1007.

Guo, H., Savickas, R., 2007. Aggregate idiosyncratic volatility in G7 countries. Review of Financial Studies,
  forthcoming.

Harvey, C.R., Siddique, A., 2000. Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. Journal of Finance 55, 1263-1295.

Heston, S.L., 1993. A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to bond and
  currency options. Review of Financial Studies 6, 327-343.

Hong, H., Lim, T., Stein, J.C., 2000. Bad news travels slowly: size, analyst coverage, and the profitability of
  momentum strategies. Journal of Finance 55, 265-295.

Hou, K.W., Moskowitz, T., 2005. Market frictions, price delay, and the cross-section of expected returns. Review
  of Financial Studies 18, 981-1020.

Huang, W., Liu, Q., Rhee, G., Zhang, L., 2006. Another look at idiosyncratic risk and expected returns.
  Unpublished working paper, University of Hawaii at Manoa.

Jagannathan, R., Wang, Z., 1996. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected returns. Journal of
   Finance 51, 3-53.

Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S., 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for stock market
   efficiency. Journal of Finance 48, 65-92.

Jiang, G.J., Xu, D., Yao, T., 2005. The information content of idiosyncratic volatility. Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Johnson, T., 2004. Forecast dispersion and the cross section of expected returns. Journal of Finance 59,
   1957-1978.

Kumar, A., 2007. Who gambles in the stock market? Unpublished working paper, UT Austin.

Ledoit, O., Santa-Clara, P., Yan, S., 2002. Relative pricing of options with stochastic volatility. Unpublished
  working paper, UCLA.

Lesmond, D.A., Ogden, J.P., Trzcinka, C.A., 1999. A new estimate of transaction costs. Review of Financial
  Studies 12, 1113-1141.

Lo, A.W., MacKinlay, A.C., 1990. Data-snooping biases in tests of financial asset pricing models. Review of
  Financial Studies 3, 431-467.

Merton, R.C., 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest rates. Journal of Finance 29,
  449-470.

Merton, R.C., 1987. Presidential address: a simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
  information. Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

                                                         32
Miller, E., 1977. Risk, uncertainty and divergence of opinion. Journal of Finance 32, 1151-1168.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1987. A simple positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
  consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703-8.

Rouwenhorst, K.G., 1998. International momentum strategies. Journal of Finance 53, 267-284.

Shanken, J., 1992. On the estimation of beta pricing models. Review of Financial Studies 5, 1-34.

Spiegel, M., Wang, X., 2005. Cross-sectional variation in stock returns: liquidity and idiosyncratic risk.
   Unpublished working paper, Yale University.

Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1992. Advances in prospect theory: cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal
  of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297-323.

Wei, S., Zhang, C., 2005. Idiosyncratic volatility does not matter: a re-examination of the relation between
  average returns and average volatilities. Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 603-621.

Zhang, X.F., 2006. Information uncertainty and stock returns. Journal of Finance 61, 105-135.




                                                        33
                          Table 1: Summary Statistics of International Data

                                     Panel A: Individual Country Returns
                                                                                                  Idiosyncratic
                                                                                                    Volatility
                     Starting   Book-                   Number        Number       Total
                     Year       to-Market       Size    of Firms      of Months    Volatility    W-FF      R-FF

    G7 Countries

    Canada              1980           0.98     628            380           280        44%       40%      40%
    France              1980           1.05     847            384           280        37%       33%      32%
    Germany             1980           0.71     951            443           280        32%       28%      27%
    Italy               1980           0.90    1286            118           280        35%       31%      30%
    Japan               1980           0.70    1568           1453           280        39%       33%      31%
    U.K.                1980           0.91     818           1077           280        30%       26%      25%
    U.S.                1980           0.81     975           5441           280        57%       51%      51%†

    Other Developed Markets

    Australia           1980           0.97     626            292           280        41%       37%      37%
    Austria             1980           1.30     183             58           280        27%       24%      23%
    Belgium             1980           1.40     504             79           280        29%       26%      25%
    Denmark             1980           1.18     230            131           280        29%       26%      25%
    Finland             1986           0.74     662             87           201        42%       38%      37%
    Greece              1987           0.78     182            172           189        47%       43%      42%
    Hong Kong           1980           1.29     784            242           280        44%       40%      40%
    Ireland             1980           1.13     467             39           280        38%       35%      34%
    Netherlands         1980           1.22    1632            116           280        31%       27%      26%
    New Zealand         1985           0.99     390             46           213        39%       36%      35%
    Norway              1980           0.82     282             81           280        42%       38%      37%
    Portugal            1987           1.24     419             58           189        35%       31%      30%
    Singapore           1980           0.94     358            122           280        38%       34%      34%
    Spain               1986           0.96    1589            105           203        33%       29%      28%
    Sweden              1982           0.98     510            165           261        43%       39%      38%
    Switzerland         1980           1.11    1049            174           278        31%       27%      26%


                                     Panel B: Global and Regional Factors

                       World                  N. America                Europe                  Far East

                   Mean      Stdev         Mean        Stdev         Mean     Stdev        Mean       Stdev

        M KT      0.55%     4.37%          0.66%       4.61%         0.63%    4.94%       0.45%      6.54%
        SM B      0.17%     3.41%         -0.08%       4.72%         0.23%    3.04%       0.53%      4.74%
        HM L      0.42%     2.27%          0.15%       3.01%         0.57%    2.09%       0.72%      3.98%


All returns are denominated in U.S. dollars and are at a monthly frequency. In Panel A, the sample for each
country begins in January of the year stated in the “Starting Year” column and ends in December 2003. The
columns “Book-to-Market” and “Size” report average firm characteristics within each country of book-to-
market ratios and market capitalization in U.S. dollars of the average number of firms reported in the column
“Number of Firms.” The column “Number of Months” reports the number of monthly observations for each
country. The last three columns report total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility with respect to the R-FF (see
Eq. (2)) and W-FF models (see Eq. (3)) using daily data over the previous month in both regressions, with the
exception of the U.S., which is marked with a † , where we report L-FF idiosyncratic volatility (see Eq. (1))
in place of R-FF idiosyncratic volatility. We report the average time-series
                                                                      √      of volatilities across firms in each
country and express the units in annualized terms by multiplying by 250. In Panel B, we report means and
standard deviations of monthly W-FF and R-FF factors over the sample period January 1980 to December
2003.
                                                         34
           Table 2: Idiosyncratic Volatility and Expected Returns in G7 Countries
                                Canada     France       Germany        Italy    Japan      U.K.      U.S.

Panel A: USD Denominated Returns

Constant                         1.723      0.602            0.753     0.425     0.948     0.480     1.746
                                 [3.68]     [1.13]           [1.87]    [0.76]    [1.25]    [1.03]    [3.83]
W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility   -1.224     -1.439           -2.003    -1.572    -1.955    -0.871    -2.014
                                [-2.46]    [-2.14]          [-3.85]   [-2.10]   [-5.18]   [-2.54]   [-6.67]
β(M KT W )                       0.344      0.059            0.277    -0.083     0.323     0.178     0.376
                                 [2.20]     [0.44]           [1.93]   [-0.32]    [3.12]    [1.46]    [4.52]
β(SM B W )                       0.009      0.015           -0.083     0.116     0.050     0.032    -0.049
                                 [0.12]     [0.17]          [-0.82]    [0.56]    [0.76]    [0.42]   [-1.19]
β(HM LW )                       -0.070     -0.069            0.076    -0.221    -0.025    -0.077    -0.051
                                [-0.95]    [-0.94]           [1.00]   [-1.98]   [-0.35]   [-1.30]   [-1.69]
Size                            -0.253     -0.067           -0.044    -0.031    -0.132    -0.058    -0.157
                                [-4.81]    [-1.08]          [-1.09]   [-0.47]   [-1.72]   [-1.16]   [-3.14]
Book-to-Market                   0.369      0.569            0.176     0.239     0.550     0.365     0.282
                                 [3.68]     [4.59]           [1.35]    [1.48]    [3.84]    [4.46]    [3.87]
Lagged Return                    0.014      0.001            0.003     0.001    -0.011     0.012    -0.001
                                 [3.57]     [0.10]           [1.01]    [0.15]   [-2.85]    [4.07]    [0.28]

Adjusted R2                      0.118         0.108        0.114     0.147     0.124     0.078     0.046


Percentiles of W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility

25th Percentile                   20.8         21.4          16.3      21.5      23.1      13.9      25.0
75th Percentile                   46.0         39.2          34.8      38.4      39.6      31.3      61.1

Economic Effect of Moving from the 25th to the 75th W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility Percentiles
25% → 75%                    -0.31% -0.26%          -0.37%    -0.27% -0.32% -0.15% -0.73%


Panel B: Local Currency Denominated Returns

Constant                         1.730      0.319            0.554     0.653     0.657     0.513
                                 [3.70]     [0.56]           [1.34]    [1.10]    [0.94]    [1.11]
L-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility   -1.332     -1.057           -1.769    -1.865    -2.035    -0.934
                                [-2.59]    [-1.64]          [-3.38]   [-2.76]   [-5.89]   [-2.63]
β(M KT W )                       0.422      0.133            0.413     0.014     0.999     0.525
                                 [2.64]     [0.71]           [2.13]    [0.05]    [5.76]    [3.59]
β(SM B W )                       0.123     -0.044            0.037    -0.011    -0.016    -0.048
                                 [1.30]    [-0.45]           [0.37]   [-0.07]   [-0.15]   [-0.54]
β(HM LW )                       -0.077      0.114            0.178    -0.126     0.012    -0.022
                                [-0.82]     [1.31]           [2.10]   [-1.11]    [0.10]   [-0.38]
Size                            -0.254     -0.041           -0.039    -0.080    -0.143    -0.090
                                [-4.84]    [-0.65]          [-0.95]   [-1.19]   [-2.01]   [-1.72]
Book-to-Market                   0.406      0.571            0.147     0.253     0.552     0.321
                                 [3.68]     [4.74]           [1.03]    [1.77]    [3.94]    [4.04]
Lagged Return                    0.015      0.001            0.001     0.001    -0.011     0.012
                                 [3.69]     [0.29]           [0.42]    [0.16]   [-2.90]    [4.09]

Adjusted R2                      0.110         0.107        0.115     0.144     0.131     0.073




                                                       35
Note to Table 2

The table reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions (Eq. (4)) for the individual G7 countries. We
regress monthly excess firm returns onto a constant; idiosyncratic volatility over the past month with respect
to the W-FF model in Eq. (3); contemporaneous factor loadings, β(M KT W ), β(SM B W ) and β(HM LW )
with respect to the W-FF model; and firm characteristics at the beginning of the month. “Size” is the log
market capitalization of the firm at the beginning of the month, “Book-to-Market” is the book-to-market ratio
available six months prior, and “Lagged Return” is the firm return over the previous six months. We report
the robust t-statistics in square brackets below each coefficient. The row “Adjusted R2 ” reports the average
of the cross-sectional adjusted R2 s. Each cross-sectional regression is run separately for each country using
USD denominated firm excess returns in Panel A and local currency denominated firm excess returns in
Panel B. In Panel A, we also report the 25th and 75th percentiles of each country’s W-FF idiosyncratic
volatility and compute the economic effect of moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile. For example,
for Canada, a move from the 25th to the 75th percentile of W-FF idiosyncratic volatility would result in a
decrease in a stock’s expected return of | − 1.224| × (0.460 − 0.208) = 0.31% per month. The sample
period is from January 1980 to December 2003 for all countries.




                                                     36
        Table 3: Idiosyncratic Volatility and Expected Returns Across All Countries

                                  Geographic Areas              G7 Countries               All Countries

                                  Europe    Far East         G7       G7 Ex U.S.         All     All Ex U.S.

 Constant                          0.823      1.402          1.382       0.871          1.320        0.861
                                   [2.11]     [2.27]         [3.64]      [2.11]         [3.58]       [2.15]
 W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility    -0.668     -1.177         -1.747      -1.069         -1.536       -0.604
                                  [-2.33]    [-3.17]        [-6.40]     [-4.14]        [-5.82]      [-2.32]
 β(M KT W )                        0.145      0.209          0.367       0.331          0.314        0.238
                                   [1.31]     [2.18]         [4.52]      [3.73]         [3.94]       [2.78]
 β(SM B W )                        0.026     -0.020         -0.055      -0.031         -0.048       -0.039
                                   [0.39]    [-0.26]        [-1.38]     [-0.59]        [-1.15]      [-0.71]
 β(HM LW )                        -0.071     -0.039         -0.057      -0.067         -0.048       -0.051
                                  [-1.48]    [-0.59]        [-1.77]     [-1.22]        [-1.57]      [-1.02]
 Size                             -0.087     -0.190         -0.111      -0.099         -0.107       -0.107
                                  [-2.45]    [-3.19]        [-2.89]     [-2.73]        [-2.95]      [-3.16]
 Book-to-Market                    0.189      0.517          0.293       0.275          0.268        0.241
                                   [5.51]     [3.52]         [6.01]      [5.15]         [6.79]       [5.85]
 Lagged Return                     0.010     -0.006          0.000       0.003          0.001        0.004
                                   [3.57]    [-1.45]         [0.12]      [1.31]         [0.58]       [1.78]
 Dummy Canada                                               -0.054       0.240         -0.055        0.190
                                                            [-0.26]      [0.81]        [-0.26]       [0.64]
 Dummy France                      0.254                    -0.060       0.275         -0.024        0.278
                                   [0.79]                   [-0.15]      [0.84]        [-0.06]       [0.84]
 Dummy Germany                    -0.190                    -0.552      -0.195         -0.527       -0.190
                                  [-0.59]                   [-1.49]     [-0.58]        [-1.41]      [-0.58]
 Dummy Italy                       0.517                     0.291       0.636          0.324        0.630
                                   [1.01]                    [0.52]      [1.22]         [0.58]       [1.22]
 Dummy Japan                                                -0.128      -0.043         -0.133       -0.040
                                                            [-0.25]     [-0.10]        [-0.26]      [-0.08]
 Dummy U.K.                                                 -0.311                     -0.280
                                                            [-0.94]                    [-0.84]
 Dummy Other Country               0.081                                               -0.104       0.176
                                   [0.34]                                              [-0.33]      [0.79]

 Adjusted R2                       0.114      0.115         0.105       0.168           0.099       0.144


The table reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions (Eq. (4)) for all 23 countries. The regressions are split
into geographic areas (Europe and the Far East), the G7 (with and without the U.S.) and all countries (with
and without the U.S.). We regress next month excess firm returns onto a constant; idiosyncratic volatility over
the past month with respect to the W-FF model in Eq. (3); contemporaneous factor loadings, β(M KT W ),
β(SM B W ) and β(HM LW ) with respect to the W-FF model; and firm characteristics at the beginning of the
month. “Size” is the log market capitalization of the firm at the beginning of the month, “Book-to-Market” is
the book-to-market ratio available six months prior, and “Lagged Return” is the firm return over the previous
six months. The cross-sectional regressions are run with separate dummy variables taking the value one if the
firm belongs to one of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, U.K., or another non-U.S. country, and zero
otherwise. We report the robust t-statistics in square brackets below each coefficient. The row “Adjusted R2 ”
reports the average of the cross-sectional adjusted R2 s. Each cross-sectional regression is run separately for
each geographic area or group of countries using USD denominated firm excess returns. The sample period
is from January 1980 to December 2003, with returns for most countries commencing in 1980, but some
smaller countries start in the mid-1980s (see Table 1).




                                                       37
                       Table 4: Weighted Fama-MacBeth (1973) Regressions

                                      Geographic Areas                  G7 Countries                All Countries

                                  U.S.     Europe    Far East         G7      G7 Ex U.S.         All      All Ex U.S.

Constant                         1.796      0.752      1.203         1.459       0.886           1.362       0.846
                                 [3.93]     [1.92]     [1.91]        [3.92]      [2.11]          [3.79]      [2.06]
W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility   -2.243     -0.893     -1.267        -1.974      -1.287          -1.750      -0.846
                                [-7.00]    [-3.17]    [-3.38]       [-6.89]     [-4.90]         [-6.41]     [-3.26]
β(M KT W )                       0.368      0.121      0.170         0.351       0.320           0.297       0.224
                                 [3.95]     [1.03]     [1.67]        [3.88]      [3.35]          [3.23]      [2.33]
β(SM B W )                      -0.086      0.016     -0.016        -0.084      -0.046          -0.077      -0.055
                                [-1.84]    [0.24]     [-0.22]       [-1.85]     [-0.84]         [-1.67]     [-1.00]
β(HM LW )                       -0.041     -0.058     -0.025        -0.035      -0.056          -0.027      -0.035
                                [-1.16]    [-1.17]    [-0.37]       [-0.88]     [-0.94]         [-0.71]     [-0.64]
Size                            -0.141     -0.067     -0.151        -0.102      -0.088          -0.092      -0.087
                                [-2.98]    [-1.86]    [-2.52]       [-2.80]     [-2.32]         [-2.69]     [-2.46]
Book-to-Market                   0.241      0.206      0.542         0.270       0.298           0.247       0.255
                                 [3.20]     [5.34]     [3.56]        [5.18]      [5.21]          [6.02]      [5.78]
Lagged Return                    0.001      0.010     -0.006         0.002       0.003           0.003       0.004
                                 [0.61]     [3.83]    [-1.39]        [0.71]      [1.06]          [1.17]      [1.59]
Dummy Canada                                                        -0.153       0.169          -0.150       0.122
                                                                    [-0.79]      [0.59]         [-0.77]      [0.43]
Dummy France                                0.250                   -0.089       0.258          -0.052       0.260
                                            [0.80]                  [-0.24]      [0.81]         [-0.14]      [0.81]
Dummy Germany                              -0.149                   -0.554      -0.166          -0.527      -0.170
                                           [-0.48]                  [-1.56]     [-0.51]         [-1.48]     [-0.51]
Dummy Italy                                 0.456                    0.188       0.561           0.219       0.550
                                            [0.94]                   [0.36]      [1.14]          [0.42]      [1.13]
Dummy Japan                                                         -0.256      -0.131          -0.256      -0.120
                                                                    [-0.53]     [-0.31]         [-0.53]     [-0.29]
Dummy U.K.                                                          -0.316                      -0.285
                                                                    [-1.01]                     [-0.91]
Dummy Other Country                        0.061                                                -0.170       0.121
                                           [0.27]                                               [-0.58]      [0.56]

Adjusted R2                      0.053     0.123      0.120         0.126        0.181          0.120        0.158


 The table reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions (Eq. (4)) for all 23 countries, where each firm is weighted
 by the firm’s market capitalization in U.S. dollars at the start of the month. The regressions are split into
 geographic areas (U.S., Europe, and the Far East), the G7 (with and without the U.S.) and all countries (with
 and without the U.S.). We regress next month excess firm returns onto a constant; idiosyncratic volatility over
 the past month with respect to the W-FF model in Eq. (3); contemporaneous factor loadings, β(M KT W ),
 β(SM B W ) and β(HM LW ) with respect to the W-FF model; and firm characteristics at the beginning of the
 month. “Size” is the log market capitalization of the firm at the beginning of the month, “Book-to-Market” is
 the book-to-market ratio available six months prior, and “Lagged Return” is the firm return over the previous
 six months. The cross-sectional regressions are run with separate dummy variables taking the value one if the
 firm belongs to one of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, U.K., or another non-U.S. country, and zero
 otherwise. We report the robust t-statistics in square brackets below each coefficient. The row “Adjusted R2 ”
 reports the average of the cross-sectional adjusted R2 s. Each cross-sectional regression is run separately for
 each geographic area or group of countries using USD denominated firm excess returns. The sample period
 is from January 1980 to December 2003, with returns for most countries commencing in 1980, but some
 smaller countries start in the mid-1980s (see Table 1).




                                                      38
                             Table 5: Effect of Different Formation Periods to Compute Idiosyncratic Volatility
                                                     U.S.                                 All Countries                           All Excluding U.S.

     Formation Period                (t − 3, t)   (t − 6, t)   (t − 12, t)   (t − 3, t)    (t − 6, t)     (t − 12, t)   (t − 3, t)    (t − 6, t)   (t − 12, t)

     Constant                          2.104        1.879        1.125         1.703         1.576          1.054         1.008         0.990        0.864
                                       [5.00]      [4.39]        [2.57]        [4.93]       [4.70]          [3.09]        [2.57]       [2.49]        [2.20]
     W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility    -2.461       -2.091       -1.273        -2.050        -1.765         -1.188        -0.930        -0.685       -0.605
                                      [-5.68]      [-4.35]      [-2.60]       [-6.05]       [-5.02]        [-3.32]       [-2.93]       [-2.07]      [-1.98]
     β(M KT W )                        0.388        0.364        0.346         0.322         0.302          0.289         0.249         0.256        0.253
                                       [4.80]      [4.59]        [4.35]        [4.07]       [3.82]          [3.64]        [2.89]       [2.99]        [2.88]
     β(SM B W )                       -0.052       -0.055       -0.046        -0.052        -0.056         -0.051        -0.041        -0.043       -0.032
                                      [-1.30]      [-1.37]      [-1.17]       [-1.24]       [-1.31]        [-1.16]       [-0.72]       [-0.75]      [-0.55]
     β(HM LW )                        -0.057       -0.055       -0.055        -0.052        -0.049         -0.050        -0.048        -0.044       -0.048
                                      [-1.93]      [-1.87]      [-1.83]       [-1.72]       [-1.60]        [-1.62]       [-0.95]       [-0.88]      [-0.89]
     Size                             -0.190       -0.170       -0.095        -0.138        -0.129         -0.080        -0.123        -0.121       -0.106
                                      [-4.09]      [-3.60]      [-2.05]       [-3.99]       [-3.74]        [-2.35]       [-3.66]       [-3.56]      [-2.95]
     Book-to-Market                    0.276        0.305        0.411         0.265         0.280          0.387         0.250         0.247        0.352




39
                                       [3.92]      [4.12]        [4.17]        [6.92]       [6.99]          [6.98]        [6.08]       [6.06]        [6.93]
     Lagged Return                    -0.001       -0.001       -0.001         0.002         0.002          0.001         0.005         0.005        0.004
                                      [-0.28]      [-0.22]      [-0.19]       [0.76]         [0.80]         [0.57]        [1.86]        [1.77]       [1.15]
     Dummy Canada                                                             -0.085        -0.057         -0.062         0.249         0.201        0.150
                                                                              [-0.40]       [-0.27]        [-0.29]        [0.83]        [0.67]      [0.50]
     Dummy France                                                             -0.029         0.070          0.131         0.338         0.375        0.345
                                                                              [-0.07]        [0.18]        [0.36]         [1.03]        [1.16]      [1.08]
     Dummy Germany                                                            -0.565        -0.476         -0.374        -0.145        -0.130       -0.140
                                                                              [-1.53]       [-1.31]        [-1.02]       [-0.44]       [-0.39]      [-0.41]
     Dummy Italy                                                               0.112         0.001          0.114         0.412         0.230        0.359
                                                                               [0.22]        [0.00]         [0.22]        [0.88]        [0.50]       [0.76]
     Dummy Japan                                                              -0.171        -0.186         -0.162        -0.001        -0.057       -0.070
                                                                              [-0.33]       [-0.36]        [-0.31]       [-0.00]       [-0.13]      [-0.16]
     Dummy U.K.                                                               -0.379        -0.309         -0.186
                                                                              [-1.13]       [-0.92]        [-0.56]
     Dummy Other Country                                                      -0.154        -0.131         -0.104        0.198         0.163         0.115
                                                                              [-0.49]       [-0.42]        [-0.33]       [0.89]        [0.73]        [0.50]

     Adjusted R2                      0.048        0.048         0.050        0.101          0.101          0.105        0.145         0.143         0.149
Note to Table 5

The table reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions (Eq. (4)) for all 23 countries. The regressions
are split into three groups U.S., all countries, and all countries excluding the U.S. We regress next month
excess firm returns onto a constant; idiosyncratic volatility computed using daily returns over the past 3, 6, or
12 months with respect to the W-FF model in Eq. (3) all expressed in annualized terms, which are denoted as
denoted by (t − 3, t), (t − 6, t), and (t − 12, t), respectively; contemporaneous factor loadings, β(M KT W ),
β(SM B W ) and β(HM LW ) with respect to the W-FF model; and firm characteristics at the beginning of the
month. “Size” is the log market capitalization of the firm at the beginning of the month, “Book-to-Market” is
the book-to-market ratio available six months prior, and “Lagged Return” is the firm return over the previous
six months. The cross-sectional regressions are run with separate dummy variables taking the value one if
the firm belongs to one of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, U.K., or another non-U.S. country, and
zero otherwise. We report robust t-statistics in square brackets below each coefficient. The row “Adjusted
R2 ” reports the average of the cross-sectional adjusted R2 s. Each cross-sectional regression is run separately
for each geographic area or group of countries using USD denominated firm excess returns. The sample
period is from January 1980 to December 2003, with returns for most countries commencing in 1980, but
some smaller countries start in the mid-1980s (see Table 1).




                                                      40
                      Table 6: International Idiosyncratic Volatility Portfolios

                       Geographic Areas              G7 Countries                  All Countries

                       Europe     Far East         G7        G7 Ex U.S.         All      All Ex U.S.

             Panel A: W-FF Alphas

             1 Low      0.172      -0.063         0.153        -0.011          0.163        0.040
                       [0.95]      [-0.24]        [2.19]       [-0.06]         [2.40]       [0.25]
             2          0.084      -0.086         0.065        -0.059          0.069       -0.026
                       [0.44]      [-0.30]        [1.16]       [-0.31]         [1.35]      [-0.16]
             3         -0.021       0.055         0.027        -0.040          0.031       -0.011
                       [-0.11]     [0.19]         [0.34]       [-0.23]         [0.45]      [-0.07]
             4         -0.263      -0.187        -0.433        -0.290         -0.416       -0.280
                       [-1.26]     [-0.58]       [-3.26]       [-1.46]        [-3.44]      [-1.61]
             5 High    -0.551      -0.592        -1.201        -0.663         -1.144       -0.629
                       [-2.19]     [-1.59]       [-6.10]       [-2.83]        [-6.39]      [-3.08]

             5–1       -0.723      -0.529        -1.353        -0.651         -1.307       -0.670
                       [-3.01]     [-1.84]       [-5.46]       [-2.77]        [-5.68]      [-3.16]


             Panel B: Raw Average Returns

             5–1       -0.412      -0.270        -0.927        -0.388         -0.893       -0.396
                       [-1.50]     [-0.83]       [-2.55]       [-1.36]        [-2.62]      [-1.49]


For every month, within each country, we first sort firms into quintile portfolios according to the W-FF
idiosyncratic volatility measure in Eq. (3) using daily firm returns over the previous month. We aggregate
the country quintile portfolios into regional portfolios, reported in the table for geographic areas (Europe and
the Far East), the G7 countries (with and without the U.S.), and across all 23 developed markets (with and
without the U.S.). Each regional W-FF idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolio is a value-weighted sum of
the country quintile portfolios, with the weights being the market capitalization of the corresponding country
quintile portfolios. Portfolio 1 contains firms with the lowest volatilities and portfolio 5 contains firms with
the highest volatilities, while “5–1” represents a strategy that goes long the highest volatility quintile and goes
short the lowest volatility quintile. In Panel A, we report the time-series alpha with respect to the W-FF model
for different regions and in Panel B, we report the raw return differences between the fifth and first quintile
portfolios. We report robust t-statistics in square brackets below each W-FF alpha (Panel A) and below the
differences in raw returns (Panel B). The sample period is from September 1980 to December 2003.




                                                        41
  Table 7: International Comovement in Idiosyncratic Volatility Portfolios

                     Alpha     M KT W    SM B W   HM LW     V OLU S   Adjusted R2

Panel A: Using the W-FF Model

U.S. (V OLU S )      -1.952     0.733    1.307    -0.311                 0.51
                     [-5.59]    [8.56]   [13.1]   [-1.88]
Europe               -0.723     0.456    0.433     0.004                 0.29
                     [-3.01]    [7.72]   [6.32]    [0.04]
Far East             -0.529     0.339    0.699    -0.087                 0.28
                     [-1.84]    [4.82]   [8.54]   [-0.64]
G7                   -1.353     0.622    1.028    -0.220                 0.57
                     [-5.46]    [10.2]   [14.6]   [-1.88]
G7 Excluding U.S.    -0.651     0.432    0.618    -0.087                 0.37
                     [-2.77]    [7.49]   [9.23]   [-0.79]
All                  -1.307     0.596    0.966    -0.189                 0.58
                     [-5.69]    [10.6]   [14.8]   [-1.75]
All Excluding U.S.   -0.670     0.428    0.597    -0.050                 0.41
                     [-3.16]    [8.24]   [9.89]   [-0.50]

Panel B: Using Only V OLU S

Europe               0.134                                   0.370       0.42
                     [0.63]                                  [14.1]
Far East             0.130                                   0.271       0.16
                     [0.43]                                  [7.29]
G7                   0.121                                   0.723       0.90
                     [1.04]                                  [50.6]
G7 Excluding U.S.    0.176                                   0.362       0.37
                     [0.77]                                  [12.8]
All                  0.081                                   0.673       0.89
                     [0.71]                                  [47.6]
All Excluding U.S.   0.148                                   0.348       0.40
                     [0.71]                                  [13.6]

Panel C: Using W-FF and V OLU S

Europe               -0.104     0.223    0.018     0.103     0.317       0.44
                     [-0.46]    [3.78]   [0.23]    [1.01]    [8.61]
Far East             -0.475     0.319    0.662    -0.078     0.028       0.27
                     [-1.57]    [4.02]   [6.35]   [-0.57]    [0.56]
G7                   -0.115     0.157    0.199    -0.023     0.635       0.91
                     [-0.98]    [5.12]   [4.92]   [-0.43]    [33.1]
G7 Excluding U.S.    -0.245     0.279    0.346    -0.023     0.208       0.43
                     [-1.04]    [4.52]   [4.25]   [-0.21]    [5.40]
All                  -0.176     0.171    0.208    -0.009     0.580       0.91
                     [-1.53]    [5.69]   [5.25]   [-0.18]    [30.9]
All Excluding U.S.   -0.283     0.283    0.338     0.012     0.198       0.47
                     [-1.34]    [5.11]   [4.63]    [0.13]    [5.73]




                                         42
Note to Table 7

For every month, within each country, we sort firms into quintile portfolios according to the W-FF
idiosyncratic volatility measure (see Eq. (3)) using daily firm returns over the previous month. We aggregate
the country quintile portfolios into regional quintile portfolios, for geographic areas (Europe and the Far
East), the G7 countries (with and without the U.S.), and across all 23 developed markets (with and without
the U.S.). Each regional W-FF idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolio is a value-weighted sum of the
country quintile portfolios, with the weights being the market capitalization of the corresponding quintile
portfolios in each country. Within each region, we create a “5–1” strategy that goes long the highest
idiosyncratic volatility quintile and goes short the quintile portfolio with the highest idiosyncratic volatility
stocks. For the U.S., we denote this 5–1 strategy as V OLU S . The table reports the estimates of regressions
from the full sample monthly returns of the 5–1 regional strategies onto a constant, the three W-FF factors,
and the V OLU S returns. We report the robust t-statistics in square brackets below each coefficient. The
sample period is from September 1980 to December 2003.




                                                      43
                                Table 8: Control Variables for the U.S.

                                      I         II          III       IV        V         VI        VII

Panel A: L-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility

Constant                             1.101      4.003      4.074     1.926     1.923      3.326      4.964
                                     [1.45]     [6.69]     [5.21]    [2.81]    [3.08]     [6.27]    [3.98]
L-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility      -1.117      -1.023     -1.767    -0.789    -0.759     -0.937    -1.813
                                   [-3.24]     [-4.76]    [-5.02]   [-2.31]   [-2.96]    [-4.17]   [-4.27]
β(M KT L )                           0.012     -0.002      0.148    -0.001    -0.019      0.023      0.101
                                     [0.15]    [-0.04]     [1.82]   [-0.01]   [-0.33]     [0.42]    [1.19]
β(HM LL )                           -0.011      0.017     -0.067    -0.013     0.018      0.007    -0.075
                                   [-0.24]      [0.64]    [-1.53]   [-0.28]    [0.60]     [0.24]   [-1.51]
β(SM B L )                          -0.151     -0.060     -0.114    -0.087    -0.032     -0.057    -0.117
                                   [-3.58]     [-2.67]    [-2.61]   [-1.64]   [-0.98]    [-2.38]   [-2.15]
Size                                 0.007     -0.222     -0.217    -0.068    -0.085     -0.179    -0.278
                                     [0.13]    [-5.72]    [-3.83]   [-1.47]   [-2.12]    [-4.61]   [-3.29]
Book-to-Market                       0.217      0.404      0.448     0.452     0.549      0.422      0.431
                                     [2.82]     [7.35]     [4.04]    [4.11]    [7.80]     [7.39]    [3.37]
Lagged Return                        0.686      0.606      1.280     0.894     0.808      0.616      0.966
                                     [3.17]     [3.74]     [6.42]    [4.82]    [4.17]     [3.74]    [4.08]
PIN                                  0.351
                                     [0.62]
Percentage of Zero Returns                     -0.459                                              -1.654
                                               [-1.65]                                             [-3.80]
Analyst Coverage                                           0.012                                    0.026
                                                           [1.32]                                   [2.49]
Institutional Ownership                                              0.004                          0.001
                                                                     [1.47]                         [0.49]
Delay                                                                         -0.099                0.723
                                                                              [-0.10]               [0.34]
Skewness                                                                                 -0.148     0.048
                                                                                         [-6.76]    [1.12]

Adjusted R2                         0.052       0.051      0.075     0.059     0.067      0.049     0.088
Average Number of Stocks            1675        3447         697       776       994      3447        556

Sample Period                     Jan 84–     Aug 63–     Jul 76–   Jul 81–   Jul 65–   Aug 63–    Jul 81–
                                   Dec 01      Dec 03      Jun 01    Jun 00   Dec 01     Dec 03     Jun 00


Panel B: Coefficients Using Total Volatility

Total Volatility                   -1.043      -0.968     -1.673    -0.723    -0.717     -0.884    -1.730
                                   [-3.18]     [-4.67]    [-4.80]   [-2.21]   [-2.88]    [-4.09]   [-4.10]


Panel C: Coefficients Using W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility

W-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility      -1.084      -0.778     -1.642    -0.797    -0.693     -0.636    -1.873
                                   [-3.17]     [-3.10]    [-4.23]   [-2.31]   [-2.37]    [-2.43]   [-4.25]




                                                     44
Note to Table 8

Panel A reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions in Eq. (4) for U.S. stocks using L-FF idiosyn-
cratic volatility (see Eq. (1)). We regress next month excess firm returns onto a constant; idiosyncratic
volatility over the past month with respect to the L-FF model; contemporaneous factor loadings, β(M KT L ),
β(SM B L ) and β(HM LL ) with respect to the U.S. L-FF model; firm characteristics at the beginning of the
period, and various control variables. “Size” is the log market capitalization of the firm at the beginning of
the month, “Book-to-Market” is the book-to-market ratio available six months prior, and “Lagged Return” is
the firm return over the previous six months. “PIN” is the Easley, Hvidkajer and O’Hara (2002) measure of
private information; “Percentage of Zero Returns” is the proportion of daily returns equal to zero constructed
by Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999); “Analyst Coverage,” “Institutional Ownership,” and “Delay”
measures are from Hou and Moskowitz (2003). In Panels B and C, we report only the Fama-MacBeth
coefficients on total volatility and W-FF idiosyncratic volatility using Eq. (3), but the regressions use the
same variables as Panel A, except these are not reported to save space. We report robust t-statistics in square
brackets below each coefficient. The row “Adjusted R2 ” reports the average of the cross-sectional adjusted
R2 s. The sample periods in Panel B are exactly the same as Panel A. In Panel C, the end of the sample
periods are exactly the same as Panel A, but regressions II, III, V, and VI start in August 1980, whereas the
sample periods for regressions I, IV and VII are identical to Panel A.




                                                     45
           Table 9: L-FF Alphas of U.S. Portfolios Sorted on Idiosyncratic Volatility

                                     Ranking on Idiosyncratic Volatility

                                                                                               Ave No
                               1 Low        2          3         4      5 High      5–1      of Stocks         Sample

No Controls                    0.103      0.027     0.067     -0.398    -1.186     -1.290          956    Aug 63 – Dec 03
                               [2.15]     [0.56]    [1.00]    [-3.84]   [-7.12]    [-6.71]

PIN                            0.054     -0.107     -0.081    -0.276    -0.950     -1.004          185    Jan 84 – Dec 01
                               [0.54]    [-0.98]    [-0.67]   [-2.22]   [-5.59]    [-4.56]

Proportion of Zero Returns     -0.014    -0.045     -0.039    -0.379    -1.116     -1.101          956    Aug 63 – Dec 03
                               [-0.31]   [-0.82]    [-0.61]   [-4.96]   [-8.71]    [-7.35]

Analyst Coverage               0.658      0.910     0.831      0.733    -0.029     -0.687          114    Jul 76 – Jun 01
                               [3.14]     [3.56]    [2.92]     [2.33]   [-0.07]    [-2.13]

Institutional Ownership        0.065      0.093     0.096     -0.117    -1.087     -1.152           95    Jul 81 – Jun 00
                               [0.54]     [0.91]    [0.69]    [-0.87]   [-5.89]    [-4.73]

Delay                          0.064      0.196     0.034      0.016    -0.603     -0.667          241    Jul 65 – Dec 01
                               [0.92]     [2.79]    [0.45]     [0.16]   [-4.73]    [-4.28]

Skewness                       0.047      0.042     -0.019    -0.306    -1.156     -1.204          956    Aug 63 – Dec 03
                               [1.02]     [0.84]    [-0.31]   [-3.35]   [-6.94]    [-6.23]


 The table reports L-FF alphas (see Eq. (1)) for only U.S. stocks for forming portfolios ranked on L-FF
 idiosyncratic volatility at the beginning of each month (quintile portfolios 1–5 from “1 Low” to “5 High”)
 and for a strategy that goes long the highest volatility quintile and short the lowest volatility quintile (“5–
 1”). In controlling for PIN, the proportion of zero returns, analyst coverage, institutional ownership, and
 skewness, we first sort stocks each month based on the first control variable and then, within each quintile,
 we sort stocks based on L-FF idiosyncratic volatility. The five idiosyncratic volatility portfolios are then
 averaged over each of the five characteristic portfolios and thus represent idiosyncratic volatility quintile
 portfolios that control for the characteristic. All portfolios are value weighted. The PIN variable is computed
 by Easley, Hvidkajer and O’Hara (2002). The analyst coverage, institutional ownership, and delay measures
 are provided by Hou and Moskowitz (2003). The column “Ave No of Stocks” reports the average number of
 stocks in each idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolio. We report robust t-statistics in square brackets below
 each L-FF alpha.




                                                        46
                          Table 10: Idiosyncratic Volatility and Leverage
                                                                       I        II

                       Constant                                      2.463     2.697
                                                                     [9.23]   [8.88]
                       L-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility                -0.935    -1.135
                                                                    [-2.24]   [-4.45]
                       β(M KT L )                                   -0.038    -0.016
                                                                    [-0.77]   [-0.36]
                       β(HM LL )                                     0.034     0.026
                                                                     [1.32]   [0.99]
                       β(SM LL )                                    -0.056    -0.057
                                                                     [2.50]   [-2.45]
                       Size                                         -0.217    -0.228
                                                                    [-6.04]   [-6.05]
                       Book-to-Market                                0.056     0.085
                                                                     [3.35]   [3.00]
                       Lagged Return                                 0.151     0.165
                                                                     [0.89]   [0.97]
                       Leverage                                               -0.921
                                                                              [-3.66]
                       Leverage × L-FF Idiosyncratic Volatility                1.585
                                                                               [2.48]

                       Adjusted R2                                  0.051     0.061


We report Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions (see Eq. (4)) for U.S. stocks using L-FF idiosyncratic volatility
(see Eq. (1)). We regress next month excess firm returns onto a constant; idiosyncratic volatility over the
past month with respect to the L-FF model; contemporaneous factor loadings, β(M KT L ), β(SM B L ) and
β(HM LL ) with respect to the U.S. L-FF model; and firm characteristics at the beginning of the period.
“Size” is the log market capitalization of the firm at the beginning of the month, “Book-to-Market” is the
book-to-market ratio available six months prior, and “Lagged Return” is the firm return over the previous six
months. Leverage is defined as the book value of debt over the sum of the book value of debt and the market
value of equity. We report robust t-statistics in square brackets below each coefficient. The row “Adjusted
R2 ” reports the average of the cross-sectional adjusted R2 s. The sample period is from August 1963 to
December 2003.




                                                       47
                Table 11: Relation Between Idiosyncratic Volatility and Leverage
                                                     Ranking on σi (t − 1, t)

                                         1 Low        2          3         4      5 High      5–1

            1 Low Leverage                0.530     0.320     0.235     -0.348    -1.061     -1.592
                                          [3.84]    [2.43]    [1.36]    [-1.78]   [-4.02]    [-5.62]

            2                             0.269     0.327     0.156     -0.058    -1.066     -1.335
                                          [3.09]    [2.97]    [1.08]    [-0.29]   [-4.62]    [-5.31]

            3                            -0.009     -0.121    -0.070    -0.330    -1.074     -1.065
                                         [-0.11]    [-1.11]   [-0.55]   [-2.13]   [-4.96]    [-4.44]

            4                            -0.028     -0.051    -0.303    -0.589    -1.204     -1.176
                                         [-0.30]    [-0.52]   [-2.44]   [-4.41]   [-5.61]    [-5.01]

            5 High Leverage              -0.101     -0.047    -0.048    -0.948    -1.258     -1.157
                                         [-0.95]    [-0.36]   [-0.31]   [-4.64]   [-4.22]    [-3.70]

            Ranking on σi (t − 1, t)      0.132     0.086     -0.006    -0.455    -1.113     -1.265
            Controlling for Leverage      [2.87]    [1.53]    [-0.08]   [-4.53]   [-6.95]    [-7.25]



We compute L-FF alphas of 5 × 5 portfolios first sorted on leverage, defined as the book value of debt divided
by the sum of the book value of debt and market value of equity, and then on lagged idiosyncratic volatility,
σi (t−1, t). We first sort stocks each month based on leverage and then, within each quintile, we sort stocks on
σi (t − 1, t). The last row labelled “Ranking on σi (t − 1, t) Controlling for Leverage” reports the L-FF alphas
of the five σi (t − 1, t) portfolios averaged over each of the five leverage portfolios and thus represent lagged
idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolios which control for leverage. All portfolios are value weighted. All
computations are done using only U.S. stocks over the sample period August 1963 to December 2003.




                                                      48
Table 12: Relation Between Idiosyncratic Volatility and Predicted and Realized Volatility
      Panel A: L-FF Alphas of Portfolios First Sorted on Et [σi (t, t + 1)], Then on σi (t − 1, t)

                                                       Ranking on σi (t − 1, t)

                                           1 Low       2         3         4       5 High      5–1

      1 Low Et [σi (t, t + 1)]             0.069     0.064     0.089     0.079     -0.070     -0.139
                                           [0.77]    [0.91]    [1.31]    [1.17]    [-0.94]    [-1.14]

      2                                    0.349     0.346     0.161     0.231     -0.089     -0.438
                                           [3.57]    [3.44]    [1.65]    [2.27]    [-0.92]    [-3.17]

      3                                    0.586     0.520     0.242     -0.007    -0.511     -1.097
                                           [5.12]    [4.19]    [2.09]    [-0.06]   [-4.03]    [-6.47]

      4                                    0.638     0.183     0.028     -0.442    -0.880     -1.518
                                           [4.51]    [1.40]    [0.17]    [-2.95]   [-5.19]    [-7.70]

      5 High Et [σi (t, t + 1)]            0.484     -0.617    -1.021    -1.487    -1.691     -2.175
                                           [2.14]    [-2.91]   [-4.58]   [-6.28]   [-6.45]    [-7.52]

      Ranking on σi (t − 1, t)             0.425     0.099     -0.100    -0.325    -0.648     -1.073
      Controlling for Et [σi (t, t + 1)]   [4.95]    [1.26]    [-1.22]   [-3.90]   [-7.09]    [-9.44]


      Panel B: L-FF Alphas of Portfolios First Sorted on σiL (t, t + 1), Then on σiL (t − 1, t)

                                                      Ranking on σiL (t − 1, t)

                                           1 Low       2         3         4       5 High      5–1

      1 Low σiL (t, t + 1)                 -0.081    0.136     0.036     -0.051    -0.490     -0.410
                                           [-0.91]   [1.92]    [0.50]    [-0.67]   [-5.90]    [-3.43]

      2                                    0.132     0.197     0.105     -0.099    -0.487     -0.619
                                           [1.57]    [2.54]    [1.38]    [-1.11]   [-3.99]    [-3.93]

      3                                    0.117     0.449     0.451     -0.155    -1.218     -1.335
                                           [0.96]    [4.83]    [4.74]    [-1.43]   [-8.31]    [-6.36]

      4                                    0.029     0.736     0.137     -0.351    -2.094     -2.122
                                           [0.13]    [4.56]    [0.94]    [-2.27]   [-11.4]    [-7.58]

      5 High σiL (t, t + 1)                -0.333    -0.496    0.312     -0.024    -1.870     -1.537
                                           [-0.74]   [1.68]    [0.94]    [-0.07]   [-5.48]    [-2.95]

      Ranking on σiL (t − 1, t)            -0.027    0.403     0.208     -0.136     -1.232    -1.205
      Controlling for σiL (t, t + 1)       [-0.21]   [5.06]    [2.53]    [-1.54]   [-11.48]   [-6.63]




                                                     49
Note to Table 12

In Panel A, we compute L-FF alphas of 5 × 5 portfolios first sorted on predicted idiosyncratic volatility,
Et [σi (t, t + 1)], and then on lagged idiosyncratic volatility, σi (t − 1, t). We first sort stocks each month
based on Et [σi (t, t + 1)], and then, within each quintile, we sort stocks on σi (t − 1, t). The last row labelled
“Ranking on σi (t − 1, t) Controlling for Et [σi (t, t + 1)]” reports the L-FF alphas of the five σi (t − 1, t)
portfolios averaged over each of the five Et [σi (t, t + 1)] portfolios and thus represent lagged idiosyncratic
volatility quintile portfolios which control for predicted volatility. All portfolios are value weighted. Pre-
dicted volatility is computed using a cross-sectional regression using lagged idiosyncratic volatility, firm
size, firm book-to-market ratio, past 6-month return, stock return skewness, and turnover over the previous
month. Different cross-sectional regressions are run each month. Panel B contains a 5 × 5 portfolio sort
similar to Panel A. In Panel B, we report L-FF alphas for 5 × 5 portfolios constructed first sorting on realized
idiosyncratic volatility using log returns, σiL (t, t + 1), and then on lagged idiosyncratic volatility using log re-
turns, σiL (t − 1, t). The idiosyncratic volatilities are computed using log returns in Eq. (1). All computations
are done using only U.S. stocks over the sample period August 1963 to December 2003.




                                                        50
