NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STABILIZATION POLICIES AND THE
INFORMATION CONTENT OF REAL WAGES

Joshua Aizennian

Working Paper No. 1373

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 19814

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1373
June 198k

Stabilization Policies and the Information
Content of Real Wages

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to compare the behavior of an econon
subject to labor contracts with an econonr where the labor market clears in

an auction manner. Such a comparison is intended to reveal the information
content of real wages in a flexible econonryr. The analysis reveals two

distinct costs inflicted by nominal contracts and demonstrates that optimal
macro policies can eliminate one of them.

Joshua Aizenman
3718 Locust Walk, CR
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 191014
(215) 898—71409

I. Introduction
Labor contracts that pre—set wages for a given period may introduce short—

run wage rigidities. Those rigidities imply that macroeconomic stabilization
policies may enhence welfare by using information that was unavailable at the

time of the wage negotiation.1 The purpose of this paper is to compare the
behavior of an economy subject to labor contracts with an economy where the

labor market clears in an auction manner. Such a comparison is intended to
reveal both the information content of real wages in an auction-type economy
and the appropriate benchmark at which optimal macro policies should aim.
In an economy where the labor market clears in an auction manner, the

real wage is set so as to clear the labor market. In a contracting economy,
however, there is no such a market. Thus by comparing an auction—type economy
with a contracting economy we may assess the role of an additional market, and

suggest how, in an environment that lacks a market, policies can be designed
to substitute in part for its absence.

The analysis is conducted in an economy of the type put forward by

Fischer and Gray. These authors consider the case of an economy where nominal
wage contracts for period t are negotiated in period t—1, before prices of

period t are known. The implicit assumptions of these models are that
economic agents are risk neutral and that the existence of labor contracts
reflects the cost of continuous wage re—negotiation.

We allow for two types of shocks. First, we have a monetary shock.
Next, each producer is subject to a specific productivity shock. We consider
the case in which a given producer observes his specific shock, but the

aggregate real shock is not observed directly.2 We consider a rational
expectation environment, in which the available information set can be used by

—1—

agents in order to infer the value of some of the shocks.

The analysis demonstrates that the effect of an auction labor market is
to reveal through the resultant real wage the aggregate productivity shock.

In a contracting economy we lack a market, consequently we have an equilibrium

that fails to reveal the aggregate productivity shock. Thus, nominal
contracts inflict two types of cost. The first relates to the deterioration
in the aggregate information available to the decision maker, due to the
presence of one less economy—wide market.3 The second relates to the
consequences of inflicting wage rigidity, which reduces the flexibility of

wage adjustment to unforeseen shocks. The purpose of the paper is to study
the interaction of these two costs and to assess the role of optimal macro
policies in such an economy.

The paper is organized in the following manner: Section II describes the

model. Section III solves it for the corresponding optimal policies. Section
IV offers concluding remarks. The Appendix summarizes the notation used in
the paper.

II. The Model
Let us consider a monetary economy composed of k producers. Those
producers sell their output in a competitive market. Output is produced by
means of a fixed input (capital) and labor. As in Fischer and Gray, we
consider the case in which, due to the costs of continuous wage re—negotia-

tion, wages and employment are governed by labor contracts. Nominal wage
contracts for period t are negotiated in period t-1, before current prices are

known, so as to equate expected labor demand to expected labor supply. But
actual employment in period t is demand determined, and depends on the

realized real wage. These models also allow for partial indexation, which is

—2—

set according to certain optimizing criteria. The implicit assumptions of
these models are that economic agents are risk neutral, and that the existence

of labor contracts reflects the cost of continuous wage re—negotiation. The
present paper shares these assumptions.
Suppose that the labor supply is given by:

(1)

L =

A.
(p-•)

where W is the money wage at time t, and

is the price level. Labor is the

only mobile factor, and output of producer i is given by:

(2)

Y =

Lit

•

exp

where Lit is the labor employed by producer i, and

is the productivity

shock effecting producer i. We consider the case in which

is known to

1.i is taken to be normally distributed, independently over

each producer.4

producers and over time, with mean zero.
As a reference point, let us start with the "non—stochastic equilibrium",
i.e., the equilibrium in the economy if the value of all the random shocks is

zero. Let us denote by a lower—case variable the percentage deviation of the
upper—case variable from its value in the non—stochastic equilibrium. Thus,
for a variable X ,
t

xt

= (X — X )
t
0

/X0

,

where X is the value of X if all
0

random shocks are zero. To simplify notation, we delete the time index.

Thus, (x, x+j) are replaced by (x, x ).

To facilitate discussion it is

useful to take a log—linear approximation of the model around its non—
stochastic equilibrium, writing the model in terms of percentage deviations.
This is equivalent to the use of a first—order approximation of a Taylor

—3—

expansion around the equilibrium. We proceed by assuming that the number of
producers is sufficiently large for each producer to be a price taker.

Employment by producer i(L) is determined by

Max

(3)

P(L)

•

exp(.ii)

—

W •

Li.

Li
Solving this equation we obtain that, using our shorter notation,

— w +

l = c[p

(4)

where
In deriving eq. 4, we make use of the assumption that the productivity

shock is observable by each producer. To simplify exposition, we take the
case in which each small producer has the same infinitesimal share of the

market. Thus, aggregate employment (1) and output (y) are given by

(5)

1 =

(6)

y =

a[p

— w + p]

k1

— w +

+

i= 1

= a[(p—w) + uI

k

Where i =

denotes the aggregate productivity shock. Although
i= 1

producer I observes his own productivity shock

aggregate

shock ji

is

not

observable directly, and the subsequent analysis will study the inference
problem associated with the determination of the perceived value of the

aggregate shocks. To close the model, we should specify the wage and price
level determinations.

—4—

In a fully flexible economy, w corresponds to the wage that clears the
labor market, i.e. w =

(

—

W)/W;

where

is the flexible equilibrium wage

rate, and W is the equilibrium wage if all shocks are zero. Under the labor
contract, the wage contract for period t is pre—set at time t—l at its
expected equilibrium level in a fully flexible regime,

E(IfIi) .

E(I)

is the expectation operator, conditional on the

information available at time t—1 (In_i). Under a partial wage indexation the
actual wage is allowed during the contract's duration to respond partially to
unexpected changes in the price level:

log W = log E(jI_i) + b[P —

(7)

or,

in terms of our shorter notation5:

w = bp.

(7')

The case where b is set to zero corresponds to nominal wage rigidity, whereas
b =

1

is the case of real wage rigidity. The subsequent analysis studies the

determinations of b.
To analyze the price level determinations, we should specify the money

market. Let the demand for money balances be

(8)

where

M =

.Y

•

exp(—cz

•

is the expected inflation:

=

[E(P÷iII)

—

—5—

Throughout the paper we proceed by invoking the assumption of rational

expectations. Agents are assumed to know the model and to observe all

prices. Each producer observe his own
aggregate shock

(p)

.

In

productivity

shock (u) but not the

case of need,agents would use the available

information to generate inferences regarding the aggregate productivity

shock ('

denotes the aggregate information set at time t, that includes

all current prices and knowledge of the model.
The supply of money balances is gIven by:

log

(10)

log M + m —

=

y • Pt.

mt is the stochastic shock to money balances, assumed to be generated by
a white—noise process

N(0, V),

(11)

where V(or V(x)) stands for the variance of x.
We would like to allow the monetary authorities to conduct a monetary
policy by means of a feedback rule that adjusts the money supply with
elasticity -y

with respect to the deviations of prices from their non—

stochastic level. Due to the nature of our model, we can focus our attention
on the properties of the stationary equilibrium for which the current values
of the stochastic shocks do not affect the expected values of future

variables. Equilibrium in the money market (Md = MS) allows us to derive the
following condition:

—6—

my+p(ci++1).

(12)

Thus:

p =

(13)

• a
1

+ a + y + a(1—b)

Consequently, real wage T is given by

—

(14)

W —

p

a — m)
1 + a + y + a(1—b)

— (1—b)

(ii •

Equation 13 implies that observing the price level provides us with
information regarding the discrepancy between the monetary and the real shock.

III. Optimal Policies
Subject to our assumptions, for a given real wage Ci) employment is

demand determined. This implies that if real wages deviate from their market
clearing level we obtain a welfare loss. Assuming risk neutral agents, and
the absence of other distortions, we can measure this welfare loss (for
derivations, see Aizenman and Frenkel (1983)) by

=

(15)

C

—

2

where c

--—(--

+ !) , and

denotes the real wage in a flexible economy, in

which the labor market clears in an auction fashion. The welfare loss is

proportional to the discrepancy between t and .

Optimal policies are

derived such as to minimize the expected value of the welfare loss conditional

—7—

on the information available to the policy maker (l):

Mm
b,y

(16)

H

where

H(b, yI)

[(re —

Next, we turn to the derivation of real wages in a flexible equilibrium
(v).

III

a. Flexible Economy Equilibrium
In a flexible economy wages are determined such as to clear the labor

market:

= 1

£

(17)

where

denotes the value of x in a flexible, auction type equilibrium. In

such an economy output is given by

—)+

=

(6')

]

Equations 5, 6', 12, 17 can be applied to derive the real wage ()

for

a

flexible economy, yielding:

p18'
/
'

"='
Equation

(

18 reveals that subject to clearing the labor market, real wages

would reveal the aggregate productivity shock,

—8—

6 Furthermore, the real

wage and employment are free from monetary consideration. In the absence of
clearing the labor market, we obtain only partial information because the
aggregate productivity shock (t)

is

not revealed. Instead, we observe only

the sum of the monetary and real shocks, as embodied in the price signal.

Thus, the distinction between nominal and real shocks plays an important role
in our subsequent discussion because of the absence of labor market

clearing. Combining eq. 7', 16 and 18 we obtain the value for the welfare
loss as perceived by the policy maker (conditional on Is):

H(b, yII) = E

(19)

(19') H =

V(—

I

(1—b)p}2II].

+

I.e)

Alternatively:

E(JII) + (1—b)p]2

The aggregate productivity shock is not observable in our economy. Yet,

its perceived value (E(II)) enters the considerations of the decision maker
as one of the determinants of the perceived welfare loss (H). His knowledge
of the price (p) allows him to infer a value for ji

E(pII) =

(20)

p

•

p

where
p = cov(1J, p)/V(p)

(21)

Alternatively:

(20')

where

E(I.III) =

=

-E (1 + ci + y + 8ci(1—b))

—

V(.icy)/[V(m) +

V()].

'p

is

i

a measure of the importance of the real

—9—

shock relative to the monetary shock. Eq. 20' allows us, after some
manipulations, to present H as

(19'

H {((l + ++ (1-b))

-

(1-b))}2

+ v(

I).

is evident that optimal policies are given by

From this it

1—b

(22)

Or, alternatively
V

*

(22')

b = 1 — (l+a+i)I[(+)

v

+
(op)

Where * refers to the optimal value of the parameter in question.
Several observations are in order. Inspection of equation 22 reveals
that for a stable covariance structure, the value of optimal policies is time

independent. This condition holds despite the use of currently available
information in deriving the various policies. Furthermore, it can be shown
that the same outcome for optimal policies for period t would be obtained if
one used the information available in the previous period (i.e., if one

derived Mm E(WLII_i)). As has been reported elsewhere (Aizenman
- ,b
and Frenkel (1983)), optimal outcome can be obtained by monetary policy alone,

or by wage indexation. Thus, equation 22 defines a negative trade—off between
optimal monetary policy and optimal indexation.8 For a given monetary policy
(-i), optimal indexation rises with the relative importance of monetary to
real shocks, having properties similar to the optimal indexation obtained by

—1 0—

Gray.

Optimal macro policies equate the contract real wage to the expected

clearing real wage, as perceived by the policy maker. I.e., subject to
optimal policies the real contract wage,

=

(23)

,

is:

E(I)

Optimal policies do not eliminate the welfare loss due to the absence of

a flexIble labor market. To appreciate thi& point notice that, subject to
optimal policies, the real contract wage diverges from the market clearing
wage (r

i).

This Is because optimal policies are based upon the

information available to the policy maker, which does not Include in our case

knowledge of the productivity shock. The market clearing wage, however,
depends upon the aggregate productivity shock, which is observable in flexible

economy via the equilibrium market clearing wage. Subject to optimal
policies, the discrepancy between the real contract wage (t) and flexible

equilibrium real wage () is orthogonal to the information available to the
policy maker. Thus, we cannot reach a more favorable outcome by macro
policies alone.9

Subject to optimal policies, employment is given by:

(24)

1* =

— E(TtIIt)].

The supply of labor, however, corresponds to

(25)

c EGII)

—11—

Using equation 18 we obtain that the discrepancy between the two is given by

(26)

(c + c) [E(TlIt) —

tl

This entails a welfare loss (relative to the case of a flexible
equilibrium) equal to

(27)

*

WL =

-

c[E(TtIIt)

—

Ttl

This loss occurs because in our case optimal macro policies cannot clear

the labor market. Such a situation is attributable to the asymmetric nature
of our framework in which the producer bases his employment decision upon a
productivity shock that is observable to him but not to the policy maker.'°
The non—observability of the aggregate shock is the consequence of the missing

market. Thus, nominal contracts inflict two types of costs. The first
relates to the deterioration in the aggregate information available to the

decision maker as a result of having one less economy—wide market. The second
relates to the consequences of inflicting wage rigidity. This rigidity reduces

the flexibility of wage adjustment to shocks that were unforesble at the
contract negotiation. Optimal macro policies can eliminate only the second
source of costs, by generating a real wage that would adjust appropriately to

those shocks that the policy maker can observe (or infer). Such optimal
policies can not eliminate the cost caused by nominal contracts due to

deteriorated aggregate information. If nominal contracts generates non—
revealed asymmetric information, as is the case in the present model, then
optimal macro policies will not generate equilibrium in the labor market.
This, however, is the combined result of nominal contracts and asymmetric

—12—

information.

A formal statement of this argument can be summarized in the following
manner: let us measure the expected welfare loss at period t generated by the

contract relative to the flexible equilibrium. We do so conditionally on the
basis of information available to the policy maker (It):

(28)

E(WLI) = c

c •

+

•

E[( — Tt)IIt]

E[( — E('!I.))2JI1 + c • E[(E(tI) —

2 •

c

•

E[( — E(II)) (E(I) — T)IIt]
•

Due to a missing market, aggregate information available to the decision maker

at time t deteriorates to I• The first term measures the welfare
consequences of the deteriorated information set. This term is also equal to

E(WLII) (i.e., the expected welfare loss subject to optimal macro
policies). Next, subject to nominal contracts real wages may diverge from
their perceived optimal value (EG'tII)); due to wage rigidity Introduced by

the contract. This cost is measured by the second term. The third term
represents the cost resulting from the interaction between the first two

costs. Optimal macro policies enable the elimination of the second type of
cost, nullifying the second and the third terms in eq. 28. Optimal macro
policies cannot, in general, eliminate the costs due to information that is
asymmetric and non—revealed because of the missing market.
Thus, the first term in equation 28 measures the welfare loss due to a

missing economy—wide clearing labor market. It can be shown to be equal to

—13—

(29)

E(WL

c •

V'

E1—ipl

This welfare loss increases with the relative importance of unanticipated

monetary volatility (1—) and with the volatility of aggregate productivity

shocks. This loss may

not

reflect a distortion if the costs of clearing the

labor market in an auction fashion exceed the costs caused by the absence of
an auction labor market (eq. 29).h1

IV. Concluding Remarks
This paper has compared a flexible economy, in which the labor market
clears continuously, with a contracting economy, of the Fischer Gray type.

The comparison reveals that in a contracting economy we have one less economy—
wide market, implying that information that is revealed in a flexible economy

equilibrium may be missing in a contracting economy. In our model, this
applied for the aggregate productivity shock. Consequently, wage contracts
inflict two types of cost. The first relates to the possession of less
aggregate information, whereas the second refers to the wage rigidity

introduced by a wage contract. Optimal macro policies eliminate the second
type of cost, generating real wages that adjust appropriately to the shocks

that the policy maker can infer. If nominal contracts generate asymmetric,
non—revealed information, optimal macro policies will not eliminate the first

cost. Subject to optimal macro policies we find that the resultant deviation
from the flexible equilibrium are non—systematic (i.e., they are orthogonal to
the information set guiding the policy maker).

—14—

Footnotes

1.

For a discussion of such policies in a rational expectation setting, see

Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977). For a more recent discussion see Karni
(1983); Canzoneri, Henderson and Rogoff (1983), Aizenman and Frenkel
(1983) and Marston and Turnovsky (1983).
2.

A framework with a similar menu of shocks was applied by Marston and
Turnovsky (1983) to assess the stabilizing role of taxation and
ndexat ion.

3.

On the role of an economy—wide capital market in revealing information
see Barro (1980).

4.

The case in which a uniform productivity shock is not observable directly
has been studied by Aizenman and Frenkel (1983).

5.

In deriving equation 7' we use the fact that in our model W

log

E(WIIti).
6.

Notice that once that i is revealed, we can infer m from the price

signal1

thereby obtaining full information.
7.

This is a short cut to the more lengthy computation following the

undetermined coefficient method. An analogous short Cut is adopted in
Canzoneri, Henderson and Rogoff (1983) in the context of an analysis of
the information content of interest rates.
8.

In Aizenman and Frenkel (1983) we evaluate optimal policies for the case
in which producers do not directly observe a uniform productivity

shock. The resultant values for optimal macro policies have similar
characteristics to those obtained in the present paper. They are derived
in a symmetric information setting where they are shown to clear the
labor market.

—15—

9.

Further welfare improvement may be achieved by invoking policies that use
information which is available to the firm at the micro level [see
Marston and Turnovsky (1983)], or policies that attempt to improve the

aggregate information set. In both cases, the marginal benefit should be
weighted against the marginal cost of implementing those policies.

10. For a related discussion regarding the information conteNt of interest
rates, in the context of asymmetric information, see Canzoneri, Henderson
and Rogoff (1983).

11. For further details regarding such an argument in the context of re—
contracting, see Aizenman (1983).

—16—

