NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEYOND REVEALED PREFERENCE:
CHOICE THEORETIC FOUNDATIONS FOR BEHAVIORAL WELFARE ECONOMICS
B. Douglas Bernheim
Antonio Rangel
Working Paper 13737
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13737

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

We would like to thank Colin Camerer, Andrew Caplin, Vincent Crawford, Robert Hall, Peter Hammond,
Botond Koszegi, Preston McAfee, Paul Milgrom, three anonymous referees, and seminar participants
at Stanford University, U. C. Berkeley, Princeton University, Rutgers University, University of Chicago
GSB, M.I.T., Harvard University, the 2006 and 2008 NYU Methodologies Conferences, the Summer
2006 Econometric Society Meetings, the Summer 2006 ASHE Meetings, the Winter 2007 ASSA Meetings,
the 2007 Conference on Frontiers in Environmental Economics sponsored by Resources for the Future,
the Spring 2007 SWET Meetings, the Summer 2007 PET Meetings, and the Fall 2007 NBER Public
Economics Meetings, for useful comments. We are also indebted to Xiaochen Fan and Eduardo Perez
for able research assistance. Bernheim gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF (SES-0452300
and SES-0752854). Rangel gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF (SES-0134618)
and the Moore Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by B. Douglas Bernheim and Antonio Rangel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics
B. Douglas Bernheim and Antonio Rangel
NBER Working Paper No. 13737
January 2008, Revised June 2008
JEL No. D01,D60,H40
ABSTRACT
We propose a broad generalization of standard choice-theoretic welfare economics that encompasses
a wide variety of non-standard behavioral models. Our approach exploits the coherent aspects of choice
which those positive models typically attempt to capture. It replaces the standard revealed preference
relation with an unambiguous choice relation: roughly, x is (strictly) unambiguously chosen over y
(written xP*y) if y is never chosen when x is available. Under weak assumptions, P* is acyclic and
therefore suitable for welfare analysis; it is also the most discerning welfare criterion that never overrules
choice. The resulting framework generates natural counterparts for the standard tools of applied welfare
economics, and is easily applied in the context of specific behavioral theories, with novel implications.
Though not universally discerning, it lends itself to principled refinements.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
bernheim@stanford.edu
Antonio Rangel
Department of Economics
California Institute of Technology
HSS MC 228-77
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
rangel@hss.caltech.edu

1
Interest in behavioral economics has grown in recent years, stimulated by accumulating
evidence that the standard model of consumer decision-making may provide an inadequate
positive description of behavior. Behavioral models are increasingly …nding their way into
policy evaluation, which inevitably raises questions concerning welfare. Unfortunately, there
is as yet no consensus concerning the general principles that should govern such normative
inquiries.

In many cases, economists adopt ad hoc criteria for particular positive mod-

els, o¤ering justi…cations based on loose and inevitably controversial intuition. The tight
connection between choice and welfare that has governed normative economic analysis for
more than half a century is also typically severed.

Indeed, many behavioral economists

distinguish between decision utility, which rationalizes choice, and true utility, which encapsulates well-being. That distinction compels them either to make paternalistic judgments,
or to adopt some alternative measure of experienced well-being. Despite attempts to de…ne
and measure true utility (e.g., Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin [1997], Kahneman [1999]),
there are concerns regarding the feasibility of that approach, and many economists remain
understandably hesitant to adopt normative principles that are not rooted in choice.1
Our objective is to generalize standard choice-based welfare analysis to settings with nonstandard decision makers.2 How one approaches that task depends on one’s interpretation
of the standard framework. According to one interpretation, standard normative analysis
respects the decision maker’s true objectives, which her choices reveal.

Unfortunately, it

is often di¢ cult to formulate coherent and normatively compelling rationalizations for nonstandard choice patterns.3 As a result, discussions of welfare become mired in controversy,
leading some to reject choice as a foundation for normative analysis (Sugden [2004]).
According to a second interpretation of standard welfare analysis, welfare is de…ned in
terms of choice rather than underlying objectives. The statement “x is strictly revealed pre1
The justi…cations for building a welfare framework around choice are familiar; see Bernheim [2008] for a
recent discussion.
2
A preliminary summary of this work appeared in Bernheim and Rangel [2007]; see also Bernheim and
Rangel [2008a].
3
See, for example, Koszegi and Rabin [2008a], who argue that choices alone cannot identify preferences.

2
ferred to y”(xP y) simply means that x (and not y) is chosen from the set fx; yg. Thus, one
can determine whether xP y directly from choice patterns without relying on any underlying
rationalization.

Furthermore, one does not require a rationalization to justify normative

judgments; arguably, choices provide appropriate guidance because they are choices, not because they re‡ect something else. From that perspective, preferences and utility are useful
positive tools – clever analytic constructs that allow economists to systematize knowledge
concerning behavior and predict choices where direct observations are absent – but they
play no direct role in normative analysis. In particular, because a preference representation
simply recapitulates the choice correspondence, it cannot resolve normative puzzles arising
from non-standard behavior, and any appearance to the contrary is deceiving.
We adopt the second interpretation of standard welfare analysis, and develop a generalized welfare criterion that respects choice directly, without reference to the decision maker’s
underlying objectives.4

We thereby avoid the thorny problems associated with formulat-

ing and justifying rationalizations.5 Naturally, operationalizing the principle of respect for
choice is problematic when choices con‡ict.
imply that choice con‡icts are ubiquitous.

However, useful behavioral theories do not
On the contrary, those theories are generally

motivated by the observation that choice patterns exhibit a substantial degree of underlying
coherence.

We take that observation as our central premise, and devise welfare criteria

that respect the coherent aspects of choice. Speci…cally, we propose replacing the standard
revealed preference relation with an unambiguous choice relation: roughly, x is (strictly)
unambiguously chosen over y (written xP y) i¤ y is never chosen when x is available. That
4

In this respect, our approach to behavioral welfare analysis contrasts with that of Green and Hojman
[2007]. They demonstrate that it is possible to rationalize apparently irrational choices as compromises
among simultaneously held, con‡icting preference relations, and they propose evaluating welfare based on
unanimity among those relations. Unlike our framework, Green and Hojman’s approach does not generally
coincide with standard welfare analysis when behavior conforms to standard rationality axioms.
5
Thus, our concerns are largely orthogonal to issues examined in the literature that attempts to identify
representations of non-standard choice correspondences, either by imposing conditions on choice correspondences and deriving properties of the associated representations, or by adopting particular representations
(e.g., preference relations that satisfy weak assumptions) and deriving properties of the associated choice
correspondences. Recent contributions in this area include Kalai, Rubinstein, and Spiegler [2002], Bossert,
Sprumont, and Suzumura [2005], Ehlers and Sprumont [2006], and Manzini and Mariotti [2007], as well
much of Green and Hojman [2007].

3
criterion instructs us to respect choice whenever it provides clear normative guidance, and
to live with whatever ambiguity remains. Though P need not be transitive, it is always
acyclic, and therefore suitable for rigorous welfare analysis.

As we explain, it is also the

most discerning welfare criterion that never overrules choice.
Like standard welfare economics, our framework requires only information concerning the
mapping from environments to choices. Because it encompasses any theory that generates
a choice correspondence, it is applicable irrespective of the processes generating behavior,
and regardless of whether one adopts a positive model that is preference-based, algorithmic,
mechanistic, or heuristic.

It generalizes standard choice-based welfare economics in two

senses. First, the approaches are equivalent when standard choice axioms hold. Second, for
settings in which departures from those axioms are minor, our framework implies that one
can approximate the appropriate welfare criterion by ignoring choice anomalies entirely. It
generates natural counterparts for the standard tools of applied welfare analysis, and permits
a broad generalization of the of the …rst welfare theorem. It is easily applied in the context
of speci…c positive theories, and leads to novel normative implications for the familiar ;
model of time inconsistency.

For a model of coherent arbitrariness, it provides a choice-

based (non-psychological) justi…cation for multi-self Pareto optimality. Finally, though not
universally discerning, it lends itself to principled re…nements. Our analysis of re…nements
for the ,

model provides novel ways to justify the judgments embedded in the long-run

criterion, and reconciles those judgments with the multi-self Pareto criterion.
We begin in Section 1 by presenting a general framework for describing choices. Section
2 sets forth principles for evaluating individual welfare and applies them to speci…c positive
models.

Section 3 generalizes compensating variation and consumer surplus. Section 4

generalizes Pareto optimality and examines competitive market e¢ ciency as an application.
Section 5 demonstrates with generality that standard welfare analysis is a limiting case of our
framework when behavioral anomalies are small. Section 6 sets forth an agenda for re…ning
our welfare criterion. Section 7 o¤ers concluding remarks. Proofs appear in the Appendix.

4

1

A general framework for describing choices

Let X denote the set of all possible choice objects. The elements of X need not be simple consumption bundles; for example, they could be lotteries, intertemporal outcome trajectories,
or even consumption trajectories that depend on random and potentially welfare-relevant
events.6

Thus, despite our compact notation, the framework subsumes decision problems

involving uncertainty, dynamics, and other features (discussed below).
A constraint set X

X is a collection of choice objects. When we say that the constraint

set is X, we mean that, according to the objective information available to the individual,
the alternatives are the elements of X. The constraint set thus depends implicitly both on
the objects among which the individual is actually choosing, and on the information available
to him concerning those objects.
We de…ne a generalized choice situation (GCS), G = (X; d), as a constraint set, X,
paired with an ancillary condition, d.7

An ancillary condition is a feature of the choice

environment that may a¤ect behavior, but is not taken as relevant to a social planner’s
evaluation. Typical examples of ancillary conditions include the point in time at which a
choice is made, the manner in which information or alternatives are presented, the labeling
of a particular option as the “status-quo,”the salience of a default option, or exposure to an
anchor.8 Notably, allowing an individual to choose between K GCSs, (X1 ; d1 ), ..., (XK ; dK ),
0
simply creates a new GCS, (X 0 ; d0 ), where X 0 = [K
k=1 Xk , and d describes the mechanics of

the decision (i.e., …rst choose a subset of X 0 , then choose an element of that subset).
Let G denote the set of all generalized choice situations contemplated by the positive
theory of behavior for which we wish to develop a normative criterion. Thus, G is theoryspeci…c. For example, standard consumer theory contemplates a domain with no ancillary
6

As in the standard framework, welfare-relevant states of nature may not be observable to the planner.
Thus, the framework subsumes cases in which such states are internal (e.g., hunger, or randomly occurring
moods); see Gul and Pesendorder [2006].
7
Rubinstein and Salant [2007] have independently formulated similar notation for describing the impact
of choice procedures on decisions; they refer to ancillary conditions as “frames.”
8
In contrast, we would regard a condition such as hunger as a welfare-relevant state of nature. An object
x would describe consumption in each potential hunger state.

5
conditions, while the theory of quasihyperbolic discounting contemplates a domain in which
ancillary conditions specify the sequencing and timing of decisions (see Section 2.5). The
positive theory under consideration identi…es a choice correspondence C : G ) X, with
C(X; d)

X for all (X; d) 2 G , that governs the individual’s behavior.9

We interpret

x 2 C(G) as an object that the individual is willing to choose when facing G.
When confronted with con‡icting choice patterns, behavioral economists sometimes argue
that certain choices are more welfare-relevant than others. In e¤ect, they prune elements of
G from the welfare-relevant domain, so that the remaining choices coherently reveal “true”
objectives.

We allow for pruning by de…ning a welfare-relevant domain, G

G , which

identi…es the choices from which we will take normative guidance. We will discuss potential
objective criteria for pruning in Section 6.

Meanwhile, our analysis will take G as given.

Because our framework accommodates violations of standard choice axioms within G, it
permits one to demand more rigorous justi…cations for any deletions, even if the result is an
enlarged domain that encompasses con‡icting choices, such as G .
While our framework allows for a behavioral theory de…ned on a domain encompassing
all conceivable choice situations (perhaps one that combines the features of more narrowly
focused theories), we note that the prevalence of behavioral inconsistencies within that universal domain might render choice essentially useless as a normative guide.

Were one to

examine such a composite theory, it would be essential to identify a smaller welfare-relevant
domain, for example by pruning GCSs that confuse or manipulate the decision maker.
We make two simple assumptions. The …rst pertains to the welfare-relevant domain, the
second to the choice correspondence. We de…ne X to include every constraint set X such
that there is some ancillary condition d for which (X; d) 2 G.
Assumption 1: Every non-empty …nite subset of X is contained in X .
Assumption 2: C(G) is non-empty for all G 2 G.
9

For our purposes, the nature of the evidence used to recover the choice correspondence is of no consequence. The reader is free to assume that positive analysis relies exclusively on choice evidence, or that
non-choice evidence also plays a role.

6

1.1

What are ancillary conditions?

For the GCS (X; d), how does one objectively draw a line between the characteristics of the
objects in the constraint set X and aspects of the ancillary condition d? In principle, one
could view virtually any feature of a decision problem as a characteristic of the available
objects. Yet if we incorporated every feature of each decision problem into the descriptions
of the objects, then each object would be available in one and only one decision problem, and
choices would provide little in the way of useful normative guidance. Consequently, practical
considerations compel us to adopt a more limited conception of an object’s attributes.
One natural way to draw the required line is to distinguish between conditions that
pertain exclusively to experience and conditions that pertain at least in part to choice.
Conditions that pertain exclusively to experience do not change when a decision is delegated
from an individual to a social planner. Consequently, if the planner treats such conditions
as characteristics of the available objects, he can still take guidance from the choices the
individual would make. If the planner must provide the individual with either a red car or
a green car, he can sensibly ask which one the individual would choose; the meaning of color
does not change with the chooser. In contrast, a condition that pertains to choice necessarily
changes when the decision is delegated, because it then references a di¤erent chooser. If a
planner were to treat such conditions as characteristics of the available objects, he would be
forced to acknowledge that delegation necessarily changes the objects, in which case he would
no longer be able to take guidance from a hypothetical undelegated choice. If he wishes to
take such guidance, he must therefore de…ne objects’ characteristics to exclude conditions
of choice. Within our framework, one can classify those excluded conditions as ancillary; if
indeed they a¤ect behavior, then one simply concludes that choice o¤ers ambiguous guidance
concerning the delegated decision problem.
Consider the example of time inconsistency. Suppose alternatives x and y yield payo¤s
at time t; the individual selects x over y when choosing at time t, and y over x when choosing
at t

1. Note that we could include the time of choice in the description of the objects:

7
when choosing between x and y at time k, the individual actually chooses between “x chosen
by the individual at time k”and “y chosen by the individual at time k”(k = t; t

1). With

that formulation, the objects of choice are di¤erent at distinct points in time, so reversals
involve no inconsistency. But then, when the decision is delegated, the objects become “x
chosen by the planner at time k” and “y chosen by the planner at time k.” Since that
set of options is entirely new, neither the individual’s choice at time t, nor his choice at
time t

1, o¤ers useful guidance.

If we wish to construct a theory of welfare based on

the choice correspondence alone, our only viable alternative is to treat x and y as the choice
objects, and to acknowledge that the individual’s con‡icting choices at t and t 1 provide the
planner with con‡icting guidance.10 Some might argue that the individual’s choice at t

1

is the planner’s best guide because it is at arms length from the experience and hence does
not trigger the psychological processes responsible for apparent lapses of self-control; others
might insist that the choice at t is the best guide because reward is properly appreciated only
in the moment and excessively intellectualized at arm’s length.

The …rst position argues

for excluding the time t choice from the welfare-relevant domain G; the second argues for
excluding the time t

1 choice.

Choice patterns alone cannot resolve that controversy.

Including both choices in G and treating the time of choice as an ancillary condition permits
us to recognize the con‡ict, remain agnostic, and embrace the implied ambiguity.
In many cases (e.g., when exposure to an arbitrary number in‡uences choice), treating a
condition of choice as a welfare-relevant characteristic of the available objects would seem to
defy common sense; consequently, classifying it as an ancillary condition should be relatively
uncontroversial. Other cases may be less clear. Di¤erent analysts may wish to draw di¤erent
lines between the characteristics of choice objects and ancillary conditions, based either on
the distinction between conditions of choice and experience discussed above, or on completely
10
Another option would be to de…ne the goods as “x chosen at time k”and “y chosen at time k,”omitting
the phrases “by the individual” and “by the planner.” A planner who looks to the individual’s choices for
guidance would then choose x at time t and y at time t 1. None of the existing work on time consistency
adopts that standard. The reason is clear: these de…nitions of the objects ignore the fact that the condition
of choice pertains to the chooser. Speci…cally, the signi…cance of making the choice at time t changes when
the decision is delegated to the planner.

8
di¤erent criteria. We therefore emphasize that the tools we develop in this paper provide a
coherent method for conducting choice-based welfare analysis no matter how one draws that
line. For example, it allows economists to perform welfare analysis without abandoning the
standard notion of a consumption good. Where di¤erences in line-drawing lead to di¤erent
normative conclusions, our framework usefully pinpoints the source of disagreement.
Drawing a line between ancillary conditions and objects’characteristics is analogous to
the problem of identifying the arguments of an “experienced utility” function in the more
standard approach to behavioral welfare analysis. Despite that similarity, there are some
important di¤erences between the approaches. First, with our approach, choice remains the
preeminent guide to welfare; one is not free to invent an experienced utility function that is
at odds with behavior. Second, our framework allows for ambiguous welfare comparisons
where choice data con‡ict; in contrast, an experienced utility function admits no ambiguity.

1.2

Scope of the framework

Our framework can incorporate non-standard behavioral patterns in four separate ways.
(1) It allows choice to depend on ancillary conditions, thereby subsuming a wide range of
behavioral phenomena. Speci…cally, the typical anomaly involves a constraint set, X, along
with two ancillary conditions, d0 and d00 , for which C(X; d0 ) 6= C(X; d00 ). This is sometimes
called a preference reversal, but in the interests of greater precision we call it a choice reversal.
We listed some well-known examples at the outset of Section 2. (2) Our framework does not
impose any counterparts to standard choice axioms. Indeed, throughout most of this paper,
we allow for all non-empty choice correspondences (Assumption 2), even ones for which
choices are intransitive or depend on “irrelevant”alternatives (entirely apart from ancillary
conditions). (3) Our framework subsumes the possibility that people can make choices from
opportunity sets that are not compact (e.g., selecting “almost best”elements). (4) We can
interpret a choice object x 2 X more broadly than in the standard framework (e.g., as in
Caplin and Leahy [2001], who axiomatize anticipatory utility by treating the time at which
uncertainty is resolved as a characteristic of a lottery).

9

2

Individual welfare

Welfare analysis typically requires us to judge whether one alternative represents an improvement over another, even when the new alternative is not necessarily the best one. For
that purpose, we require a binary relation, call it Q, where xQy means that x improves upon
y. Within the standard framework, the revealed preference relations serve that role.
When imposing standard choice axioms, one typically de…nes the weak and strict revealed
preference relations in terms of choices from binary sets: xR0 y (xP y) is equivalent to the
statement that x 2 C(fx; yg) (y 2
= C(fx; yg)). Those de…nitions imply the following:11
xRy i¤, for all X 2 X with x; y 2 X, y 2 C(X) implies x 2 C(X)

(1)

xP y i¤, for all X 2 X with x; y 2 X, we have y 62 C(X)

(2)

Expressions (1) and (2) immediately suggest two natural generalizations of revealed preference. The …rst extends (1), the weak revealed preference relation:
xR0 y i¤, for all (X; d) 2 G such that x; y 2 X, y 2 C(X; d) implies x 2 C(X; d)
The statement “xR0 y”means that whenever x and y are both available, y isn’t chosen unless
x is as well. We will then say that x is weakly unambiguously chosen over y. Let P 0 denote
the asymmetric component of R0 (xP 0 y i¤ xR0 y and

yR0 x), and let I 0 denote the symmetric

component (xI 0 y i¤ xR0 y and yR0 x). The statement “xP 0 y” means that whenever x and
y are available, sometimes x is chosen but not y, and otherwise either both or neither are
chosen. The statement “xI 0 y”means that, whenever x is chosen, so is y, and vice versa.
The second generalization of revealed preference extends (2), strict revealed preference:
xP y i¤, for all (X; d) 2 G such that x; y 2 X, we have y 2
= C(X; d)
The statement “xP y” means that whenever x and y are available, y is never chosen. We
will then say that x is strictly unambiguously chosen over y (sometimes dropping “strictly”
11

The implications follow from the independence axiom. Note that the de…nition of P , below, di¤ers from
the one proposed by Arrow [1959], which requires only that there is some X 2 X with x; y 2 X for which
x 2 C(X) and y 2
= C(X).

10
for the sake of brevity). As a general matter, P 0 and P may di¤er. However, if C maps
each G 2 G to a unique choice, they necessarily coincide.

We note that Rubinstein and

Salant [2007] have separately proposed a binary relation that is related to P 0 and P .12
There are many binary relations for which P is the asymmetric component; each is a
potential generalization of weak revealed preference. The coarsest is, of course, P itself.
The …nest, R , is de…ned by the property that xR y i¤

yP x.13 The statement “xR y”

means that, for any x; y 2 X, there is some GCS for which x and y are available, and x is
chosen. Let I be the symmetric component of R (xI y i¤ xR y and yR x). The statement
“xI y” means that there is at least one GCS for which x is chosen with y available, and at
least one GCS for which y is chosen with x available.
When choices are invariant with respect to ancillary conditions and satisfy standard
axioms, R0 and R specialize to R, while P 0 and P specialize to P . Thus, our framework
subsumes standard welfare economics as a special case.

2.1

Some properties of the welfare relations

How are R0 , P 0 , and I 0 related to R , P , and I ? It is easy to check that xP y implies xP 0 y
implies xR0 y implies xR y, so that P is the coarsest of these relations and R the …nest.
Also, xI 0 y implies xI y.
The relation R is always complete, but R0 need not be, and there is no guarantee that
any of the relations de…ned here are transitive. (See Example 1 below for an illustration
of intransitivity involving P ). However, to conduct useful welfare analysis, one does not
require transitivity. Our …rst main result establishes that there cannot be a cycle involving
R0 , the direct generalization of weak revealed preference, if one or more of the comparisons
12

The following is a description of Rubinstein and Salant’s [2007] binary relation, using our notation.
Assume C is always single-valued. Then x
y i¤ C(fx; yg; d) = x for all d such that (fx; yg; d) 2
G. In contrast to P 0 or P , the relation
depends only on binary comparisons. Rubinstein and Salant
[2006] considered a special case of the relation for decision problems involving choices from lists, without
reference to welfare. Mandler [2006] proposed a welfare relation that is essentially equivalent to Salant and
Rubinstein’s for the limited context of status quo bias.
13
One binary relation A is weakly coarser than another, B, if xAy implies xBy. When A is weakly coarser
than B, B is weakly …ner than A.

11
involves P , the direct generalization of strict revealed preference.
Theorem 1: Consider any x1 ,...,xN such that xi R0 xi+1 for i = 1; :::; N
for some k. Then

1, with xk P xk+1

xN R 0 x1 .

Theorem 1 assures us that a planner who evaluates alternatives based on R0 (to express
“no worse than”) and P (to express “better than”) cannot be turned into a “money pump.”14
The theorem has an immediate and important corollary:
Corollary 1: P is acyclic. That is, for any x1 ,...,xN such that xi P xi+1 for i = 1; :::; N
1, we have

xN P x1 .

Like transitivity, acyclicity guarantees the existence of maximal elements for …nite sets
and allows us to both identify and measure unambiguous improvements. Thus, regardless
of how poorly behaved the choice correspondence may be, P is always a viable welfare
criterion. In contrast, it is easy to devise examples in which P 0 cycles.

2.2

Individual welfare optima

We will say that it is possible to strictly improve upon a choice x 2 X if there exists y 2 X
such that yP x; in other words, if there is an alternative that is unambiguously chosen over
x.

We will say that it is possible to weakly improve upon a choice x 2 X if there exists

y 2 X such that yP 0 x. When a strict improvement is impossible, we say that x is a weak
individual welfare optimum. When a weak improvement is impossible, we say that x is a
strict individual welfare optimum.
The following two observations (which follow immediately from the de…nitions) characterize individual welfare optima.
14

In the context of standard decision theory, Suzumura’s [1976] analogous consistency property plays a
similar role. A preference relation R is consistent if x1 Rx2 :::RxN with xi P xi+1 for some i implies xN Rx1
(where P is the asymmetric component of R). Theorem 1 has the following trivial corollary: If C maps
each G 2 G to a unique choice (so that P 0 coincides with P ), then R0 is consistent.

12
Observation 1: Every x 2 C (X; d) for (X; d) 2 G is a weak individual welfare optimum
in X. If x is the unique element of C(X; d), then x is a strict welfare optimum in X.
This …rst observation guarantees the existence of weak welfare optima and assures us that
our welfare criterion respects a natural “libertarian”principle: any action voluntarily chosen
from a set X within the welfare-relevant choice domain, G, is a weak optimum within X.
Thus, according to the relation P , it is impossible to design an intervention that “improves”
on a choice made by the individual within G. Nevertheless, it may be possible to improve
decisions made in any GCS that is not considered welfare-relevant (i.e., elements of G that
are excluded from G); see Section 6.15

It may also be possible to improve upon market

outcomes when market failures are present, just as in standard economics; see Section 4.2.
The fact that we have established the existence of weak individual welfare optima without
making any additional assumptions, e.g., related to continuity and compactness, may at …rst
seem surprising, but simply re‡ects our assumption that the choice correspondence is wellde…ned over the set G. Standard existence issues arise when the choice function is built up
from other components. The following example clari…es these issues.
Example 1: Suppose G = fX1 ; :::; X4 g (plus singleton sets, for which choice is trivial),
with X1 = fa; bg, X2 = fb; cg, X3 = fa; cg, and X4 = fa; b; cg (there are no ancillary
conditions). Imagine that C(X1 ) = fag, C(X2 ) = fbg, C(X3 ) = fcg, and C(X4 ) = fag.
Then we have aP b and bP c; in contrast, aI c. Despite the intransitivity of P , option a is
nevertheless a strict welfare optimum in X4 , and neither b nor c is a weak welfare optimum.
Note that a is also a strict welfare optimum in X1 (b is not a weak optimum), and b is a
strict welfare optimum in X2 (c is not a weak optimum). Notably, both a and c are strict
welfare optima in X3 , despite the fact that only c is chosen from X3 ; a survives because it is
15

Many behavioral economists have proposed interventions which, they claim, would improve on individual
choices; see, for example, Thaler and Sunstein’s [2003] discussion of libertarian paternalism. Those claims
re‡ect assumptions, often implicit, concerning which choices are and are not appropriate guides to welfare.
We are sympathetic to the view that it may be possible and desirable to make such judgments in some
settings; that is why we allow the welfare-relevant domain G to diverge from the full domain G . However,
as discussed in Section 6, we would prefer to see those judgments stated explicitly, and justi…ed where
possible based on objective criteria.

13
chosen over c in X4 , which makes a and c not comparable under P .
Now let’s limit attention to G 0 = fX1 ; X2 ; X3 g. In that case, Assumption 1 is violated
(G 0 does not contain all …nite sets) and P cycles (aP bP cP a).

If we wish to create a

preference or utility representation based on the data contained in G 0 so we can project the
individual’s choice from the set X4 , the intransitivity would pose a di¢ culty. And if we try
to prescribe a welfare optimum for X4 without knowing (either directly or through a positive
model) what the individual would choose in X4 , we encounter the same problem: a, b, and
c are all strictly improvable, so there is no welfare optimum.16 But once we know what the
individual would select from X4 (either directly or by extrapolating from a reliable positive
model), the existence problem for X4 vanishes.
The previous example illustrates that the alternatives chosen from a set need not be the
only individual welfare optima within that set (speci…cally, a is an optimum in X3 , but is
not chosen from X3 ). Our next observation accounts for that possibility.
Observation 2: x is a weak individual welfare optimum in X if and only if for each
y 2 X (other than x) there is some GCS for which x is chosen with y available (y may be
chosen as well). Moreover, x is a strict individual welfare optimum in X if and only if for
each y 2 X (other than x), either x is chosen and y is not for some GCS with y available,
or there is no GCS for which y is chosen and x is not with x available.
The following example, based loosely on an experiment reported by Iyengar and Lepper
[2000], illustrates why one can reasonably treat an alternative as an individual welfare optimum within a set even though the decision maker never chooses it from that set. Suppose
a subject chooses strawberry jam when only one other ‡avor is available (regardless of what
it is, and assuming he also has the option to take nothing), but rejects all ‡avors (including
strawberry) in favor of nothing when thirty are available. In the latter case, one could argue
that taking nothing is his best alternative because he chooses it. But one could also argue
16

Even so, individual welfare optima exist within every set that falls within the restricted domain. Here,
a is a strict welfare optimum in X1 , b is a strict welfare optimum in X2 , and c is a strict welfare optimum
in X3 .

14
that strawberry jam is his best alternative because he chooses it over all of his other alternatives when facing simpler, less overwhelming decision problems. Our framework recognizes
that both judgments are potentially valid on the basis of choice patterns alone.

2.3

Further justi…cation for P

Though the binary welfare relations proposed herein are natural and intuitive generalizations
of the standard welfare relations, one could in principle devise alternatives. Here we provide
an additional justi…cation for favoring P . We have seen that P never overrules choice, in
the sense that any object chosen from a set X in some welfare-relevant condition is necessarily
a weak individual welfare optimum within X. Here we show that all other relations with
that desirable property are less discerning than P .
Consider a choice correspondence C de…ned on G and an asymmetric binary relation Q
de…ned on X. For any X 2 X , let mQ (X) be the maximal elements in X for the relation Q:
mQ (X) = fx 2 X j @y 2 X with yQxg
Also, for X 2 X , let D(X) be the set of ancillary conditions associated with X:
D(X) = fd j (X; d) 2 Gg
We will say that Q is an inclusive libertarian relation for a choice correspondence C if, for
all X 2 X , the maximal elements under Q include all of the elements the individual would
choose from X, considering all associated ancillary conditions (formally, [d2D(X) C(X:d)
mQ (X)). Such a relation never overrules choice in the sense mentioned above, and all other
relations overrule choice in some circumstance.
Observation 1 implies that P is an inclusive libertarian relation, but it is not the only
one.

For example, the null relation, RN ull (

xRN ull y for all x; y 2 X), falls into that

category. Yet RN ull is less discerning than P . According to the following result, so are all
other inclusive libertarian relations.

15
Theorem 2: Consider any choice correspondence C, and any asymmetric inclusive libertarian relation Q 6= P . Then P is …ner than Q. Thus, for all X 2 X , the set of
maximal elements in X for the relation P is contained in the set of maximal elements
in X for the relation Q (that is, mP (X)

mQ (X)).

Ideally, for a given choice correspondence C, one might wish to …nd a binary welfare
relation Q such that, for all X 2 X , the maximal elements under Q coincide exactly with the
elements the individual would choose from X, considering all associated ancillary conditions
(formally, [d2D(X) C(X:d) = mQ (X)).
C.17

We will call any such Q a libertarian relation for

Because any libertarian relation is also an inclusive libertarian relation, Theorem 2

implies that a libertarian relation exists for a choice correspondence C if and only if P is
libertarian.18 Thus, whenever there exists some preference relation that rationalizes choice
on G, P provides such a rationalization.
In principle, for a given choice correspondence C, one might also wish to …nd a binary
welfare relation Q such that, for all X 2 X , every maximal elements under Q is chosen from X
for some ancillary condition (formally, mQ (X) is non-empty, and mQ (X)

[d2D(X) C(X:d)).

We will call any such Q an exclusive libertarian relation for C. We focus on inclusive rather
than exclusive libertarian relations for three reasons. First, in our view, if an individual is
willing to choose x from the set X within the welfare-relevant domain, a choice-based welfare
criterion should not declare that x is improvable within X. Second, there are sometimes
good reasons to treat objects not chosen from a set as individual welfare optima within that
set (recall the jam example in Section 2.2). Finally, exclusive libertarian relations do not
17

In the absence of ancillary conditions, the statement that Q is a libertarian relation for C is equivalent to
the statement that Q rationalizes C (see, e.g., Bossert, Sprumont, and Suzumura [2005]). As is well-known,
one must impose restrictive conditions on C to guarantee the existence of a rationalization. For instance,
there is no rationalization (and hence no libertarian relation) for the choice correspondence described in
Example 1. One naturally wonders about the properties that a generalized choice correspondence must
have to guarantee the existence of a libertarian relation. See Rubinstein and Salant [2007] for an analysis
of that issue.
18
Indeed, according to Theorem 2, if there is an inclusive libertarian relation Q for a choice correspondence
C and a choice set X for which the set of maximal elements under Q coincides exactly with the set of chosen
elements (that is, [d2D(X) C(X) = mQ (X)), then the set of maximal elements under P also coincides
exactly with the set of chosen elements.

16
exist for many choice correspondences.19
One might also consider a more direct interpretation of choice-based welfare economics:
classify x as an individual welfare optimum for X i¤ there is some ancillary condition for
which the individual is willing to choose x from X. However, that approach does not allow
us to determine whether a change from one element of X to another is an improvement,
except in cases where the individual would choose either the initial or …nal element from X.
For that purpose we require a binary relation.

2.4

Relation to multi-self Pareto optima

Under certain restrictive conditions, our notion of an individual welfare optimum coincides
with the idea of a multi-self Pareto optimum. That criterion is most commonly invoked in
the literature on quasi-hyperbolic discounting, where it is applied to an individual’s many
time-dated “selves”(see, e.g., Laibson et. al. [1998]).
Suppose G is the Cartesian product of the set of constraint sets and a set of ancillary
conditions (G = X

D, where d 2 D); in that case, we say that G is rectangular. Suppose

also that, for each d 2 D, choices correspond to the maximal elements of a preference
ranking Rd , and hence to the alternatives that maximize a utility function ud .20 One can
then imagine that each ancillary condition activates a di¤erent “self” and apply the Pareto
criterion across selves.
yM x, i¤ ud (y)

We will say that y weakly multi-self Pareto dominates x, written

ud (x) for all d 2 D, with strict inequality for some d; it strictly multi-self

Pareto dominates x, written yM x, i¤ ud (y) > ud (x) for all d 2 D. Moreover, x 2 X

X is

a weak (strict) multi-self Pareto optimum in X if there is no y 2 X such that yM x (yM x).
Theorem 3: Suppose G is rectangular and choices for each d 2 D maximize a utility function ud .

Then M = P and M = P 0 .

It follows that x 2 X is a weak (strict)

multi-self Pareto optimum in X i¤ it is a weak (strict) individual welfare optimum.
19

It is easy to construct examples of choice correspondences that violate the standard independence axiom
for which no exclusive libertarian relation exists; see Example 5 in Bernheim and Rangel [2008b].
20
To guarantee that best choices are well-de…ned, we would ordinarily restrict X to compact sets and
assume that ud is at least upper-semicontinuous, but those assumptions play no role in what follows.

17
Thus, in certain narrow settings, our approach justi…es the multi-self Pareto criterion
without invoking potentially controversial psychological assumptions, such as the existence
of multiple coherent decision-making entities within the brain. That justi…cation does not
apply to quasi-hyperbolic consumers, because G is not rectangular; however, it does justify
the use of the multi-self Pareto criterion for cases of “coherent arbitrariness,”such as those
studied by Ariely, Loewenstein, and Prelec [2003] (see Section 2.5).

2.5

Applications to speci…c positive models

Next we explore the implications of our framework in the context of two speci…c positive
models: coherent arbitrariness and quasihyperbolic discounting. Partially coherent choice
patterns should also provide adequate traction for choice-based normative analysis in other
settings. A few additional examples include individuals who (a) sometimes exhibit choice
reversals when alternatives are listed in di¤erent orders, (b) always notice stochastic dominance in lotteries but are otherwise susceptible to framing e¤ects, or (c) do not notice small
di¤erences between alternatives, but choose coherently when di¤erences are large.
Coherent arbitrariness.

Behavior is coherently arbitrary when some psychological

anchor (for example, calling attention to a number) a¤ects choice, but the individual nevertheless conforms to standard axioms for any …xed anchor (see Ariely, Loewenstein, and
Prelec [2003], who construed this pattern as an indictment of the revealed preference paradigm). To illustrate, let’s suppose that an individual consumes two goods, y and z, and that
we have the following representation of decision utility:
U (y; z j d) = u(y) + dv(z)
with u and v strictly increasing, di¤erentiable, and strictly concave.

We interpret the

ancillary condition, d 2 [dL ; dH ], as an anchor that in‡uences decision utility.
Since G is rectangular, and since choices maximize U (y; z j d) for each d, Theorem 3
implies that our welfare criterion is equivalent to the multi-self Pareto criterion, where each

18
d indexes a di¤erent self. It follows that
(y 0 ; z 0 )R0 (y 00 ; z 00 ) i¤ u(y 0 ) + dv(z 0 )

u(y 00 ) + dv(z 00 ) for d = dL ; dH

(3)

Replacing the weak inequality with a strict one, we obtain a similar equivalence for P .
Figure 1(a) shows two decision-indi¤erence curves (that is, indi¤erence curves derived
from decision utility) passing through the bundle (y 0 ; z 0 ), one for dL (labelled IL ) and one for
dH (labelled IH ). All bundles (y 00 ; z 00 ) lying below both decision-indi¤erence curves satisfy
(y 0 ; z 0 )P (y 00 ; z 00 ); this is the analog of a lower contour set. All bundles (y 00 ; z 00 ) lying above
both decision-indi¤erence curves satisfy (y 00 ; z 00 )P (y 0 ; z 0 ); this is the analog of an upper
contour set. For all bundles (y 00 ; z 00 ) lying between the two decision-indi¤erence curves, we
have neither (y 0 ; z 0 )R0 (y 00 ; z 00 ) nor (y 00 ; z 00 )R0 (y 0 ; z 0 ); however, (y 0 ; z 0 )I (y 00 ; z 00 ).
Now consider a standard budget constraint, X = f(y; z) j y + pz

M g, where y is the

numeraire, p is the price of z, and M is income. As shown in Figure 1(b), the individual
chooses bundle a when the ancillary condition is dH , and bundle b when the ancillary condition is dL . Each of the points on the thick segment of the budget line between bundles
a and b is uniquely chosen for some d 2 [dL ; dH ], so all these bundles are strict individual
welfare optima. It is easy to prove that there are no other welfare optima, weak or strict.
As the gap between dL and dH shrinks, the set (y 00 ; z 00 )P (y 0 ; z 0 ) converges to a standard
upper contour set, and the set of individual welfare optima converges to a single utility
maximizing choice.

Thus, our welfare criterion converges to a standard criterion as the

behavioral anomaly becomes small. We will generalize this observation in Section 5.
Dynamic inconsistency. Consider the well-known ; model of quasihyperbolic discounting popularized by Laibson [1997] and O’Donoghue and Rabin [1999].

Economists

who use this positive model for policy analysis tend to employ one of two welfare criteria:
either the multi-self Pareto criterion, which associates each moment in time with a di¤erent
self, or the “long-run criterion,” which assumes that well-being is described by exponential
discounting at the rate . As we will see in the section, our framework leads to a di¤erent
criterion.

19
Suppose the consumer’s task is to choose a consumption vector, C1 = (c1 ; :::; cT ), where
0 denotes the level of consumption at time t. Let Ct denote the continuation consump-

ct

tion vector (ct ; :::; cT ). Choices at time t maximize the function
Ut (Ct ) = u(ct ) +

T
X

k t

u(ck ) ,

(4)

k=t+1

where ; 2 (0; 1). We assume perfect foresight concerning future decisions, so that behavior
is governed by subgame perfect equilibria. We also assume u(0) is …nite; for convenience,
we normalize u(0) = 0.21 Finally, we assume limc!1 u(c) = 1.
To conduct normative analysis, we must recognize that the selection of an intertemporal
consumption vector involves only one choice by a single decision maker.

Critically, that

statement remains valid even when the individual makes the decision over time in a series of
steps (notwithstanding the common practice of modeling such problems as games between
multiple time-dated selves); he still selects a single consumption trajectory. For this positive
model, a GCS G = (X; ) involves a set of lifetime consumption vectors, X, and a decision
tree, , for selecting an element of X.

The decision tree describes the options available

at each point in time (including precommitment opportunities), how those options depend
on past actions, and how they a¤ect the options that will be available in future periods.
There are typically many di¤erent trees that allow the individual to select from any given
X. Because some decisions depend on the points in time at which they are made, we may
have C(X; ) 6= C(X; 0 ) for

6=

0

; that is why we treat

as an ancillary condition.

For every possible constraint set X, G includes every conceivable pair (X; ), where
is decision tree for selecting from X.

Note that G is not rectangular: decision trees are

tailored to constraint sets, and in any case the individual cannot chose consumption for
period t using a tree that allows no choice until period k > t. Hence, Theorem 3, which
identi…es conditions that justify the multi-self Pareto criterion, does not apply.
21

The role of this assumption is to rule out the possibility that a voluntary decision taken in the future
can cause unbounded harm to the individual in the present. Such possibilities can arise when u(0) = 1,
but seem more an artifact of the formal model than a plausible aspect of time-inconsistent behavior. One
can show that if conceivable consumption is unbounded and u is unbounded both above and below on R,
then no alternative in R++ is unambiguously chosen over any other alternative.

20
The following result completely characterizes R0 and P for the , model, assuming that
the welfare-relevant domain G coincides with the full choice domain G .22
Theorem 4: Let G = G . De…ne Wt (Ct )

PT

k=t (

)k t u(ck ). Then C10 R0 C100 i¤ W1 (C10 )

U1 (C100 ), and C10 P C100 i¤ W1 (C10 ) > U1 (C100 ). Moreover, R0 and P are transitive.
In e¤ect, the theorem tells us that it is possible to design an intrapersonal game in which
C10 is chosen when C100 is feasible if and only if W1 (C10 )

U1 (C100 ).

Thus, to determine

whether C10 , is unambiguously chosen over C100 , we compare the …rst period decision utility
obtained from C100 (that is, U1 (C100 )) with the …rst period utility obtained from C10 discounting
at the rate
U1 (C10 )

(that is, W1 (C10 )). Given our normalization (u(0) = 0), we necessarily have

W1 (C10 ). Thus, U1 (C10 ) > U1 (C100 ) is a necessary (but not su¢ cient) condition for

C10 to be unambiguously chosen over C100 .23 That observation explains the transitivity of the
preference relation.24

It also implies that any welfare improvement under P or P 0 must

also be a welfare improvement under U1 , the decision utility at the …rst moment in time.
From Theorem 4, it follows that C1 is a weak welfare optimum in X if and only if the
decision utility that C1 provides at t = 1 is at least as large as the highest available discounted
value of u, using

as a time-consistent discount factor. Formally:

Corollary 2: For any consumption set X, C1 is a weak welfare optimum in X i¤ U1 (C1 )
supC10 2X W1 (C10 ). If U1 (C1 ) > supC10 2X W1 (C10 ), then C1 is a strict welfare optimum in
X.25
Notice that, for all C1 , lim

!1 [W1 (C1 )

U1 (C1 )] = 0.

Accordingly, as the degree of

dynamic inconsistency shrinks, our welfare criterion converges to the standard criterion.
22

From the characterization of R0 , we can deduce that C10 I 0 C100 i¤ W1 (C10 ) = U1 (C10 ) = W1 (C100 ) = U1 (C100 ),
which requires c0k = c00k = 0 for k > 2. Thus, for comparisons involving consumption pro…les with strictly
positive consumption in the third period or later, P 0 coincides with R0 . From the characterization of
P , we can deduce that (i) C10 R C100 i¤ U1 (C10 )
W1 (C100 ), and (ii) C10 I C100 i¤ U1 (C10 )
W1 (C100 ) and
00
0
U1 (C1 ) W1 (C1 ).
23
Also, U1 (C10 ) U1 (C100 ) is a necessary (but not su¢ cient) condition for C10 to be weakly unambiguously
chosen over C100 .
24
For similar reasons, it is also trivial to show that C11 R0 C12 P C13 implies C11 P C13 .
25
If U1 (C1 ) = supC10 2X W1 (C10 ), then C1 may or may not be a strict welfare optimum.

21
In contrast, the same statement does not hold for the multi-self Pareto criterion, as that
criterion is usually formulated. The reason is that, regardless of , each self is assumed to
care only about current and future consumption. Thus, consuming everything in the …nal
period is always a multi-self Pareto optimum, even when

= 1.

Note that if the relevant time periods are short (e.g., days) and the value of

is noticeably

less than one (e.g., 0.95), then the welfare criterion identi…ed in Theorem 4 may be discerning
only when applied to problems with short planning horizons (e.g., short-term procrastination,
but not retirement). In Section 6, we discuss potential criteria for restricting the welfarerelevant domain G, thereby generating more discerning criteria.

3

Tools for applied welfare analysis

In this section we show that the concept of compensating variation has a natural counterpart within our framework; the same is true of equivalent variation (for analogous reasons).
We also illustrate how, under more restrictive assumptions, the generalized compensating
variation of a price change corresponds to an analog of consumer surplus.

3.1

Compensating variation

Let’s assume that the individual’s constraint set, X( ; m), depends on a vector of environmental parameters, , and a monetary transfer, m. Let
d0 the initial ancillary condition, and (X(
change in parameters to

1

0 ; 0); d0 )

0

be the initial parameter vector,

the initial GCS. We will consider a

and in the ancillary condition to d1 , along with a monetary

transfer m. We write the new GCS as (X(

1 ; m); d1 ).

This setting will allow us to evaluate

compensating variations for …xed changes in prices, ancillary conditions, or both.26
Within the standard economic framework, the compensating variation is the smallest
value of m such that for any x 2 C(X(
26

0 ; 0))

and y 2 C(X(

1 ; m)),

the individual would

This formulation of compensating variation assumes that G is rectangular. If G is not rectangular, then
as a general matter we would need to write the …nal GCS as (X( 1 ; m); d1 (m)), and specify the manner in
which d1 varies with m.

22
be willing to choose y in a binary comparison with x. In extending that de…nition to our
framework, we encounter three ambiguities. The …rst arises when the individual is willing
to choose more than one alternative in either the initial GCS (X(
GCS, (X(

1 ; m); d1 ).

0 ; 0); d0 ),

or in the …nal

Unlike in the standard framework, comparisons may depend on the

particular pair considered.

We handle that ambiguity by insisting that compensation is

adequate for all pairs of outcomes that could be chosen from the initial and …nal sets.
A second ambiguity arises from a potential form of non-monotonicity. Without further
assumptions, we cannot guarantee that, if the payment m is adequate to compensate an
individual for some change, then any m0 > m is also adequate.

We handle that issue by

…nding a level of compensation beyond which such reversals do not occur. (We discuss an
alternative in Appendix D of Bernheim and Rangel [2008b].)
The third dimension of ambiguity concerns the standard of compensation: do we consider
compensation su¢ cient when the new situation (with the compensation) is unambiguously
chosen over the old one, or when the old situation is not unambiguously chosen over the new
one? That ambiguity is an essential feature of welfare evaluations with inconsistent choice.
Accordingly, we de…ne two notions of compensating variation:
De…nition: CV-A is the level of compensation mA that solves
inf fm j yP x for all m0

m, x 2 C(X(

0 ; 0); d0 )

and y 2 C(X(

1; m

0

); d1 (m0 ))g

De…nition: CV-B is the level of compensation mB that solves
sup fm j xP y for all m0

m, x 2 C(X(

0 ; 0); d0 )

and y 2 C(X(

1; m

0

); d1 (m0 ))g

In other words, all levels of compensation greater than the CV-A (smaller than CV-B)
guarantee that everything selected in the new (initial) set is unambiguously chosen over
everything selected from the initial (new) set.27 It is easy to verify that mA
27

mB . Also,

Additional continuity assumptions are required to guarantee that the individual is adequately compensated when the level of compensation equals CV-A (or CV-B).

23
when

1

=

0

and d1 6= d0 , we always have mA

0

mB . Thus, the welfare e¤ect of a

change in the ancillary condition, by itself, is always ambiguous.
Theorem 1 guarantees that CV-A and CV-B are well-behaved welfare measures in the
following sense: If the individual experiences a sequence of changes and is adequately compensated for each in the sense of the CV-A, no alternative that he would select from the
initial set is unambiguously chosen over any alternative that he would select from the …nal
set.28 Similarly, if he experiences a sequence of changes and is not adequately compensated
for any of them in the sense of the CV-B, no alternative that he would select from the …nal
set is unambiguously chosen over any alternative that he would select from the initial set.
In contrast to the standard framework, the compensating variations (either CV-As or
CV-Bs) associated with each step in a sequence of changes needn’t be additive.29 However,
we are not troubled by non-additivity. If one wishes to determine the size of the payment
that compensates for a collection of changes, it is appropriate to consider these changes
together, rather than sequentially.

The fact that the individual could be induced to pay

(or accept) a di¤erent amount, in total, provided he is surprised by the sequence of changes
(and treats each as if it leads to the …nal outcome) is not a serious conceptual di¢ culty.

3.2

Consumer surplus

Under more restrictive assumptions, the compensating variation of a price change corresponds to an analog of consumer surplus. Let’s consider again the model of coherent arbitrariness, but assume a more restrictive form of decision utility (which involves no income
e¤ects, so that Marshallian consumer surplus would be valid in the standard framework):
U (y; z j d) = y + dv(z)

(5)

28
For example, if mA
1 is the CV-A for a change from (X( 0 ; 0); d0 ) to (X( 1 ; m); d1 ), and if, for some
A
> 0, mA
is
the
CV-A
for a change from (X( 1 ; mA
+ m); d2 ), then nothing
2
1 + ); d1 ) to (X( 2 ; m1 +
that the individual would choose from (X( 0 ; 0); d0 ) is unambiguously chosen over anything that he would
A
choose from (X( 2 ; mA
1 + + m2 + "); d2 ) for " > 0.
29
In the standard framework, if m1 is the CV for a change from X( 0 ; 0) to X( 1 ; m), and if m2 is the
CV for a change from X( 1 ; m1 ) to X( 2 ; m1 + m), then m1 + m2 is the CV for a change from X( 0 ; 0) to
X( 2 ; m). The same statement does not necessarily hold within our framework.

24
Thus, for any given d, the inverse demand curve for z is given by p = dv 0 (z)

P (z; d).

Let M denote the consumer’s initial income. Consider a change in the price of z from p0
to p1 , along with a change in ancillary conditions from d0 to d1 . Let z0 denote the amount
of z purchased with (p0 ; d0 ), and let z1 denote the amount purchased with (p1 ; d1 ); assume
that z0 > z1 .

Since there are no income e¤ects, z1 will not change as the individual is

compensated. The following result provides a simple formula for CV-A and CV-B:
Theorem 5: Suppose decision utility is given by equation (5), and consider a change from
Rz
(p0 ; d0 ) to (p1 ; d1 ). Let m(d) = [p1 p0 ]z1 + z10 [P (z; d) p0 ]dz (where zk satis…es
P (zk ; dk ) = pk for k = 0; 1, and z0 > z1 ). Then mA = m(dH ) and mB = m(dL ).

The …rst term in the expression for m(d) is the extra amount the consumer pays for
the …rst z1 units.

The second term involves the area between the demand curve and a

horizontal line at p0 between z1 and z0 when d is the ancillary condition.

Figure 2(a)

provides a graphical illustration of CV-A, analogous to ones found in most microeconomics
textbooks: it is the sum of the areas labeled A and B. Figure 2(b) illustrates CV-B: it
is the sum of the areas labeled A and C, minus the area labeled E. Note that CV-A and
CV-B bracket the conventional measure of consumer surplus that one would obtain using
the demand curve associated with the ancillary condition d0 .

As the range of possible

ancillary conditions narrows, CV-A and CV-B both converge to standard consumer surplus,
a property which we generalize in Section 5.
For an application of this framework to a practical problem involving the salience of sales
taxes, as well as for an extension to settings with income e¤ects, see Chetty et. al. [2008].

4

Welfare analysis involving more than one individual

In this section we describe a natural generalization of Pareto optimality to settings with
behavioral anomalies, and we illustrate its use by examining the e¢ ciency of competitive
market equilibria.

25

4.1

Generalized Pareto optima

Suppose there are N individuals indexed i = 1; :::; N . Let X denote the set of all conceivable
social choice objects, and let X denote the set of feasible objects.

Let Ci be the choice

correspondence for individual i, de…ned over Gi (where the subscript re‡ects the possibility
that the set of ancillary conditions may di¤er from individual to individual). These choice
correspondences induce the relations Ri0 and Pi over X.
We say that x is a weak generalized Pareto optimum in X if there exists no y 2 X with
yPi x for all i. We say that x is a strict generalized Pareto optimum in X if there exists
no y 2 X with yRi0 x for all i, and yPi x for some i.30

If one thinks of P as a preference

relation, then our notion of a weak generalized Pareto optimum coincides with existing
notions of social e¢ ciency when consumers have incomplete and/or intransitive preferences
(see, e.g., Fon and Otani [1979], Rigotti and Shannon [2005], or Mandler [2006]).31
Since strict individual welfare optima do not always exist, we cannot guarantee the existence of strict generalized Pareto optima with a high degree of generality. However, we
can trivially guarantee the existence of a weak generalized Pareto optimum for any set X:
simply choose x 2 Ci (X; d) for some i and (X; d) 2 Gi .
In the standard framework, there is typically a continuum of Pareto optima that spans the
gap between the extreme cases in which the chosen alternative is optimal for some individual.
We often represent that continuum by drawing a utility possibility frontier or, in the case
of a two-person exchange economy, a contract curve.
30

Is there also usually a continuum

Between these extremes, there are two intermediate notions of Pareto optimality. One could replace Pi
with Pi0 in the de…nition of a weak generalized Pareto optimum, or replace Ri0 with Pi0 and Pi0 with Pi in
the de…nition of a strict generalized Pareto optimum. One could also replace Pi with Pi0 in the de…nition of
a strict generalized Pareto optimum.
31
It is important to keep in mind that, in that literature, an individual is always willing to select any
element of a choice set X that is maximal with X under the preference relation. In contrast, in our
framework, an individual is not necessarily willing to select any element of X that is maximal within X
under the individual welfare relation P . (Recall that P is an inclusive libertarian relation, but that it
need not rationalize the choice correspondence.) However, for the limited purpose of characterizing socially
e¢ cient outcomes, choice is not involved, so that distinction is immaterial. Thus, as illustrated in an
example below, existing results concerning the structure or characteristics of the Pareto e¢ cient set with
incomplete and/or intransitive preferences apply in our setting.

26
of generalized Pareto optima spanning the gap between the extreme cases described in the
previous paragraph?

The following example answers that question in the context of a

two-person exchange economy.
Example 2: Consider a two-person exchange economy involving two goods, y and z.
Suppose the choices of consumer 1 are described by the model of coherent arbitrariness
discussed earlier, while consumer 2’s choices respect standard axioms.

In Figure 3, we

have drawn two standard contract curves. The one labeled TH is formed by the tangencies
between the consumers’ indi¤erence curves when consumer 1 faces ancillary condition dH
(such as the point at which I1H touches I2 ); the one labeled TL is formed by the tangencies
when consumer 1 faces ancillary condition dL (such as the point at which I1L and I2 ). The
shaded area between those two curves is the generalized contract curve; it contains all of
the weak generalized Pareto optimal allocations. The ambiguities in consumer 1’s choices
expand the set of Pareto optima, which is why the generalized contract curve is thick.32 Like
a standard contract curve, the generalized contract curve runs between the southwest and
northeast corners of the Edgeworth box, so there are many intermediate Pareto optima. If
the behavioral e¤ects of the ancillary conditions were smaller, the generalized contract curve
would be thinner; in the limit, it would converge to a standard contract curve. (Section 5
generalizes this point.)
Our next result establishes with generality (and with no further assumptions) that, just
as in Figure 3, one can start with any alternative x 2 X and …nd a Pareto optimum that no
individual unambiguously chooses over x.33
Theorem 6: For every x 2 X, the non-empty set fy 2 X j 8i,

xPi yg includes at least

one weak generalized Pareto optimum in X.
32

Notably, in another setting with incomplete preferences, Mandler [2006] demonstrates with generality
that the Pareto e¢ cient set has full dimensionality.
33
The proof of Theorem 6 is more subtle than one might expect; in particular, there is no guarantee
that any individual’s welfare optimum within the set fy 2 X j 8i,
xPi yg is a generalized Pareto optimum
within X.

27

4.2

The e¢ ciency of competitive equilibria

The notion of a generalized Pareto optimum easily lends itself to formal analysis.

To

illustrate, we provide a generalization of the …rst welfare theorem.
Consider an economy with N consumers, F …rms, and K goods. Let xn denote the consumption vector of consumer n, z n the endowment vector of consumer n, Xn the consumption
set for consumer n, and y f the input-output vector of …rm f . Feasibility of production for
…rm f requires y f 2 Y f , where the production sets Y f are characterized by free disposal.
Let Y denote the aggregate production set. We will say that an allocation x = (x1 ; :::; xN )
P
n
z n ) 2 Y and xn 2 X n for all n. Trade occurs at a price vector
is feasible if N
n=1 (x

subject to ancillary conditions d = (d1 ; :::; dN ), where dn pertains to consumer n. The price
vector

implies a budget constraint B n ( ) = fxn 2 Xn j xn

z n g for consumer n.

We assume that pro…t maximization governs the choices of …rms.

Consumer n’s be-

havior is described by a choice correspondence C n (X n ; dn ), where X n is a set of available
consumption vectors, and dn represents the applicable ancillary condition. Let Rn0 be the
welfare relation on Xn obtained from (G n ; C n ) (similarly for Pn0 and Pn ).
A behavioral competitive equilibrium involves a price vector, b, a consumption allocation,

x
b = (b
x1 ; :::; x
bN ), a production allocation, yb = (b
y 1 ; :::; ybF ), and a set of ancillary conditions
P
xn z n ) =
db = (db1 ; :::; dbN ), such that (i) for each n, we have x
bn 2 C n (B n (b); dbn ), (ii) N
n=1 (b
PF
bf , and (iii) ybf maximizes by f for y f 2 Y f .34
f =1 y

Fon and Otani [1979] established the e¢ ciency of competitive equilibria in exchange

economies when consumers have incomplete and/or intransitive preferences (see also Rigotti
and Shannon [2005] and Mandler [2006]). The e¢ ciency of behavioral competitive equilibria in exchange economies (a much more general statement) follows as a corollary of their
theorem.35 A similar argument establishes e¢ ciency for production economies.
34

One could endogenize the ancillary conditions by supplementing this de…nition with additional equilibrium requirements. However, Theorem 7 would still apply.
35
Let mPi (X) denote the maximal elements of X under Pi . Consider an alternative exchange economy
in which mPi (X) is the choice correspondence for consumer i. According to Theorem 1 of Fan and Otani
[1979], the competitive equilibria of that economy are Pareto e¢ cient, when judged according to P1 ,...,PN .

28
Theorem 7: If all choices are welfare-relevant (G n = G n ), then the allocation associated
with any behavioral competitive equilibrium is a weak generalized Pareto optimum.36
The generality of Theorem 7 is worth emphasizing: it establishes the e¢ ciency of competitive equilibria within a framework that imposes almost no restrictions on consumer behavior,
thereby allowing for virtually any conceivable choice pattern, including all anomalies documented in the behavioral literature. Note, however, that the theorem plainly need not hold
if …rms pursue objectives other than pro…t maximization. Thus, we see that the …rst welfare
theorem is driven by assumptions concerning the behavior of …rms, not consumers.
Naturally, behavioral competitive equilibrium can be ine¢ cient in the presence of su¢ ciently severe but otherwise standard market failures. In addition, even a perfectly competitive behavioral equilibrium may be ine¢ cient when judged by a welfare relation derived
from a restricted welfare-relevant choice domain (G

G ). This observation alerts us to the

fact that, in behavioral economies, there is a new class of potential market failures involving
choice situations that have been pruned from G n . Our analysis of addiction (Bernheim and
Rangel [2004]) exempli…es that possibility.

5

Standard welfare analysis as a limiting case

Several of the examples in the preceding sections suggest that, for settings in which departures from standard choice axioms are minor, one can approximate the appropriate welfare
criterion by ignoring choice anomalies and applying the standard normative framework. We
now establish that point with generality. Our analysis requires some technical machinery.
First we add a mild assumption concerning the choice domain:
For any behavioral competitive equilibrium, there is necessarily an equivalent equilibrium for the alternative
economy. (Note that the converse is not necessarily true.) Thus, the behavioral competitive equilibrium
must be a generalized Pareto optimum. Presumably, one could also address the existence of behavioral
competitive equilibria by adapting the approach developed in Mas-Colell [1974], Gale and Mas-Colell [1975],
and Shafer and Sonnenschein [1975].
36
One can also show that a behavioral competitive equilibrium is a strict generalized Pareto optimum under
the following additional assumption (which is akin to non-satiation): if xn ; wn 2 X n and xn > wn (where
> indicates a strict inequality for every component), then wn 2
= C n (X n ; dn ) for any dn with (X n ; dn ) 2 G n .
n
n
n
n
In that case, w Rn x
b implies bw
bx
b ; otherwise, the proof is unchanged.

29
Assumption 3: X (the set of potential choice objects) is compact, and for all X 2 X , we
have clos(X) 2 X c (the compact elements of X ).
Now consider a sequence of choice correspondences C n , n = 1; 2; :::, de…ned on G. Also

b de…ned on X c that re‡ects maximization of a continuous
consider a choice correspondence C

b if and only if the following
utility function, u. We will say that C n weakly converges to C
condition is satis…ed: for all " > 0, there exists N such that for all n > N and (X; d) 2 G,
37
b
each point in C n (X; d) is within " of some point in C(clos(X)).

Note that we allow for the possibility that the set X is not compact.

In that case,

our de…nition of convergence implies that choices must approach the choice made from the
closure of X. So, for example, if the opportunity set is X = [0; 1), where the chosen action
x entails a dollar payo¤ of x, we might have C n (X) = [1

1
; 1),
n

b
whereas C(clos(X))
= f1g.

b
The convergence of C n (X) to C(clos(X))
is intuitive: for a given n, the individual satis…ces,
but as n increases, he chooses something that leaves less and less room for improvement.

To state our next result, we require some additional de…nitions. For the limiting (conb and any X 2 X C , we de…ne U
b (u)
ventional) choice correspondence C
b (u)
and L

fy 2 X j u(y)

fy 2 X j u(y)

ug

b (u) and L
b (u) are, respectively, the standard
ug. In words, U

weak upper and lower contour sets relative to a particular level of utility u for the utility
b Similarly, for each choice correspondence C n and X 2 X , we de…ne
representation of C.
U n (x)

fy 2 X j yP n xg and Ln (x)

fy 2 X j xP n yg. In words, U n (x) and Ln (x) are,

respectively, the strict upper and lower contour sets relative to the alternative x, de…ned
according to the welfare relation P n derived from C n .
We now establish that the strict upper and lower contour sets for C n , de…ned according
b
to the relations P n , converge to the conventional weak upper and lower contour sets for C.
b
Theorem 8: Suppose the sequence of choice correspondences C n weakly converges to C,
37

b is de…ned on X c , and re‡ects maximization of a continuous utility function,
where C

Technically, this involves uniform convergence in the upper Hausdor¤ hemimetric; see Appendix C.

30
u. Consider any x0 . For all " > 0, there exists N such that for all n > N , we have
b (u(x0 ) + ")
U

b (u(x0 )
U n (x0 ) and L

")

Ln (x0 ).

b (u(x0 ) + ")
Because U n (x0 ) and Ln (x0 ) cannot overlap, and because the boundaries of U

b (u(x0 ) ") converge to each other as " shrinks to zero, it follows immediately (given the
and L

b (u(x0 )) and Ln (x0 ) converges to L
b (u(x0 )).
boundedness of X) that U n (x0 ) converges to U

Our next result establishes that, under innocuous assumptions concerning X( ; m) and

u, the CV-A and the CV-B converge generally to the standard compensating variation.
b
Theorem 9: Suppose the sequence of choice correspondences C n weakly converges to C,

b is de…ned on X c , and re‡ects maximization of a continuous utility function,
where C

u. Assume X( ; m) is compact for all
assume maxx2X(
b
if C(X(
; m))

;m)

and m, and continuous in m.38

u(x) is weakly increasing in m for all

int(X). Consider a change from (

0 ; d0 )

Also

, and strictly increasing
to (

b and suppose C(X(
b
standard compensating variation given C,

1 ; d1 ).

b
1 ; m))

Let m
b be the

int(X).39 Let

mnA be the CV-A, and mnB the CV-B given C n . Then limn!1 mnA = limn!1 mnB = m.
b

Our …nal convergence result establishes that generalized Pareto optima converge to standard Pareto optima.40 The statement of the theorem requires the following notation: for any
domain G, choice set X, and collection of choice correspondences (one for each individual)
C1 ; :::; CN de…ned on G, let W (X; C1 ; :::; CN ; G) denote the set of weak generalized Pareto
optima within X.

(When ancillary conditions are absent, we engage in a slight abuse of

notation by writing the set of weak Pareto optima as W (X; C1 ; :::; CN ; X )).
Theorem 10: Consider any sequence of choice correspondence pro…les, (C1n ; :::; CNn ), such

38

bi , where C
bi is de…ned on X c and re‡ects maximization
that Cin weakly converges to C

X( ; m) is continuous in m if it is both upper and lower hemicontinuous in m.
This statement assumes that m
b is well-de…ned. Without further restrictions, there is no guarantee that
any …nite payment will compensate for the change from 0 to 1 .
40
It follows from Theorem 10 that, for settings in which the Pareto e¢ cient set is “thin” (that is, of low
dimensionality) under standard assumptions, the set of generalized Pareto optima is “almost thin” as long
as behavioral anomalies are not too large. Thus, unlike Mandler [2006], we are not troubled by the fact
that the Pareto e¢ cient set with incomplete preferences may have high (even full) dimensionality.
39

31
of a continuous utility function, ui .

For any X 2 X and any sequence of alter-

natives xn 2 W (X; C1n ; :::; CNn ; G), all limit points of convergent subsequences lie in
b1 ; :::; C
bN ; X c ).
W (clos(X); C

Theorem 10 has an immediate corollary for a single decision maker:
b
Corollary 3: Suppose the sequence of choice correspondences C n weakly converges to C,

b is de…ned on X c , and re‡ects maximization of a continuous utility function, u.
where C
For any X 2 X and any sequence of alternatives xn such that xn is a weak individual

welfare optimum for C n , all limit points of convergent subsequences maximize u in
clos(X).
Theorems 8, 9, and 10 are important for three reasons. First, they justify the common
view that the standard welfare framework must be approximately correct when behavioral
anomalies are small. A formal justi…cation for that view has been absent. To conclude that
the standard normative criterion is roughly correct in a setting with choice anomalies, we
would need to compare it to the correct criterion. Unless we have established the correct
criteria for such settings, we have no benchmark against which to gauge the performance of
the standard criterion, even when choice anomalies are tiny. Our framework overcomes that
problem by providing welfare criteria for all situations. Our results imply that small choice
anomalies have only minor implications for welfare. Thus, we have formalized the intuition
that a little bit of positive falsi…cation is unimportant from a normative perspective.
Second, our convergence results imply that the debate over the signi…cance of choice
anomalies need not be resolved prior to adopting a framework for welfare analysis.

If

our framework is adopted and the anomalies ultimately prove to be small, one will obtain
virtually the same answer as with the standard framework.
Third, our convergence results suggest that our welfare criterion will always be reasonably
discerning provided behavioral anomalies are not too large. That observation is reassuring,
in that the welfare relations may be extremely coarse, and the sets of individual welfare
optima extremely large, when choice con‡icts are su¢ ciently severe.

32

6

Re…ning the welfare relations

It straightforward to verify that R0 and P

become weakly …ner as the welfare-relevant

domain (G) shrinks and weakly coarser as it expands. Intuitively, if choices between two
alternatives x and y are unambiguous over some domain, they are also unambiguous over
a smaller domain.41

Consequently, if one is concerned that R0 and P are insu¢ ciently

discerning, one can potentially re…ne those relations by excluding GCSs from the welfarerelevant domain.

Justifying such re…nements generally requires one to o¢ ciate between

apparent choice con‡icts. Many existing discussions of behavioral welfare economics amount
to informal arguments concerning o¢ ciation; for example, one choice is sometimes taken to
be more indicative of “true preferences” than another.

Our framework permits one to

introduce and formalize such arguments within the context of identifying G.
For a choice-based normative framework, it is natural to consider the possibility of
self-o¢ ciating through meta-choices (that is, choices between choices). The case of timeinconsistency illustrates some of the conceptual problems with that approach. Assume an
individual would choose x over y for time t at time t, but would choose y over x for time t
at time t

1. Any meta-choice between those choices must occur at time t

Therefore, just like the decision at t

1 or earlier.

1, all meta-choices are made at arms length from

the reward. But an arms-length choice clearly cannot objectively resolve whether another
arms-length choice (the one at time t

1) or an in-the-moment choice (the one at time t) is

a more appropriate normative guide.
More generally, a meta-choice is simply another GCS. Within our framework, consideration of meta-choices therefore amounts to expanding the welfare-relevant domain G, which
makes the relations R0 and P weakly coarser, potentially enlarging (and never shrinking)
the set of weak individual welfare optima.42 The welfare relations can become …ner only if
41

Notice, however, the same principle does not hold for P 0 or R . If we have xI 0 y for some domain G, we
might nevertheless have xP 0 y for a more inclusive domain, G 0 . Similarly, if we have xP y (so that yR x)
for some domain G, we might nevertheless have yR x for a more inclusive domain, G 0 .
42
Expanding G can shrink the set of strict individual welfare optima for a constraint set X, but only if
there are two optimal elements of X such that the individual is never willing to choose one but not the other

33
we also exclude the “defeated”GCS, which would implicitly require us to elevate the status
of one type of choice (the meta-choice) over another (the original choice). But that elevated
status necessarily re‡ects an arbitrary judgment. We might seek a choice-based justi…cation
for that judgment by considering a second-level meta-choice (between the original metachoice and the excluded GCS), but that path leads inevitably to consideration of higher and
higher level meta-choices, with no logical stopping point. In addition, unless one is willing
to impose additional structure, there is no guarantee that meta-choices will be decisive; for
example, they may be cyclic, or k-th level meta-choices may con‡ict with (k + 1)-th level
meta-choices for all k. Thus, it is hard to imagine a compelling choice-based justi…cation
for deference to meta-choices.
Can we devise other compelling criteria for excluding GCSs from the welfare-relevant
domain, G? The remainder of this section discusses several alternatives.

6.1

Re…nements based on imperfect information processing

Suppose there is some GCS, G = (X; d), in which the individual incorrectly perceives the
constraint set as Y 6= X. We submit that it is appropriate to delete that GCSs from the
welfare-relevant domain G.43 Even with its deletion, ambiguities in R0 and P may remain,
but those relations nevertheless become (weakly) …ner and hence more discerning.
Why would the individual believe himself to be choosing from the wrong set?

His

attention may focus on some small subset of X, his memory may fail to call up facts that
relate choices to consequences, he may forecast the consequences of his choices incorrectly,
or he may have learned from his past experiences more slowly than the objective information
would permit. Accordingly, we propose using non-choice evidence, including …ndings from
psychology, neuroscience, and neuroeconomics, to identify and delete suspect GCSs in which
when both are available.
43
In principle, if we understood the individual’s cognitive processes su¢ ciently well, we might be able to
identify his perceived choice set Y , and reinterpret the choice as pertaining to Y rather than to X. While it
may be possible to accomplish that task in some instances (see, e.g., Koszegi and Rabin [2008b]), we suspect
that, in most cases, it is beyond the current capabilities of economics, neuroscience, and psychology.

34
those types of informational processing failures occur.44
The following simple example motivates the use of evidence from neuroscience.45

An

individual is o¤ered a choice between alternatives x and y. He chooses x when the alternatives are described verbally, and y when they are described partly verbally and partly in
writing. Which choice is the best guide for public policy? If we learn that the information
was provided in a dark room, we would be inclined to respect the choice of x, rather than
the choice of y. We would reach the same conclusion if an opthamologist certi…ed that the
individual was blind, or, more interestingly, if a brain scan revealed that his visual processing
circuitry was impaired. In all these cases, non-choice evidence sheds light on the likelihood
that the individual successfully processed information that was in principle available to him,
thereby properly identifying the choice set X.
Our work on addiction (Bernheim and Rangel [2004]) illustrates this agenda.

Citing

evidence from neuroscience, we argue as follows. First, the brain’s value forecasting circuitry
includes a speci…c neural system that measures empirical correlations between cues and
potential rewards. Second, the repeated use of an addictive substance causes that system
to malfunction in the presence of cues that are associated with its use. Whether or not that
system also plays a role in hedonic experience, the choices made in the presence of those
cues are therefore predicated on improperly processed information, and welfare evaluations
should be guided by choices made under other conditions (e.g., precommitments).
In many situations, simpler forms of evidence may su¢ ce. For example, if an individual
characterizes a choice as a mistake on the grounds that he neglected or misunderstood
information, or if a simple test of his knowledge reveals that he ignored critical information,
then one might justi…ably declare the choice suspect. Other considerations, such as the
complexity of a GCS, could also come into play.
44
Thus, our analysis speaks to the current debate over the role of non-choice evidence in economic analysis.
See Gul and Pesendorfer [2008], as well as various other papers appearing in Caplin and Schotter [2008].
45
The relevance of evidence from neuroscience and neuroeconomics may not be con…ned to problems with
information processing. Pertinent considerations would also include impairments that prevent people from
implementing desired courses of action.

35
Even in the absence of hard evidence, reasonable people may tend to agree that certain
GCSs are not conducive to full and accurate information processing. We propose classifying such GCSs as provisionally suspect, and proceeding as described above.

Anyone who

questions a provisional classi…cation can examine the sensitivity of welfare statements to the
inclusion or exclusion of the pertinent GCSs. Moreover, any serious disagreement concerning the classi…cation of a particular GCS could in principle be resolved through a narrow
and disciplined examination of evidence pertaining to information processing failures.
Note that this re…nement agenda entails only a mild modi…cation of our choice-based
perspective on welfare. Signi…cantly, we do not propose the use of any information as either
a substitute for or alternative to choice patterns.

Within this framework, all evaluations

ultimately respect at least some of the individual’s choices, and must be consistent with all
unambiguous choice patterns.
What is a mistake?

The concept of a mistake does not exist within the context

of standard choice-theoretic welfare economics.

Within our framework, one can de…ne a

mistake as a choice made in a suspect GCS that is contradicted by choices in non-suspect
GCSs. According to that de…nition, the individual’s mistake lies in his understanding of his
constraint set, not in the choice he makes given that understanding.
In Bernheim and Rangel [2004], we mentioned the example of American visitors to the
UK, who su¤er numerous injuries and fatalities because they often look only to the left before
stepping into streets, even though they know tra¢ c approaches from the right. We naturally
sense that the pedestrian is not attending to pertinent information and/or options, and that
his inattention leads to consequences that he would otherwise wish to avoid. Accordingly, we
classify the associated GCS as provisionally suspect on the grounds that behavior is probably
mistaken (in the sense de…ned above), and instead examine choice situations for which the
pedestrian noticeably attends to tra¢ c patterns.
Paternalism. In extreme cases, all or most of an individual’s potential GCSs may be
suspect, in which case choice provides an insu¢ cient basis for welfare analysis.

Possible

36
examples include people su¤ering from Alzheimer’s disease, other forms of dementia, or severe injuries to some of the brain’s information-processing circuitry.

Likewise, we might

regard decisions by young children as inherently suspect. Thus, our framework carves out
a role for paternalism. It also suggests a strategy for formulating paternalistic judgments:
construct the welfare relations after replacing deleted choices with proxies. Such proxies
might be derived from the behavior of decision makers whose decision processes are not suspect, but who are otherwise similar (e.g., with respect to their choices for any non-suspect
GCSs that they have in common, and/or their hedonic responses to speci…c consequences).
For individuals who experience episodes that simultaneously involve both abnormal hedonic
responses and impaired decision-making circuitry (e.g., unpleasant and psychologically paralyzing anxiety attacks), it would not be appropriate to substitute the choices of a functional
decision maker with normal hedonic responses. Instead, one could construct choice proxies
by modeling the relationship between choices and hedonic responses for an individual with
functional decision-making circuitry and predicting the choices he would make if he had the
same abnormal hedonic responses.

6.2

Re…nements based on coherence

In some instances, it may be possible to partition behavior into coherent patterns and isolated
anomalies.

One might then adopt the position that welfare analysis should ignore the

anomalies entirely. That argument suggests another potential re…nement strategy: identify
subsets of GCSs within which choices are coherent (in the sense that standard axioms hold);
then construct welfare relations based on those GCSs and ignore other choices. The main
di¢ culty with this coherence criterion is that all behavior is coherent within a su¢ ciently
narrow scope (e.g., every choice is coherent taken by itself). How does one judge whether
that scope is too narrow?

Despite our inability to o¤er a general and precise de…nition,

there are nevertheless contexts in which coherence has a natural interpretation.
Take the problem of intertemporal consumption allocation for a ; consumer (Section
2.5). Consider a single-choice GCS (in which the decision is completely resolved through

37
full precommitment at a single point in time) that con‡icts with a staged-choice GCS (in
which it is made in a series of steps). Much of the extant literature adopts the position that
a decision for the single-choice GCS re‡ects a single coherent perspective while a decision
for the staged-choice GCS does not.

That view invites an application of the coherence

criterion: exclude staged-choice GCSs from the welfare-relevant domain, denoted Gc , while
retaining single-choice GCSs, which cohere within time-indexed subsets. We will explore the
implications of that re…nement to illustrate the potential power of the coherence criterion.
Because the proposed re…nement does not o¢ ciate between con‡icting single-choice GCSs,
it fails to resolve all ambiguity. Nevertheless, within our framework, it yields a discerning
welfare criterion. Our next result characterizes individual welfare optima under the resulting
welfare relations, Rc0 and Pc , for conventional intertemporal budget constraints.46

De…ne

1
,
1+r

where r is the rate of interest. Also de…ne the constraint set X1 as consisting of
P
all non-negative consumption vectors (c1 ; :::; cT ) for which Tk=1 k 1 ct w1 . Assume that
initial wealth, w1 , is strictly positive, and that u(c) is continuous and strictly concave.

Theorem 11: Based on Rc0 and Pc , the consumption vector C1 is an individual welfare
optimum in X1 (both weak and strict) i¤ C1 maximizes U1 (C1 ).
According to Theorem 11, welfare optimality within X1 under Rc is completely governed
by the individual’s perspective at the …rst moment in time.47 The special status of t = 1,
which we noted following Theorem 4, is ampli…ed when attention is restricted to G c . Thus,
even though the coherence criterion does not resolve all choice con‡icts, it justi…es the
judgements embedded in long-run criterion (exponential discounting at the rate ) for certain
environments, assuming the …rst period is short.
The coherence criterion is also equivalent to a novel and appealing variant of multiself Pareto optimality.
46

As conventionally applied, that concept su¤ers from a conceptual

The characterization holds for any convex constraint set satisfying free disposal that permits continuous
trade-o¤s between consumption in disparate periods. For weak optima, one can dispense with convexity.
47
Once period t arrives, an optimal path remains optimal within the set of paths that remain feasible, but
there are other individual welfare optima within that set, and they need not maximize U1 either overall or
within the set of paths that remain feasible. See Bernheim and Rangel [2008b] for details.

38
de…ciency: it assumes the time t self does not care about the past (see, e.g., Laibson et. al.
[1998]).48 Because one cannot choose past consumption, that assumption (as well as any
other speci…c alternative) is arguably untestable and unwarranted.

Given our ignorance

concerning backward looking preferences, it is more appropriate to adopt a notion of multiself Pareto e¢ ciency that is robust with respect to a wider range of possibilities.
Imagine that if the individual could choose both past and future consumption in period
bt (C1 ;
t, he would maximize the decision-utility function U
U (Ct ) is the objective function for the
backward-looking function

t.

t)

= U (Ct ) +

t (c1 ; :::; ct 1 ),

bt (C1 ;
, setting (equation (4)); U

t)

where

appends the

We say that C1 is a weak robust multi-self Pareto optimum

if it is a weak multi-self Pareto optimum for all possible (

2 ; :::;

49
T ).

Theorem 12: For any set X, a consumption vector C1 is a weak individual welfare optimum
(based Pc ) i¤ it is a weak robust multi-self Pareto optimum.50
Intuitively, if the welfare-relevant domain were rectangular, Pc would coincide with the
strict multi-self Pareto relation (Theorem 3).

We can make it rectangular by hypotheti-

cally extending the choice correspondence C to include choices involving past consumption.
Deleting those hypothetical choices makes the welfare relation more discerning and does not
enlarge the set of weak individual welfare optima. Thus, the set of weak individual welfare
optima under Pc must lie within the set of multi-self Pareto optima for every conceivable
pattern of backward-looking choices. In light of Theorem 12, Theorem 11 is also intuitive:
The time t = 1 perspective dominates robust multi-self Pareto comparisons because we lack
critical information (backward-looking preferences,

t)

concerning all other perspectives.

Theorems 11 and 12 also explain why the multi-self perspective justi…es using U1 (C1 )
to evaluate the welfare of a time-consistent decision maker.

The appropriateness of that

standard is not obvious, because time-consistent behavior does not rule out divergences
48

Other assumptions concerning backward-looking preferences appear in the literature; see, e.g., Imrohoroglu, Imrohoroglu, and Joines [2003].
49
We omit 1 because there is no consumption prior to period 1.
50
The proof establishes a stronger property: Pc is equivalent to a strict robust multi-self Pareto dominance
relation. One can also show that Rc0 is equivalent to a weak robust multi-self Pareto dominance relation.

39
between U1 (C1 ) and backward-looking preferences at any time t > 1.

However, if we

allow for such divergences, acknowledge that we cannot shed light on them through choice
experiments, and invoke the robust multi-self Pareto criterion, we are led back to U1 (C1 ).

6.3

Re…nements based on other criteria

If people process information more completely and accurately when making straightforward
choices, a simplicity criterion could have merit.

That criterion would presumably favor

one-shot binary decision problems. Unfortunately, if we construct P exclusively from data
on binary decisions, acyclicity is not guaranteed (recall Example 1).

However, in certain

settings, this procedure does generate coherent welfare relations. Consider again the ;
model of quasihyperbolic discounting. Fixing the date of choice at time t, behavior within
the set of one-shot binary decision problems fully “reveals” the decision-utility function Ut ,
as does behavior within the set of single-choice GCSs.

Therefore, o¢ ciating in favor of

one-shot binary decision problems is equivalent to o¢ ciating in favor of single-choice GCSs;
both approaches lead to the welfare relations Rc0 and Pc .
One could also apply a preponderance criterion: if someone ordinarily chooses x over y
and rarely chooses y over x, disregard the exceptions and follow the rule. That criterion is
sometimes invoked (at least implicitly) in the literature on quasi-hyperbolic ( , ) discounting
to justify use of the long-run perspective: tradeo¤s between rewards in periods t and t + k
are governed only by

from the perspective of all periods s < t, and by both

and

only

from the perspective of period t.
We see two conceptual problems with the preponderance criterion.

First, there are

potentially many competing notions of frequency. Since it is possible to proliferate variations
of ancillary conditions, one cannot simply count GCSs. In the quasi-hyperbolic setting, a
count of time-dated perspectives would favor the long-run criterion. However, an application
of preponderance based on the frequency with which GCSs are encountered (an index of
familiarity) might favor the short-run perspective.
Second, a rare ancillary condition may be highly conducive to good decision-making.

40
That would be the case, for example, if an individual typically misunderstands available
information concerning his alternatives unless it is presented in a particular way. Likewise,
in the quasi-hyperbolic setting, one could argue that people may appreciate their needs most
accurately when those needs are immediate and concrete, rather than distant and abstract.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed a choice-theoretic framework for behavioral welfare economics, one that accommodates choice con‡icts and other non-standard behavioral patterns
without requiring economists to take a stand on whether individuals have true utility functions or on how well-being might be measured. Our approach exploits coherent aspects of
choice by replacing the standard revealed preference relation with an unambiguous choice
relation. That relation is always acyclic, and therefore suitable for rigorous welfare analysis.
It is also the most discerning welfare criterion that never overrules choice.
Like standard welfare economics, our framework requires only information concerning the
mapping from environments to choices. Because it encompasses any theory that generates
a choice correspondence, it is applicable irrespective of the processes generating behavior,
or of the positive model used to describe behavior. Thus, it potentially opens the door to
greater integration of economics, psychology, and neuroeconomics. It generalizes standard
choice-based welfare economics in two senses.

First, the approaches are equivalent when

standard choice axioms are satis…ed. Second, for settings in which departures from those
axioms are minor, our framework implies that one can approximate the appropriate welfare
criterion by ignoring choice anomalies entirely.

It generates natural counterparts for the

standard tools of applied welfare analysis, such as compensating variation, consumer surplus,
Pareto optimality, and the contract curve, and permits a broad generalization of the of the
…rst welfare theorem. It is easily applied in the context of speci…c positive theories; indeed,
elements have been incorporated into recent work by Chetty et. al. [2008] and Burghart et.
al. [2007]. Finally, though not universally discerning, it lends itself to principled re…nements.

41

References
[1] Ariely, Dan, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec. 2003. “Coherent Arbitrariness:
Stable Demand Curves without Stable Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(1):73-105.
[2] Arrow, Kenneth J. 1959. “Rational Choice Functions and Orderings.” Economics,
26(102): 121-127.
[3] Bernheim, B. Douglas. 2008. “Neuroeconomics: A Sober (but Hopeful) Appraisal.”
AEJ Microeconomics, forthcoming.
[4] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2004. “Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision Processes.”American Economic Review, 94(5):1558-90.
[5] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2007. “Toward Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics.” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 97(2), 464-470.
[6] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. “Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics.”In Andrew Caplin and Andrew Schotter (eds.), The Methodologies of Modern Economics. Oxford University Press, forthcoming, 2008a.
[7] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. “Beyond Revealed Preference: ChoiceTheoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics.” NBER Working Paper No.
13737, 2008b.
[8] Bossert, Walter, Yves Sprumont, and Kotaro Suzumura. 2005. “Consistent Rationalizability.” Economica, 72: 185-200.
[9] Burghart, Daniel R., Trudy Ann Cameron, and Geo¤rey R. Gerdes. 2007. “Valuing
Publicly Sponsored Research Projects: Risks, Scenario Adjustments, and Inattention.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 35: 77-105.

42
[10] Caplin, Andrew, and John Leahy. 2001. “Psychological Expected Utility Theory and
Anticipatory Feelings.”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 55-79.
[11] Caplin, Andrew, and Andrew Schotter (eds.). 2008. The Methodologies of Modern
Economics. Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
[12] Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2008. “Salience and Taxation: Theory
and Evidence." Mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.
[13] Ehlers, Lars, and Yves Sprumont. 2006. “Weakened WARP and Top-Cycle Choice
Rules.”Mimeo, University of Montreal.
[14] Fon, Vincy, and Yoshihiko Otani. 1979. “Classical Welfare Theorems with NonTransitive and Non-Complete Preferences.”Journal of Economic Theory, 20: 409-418.
[15] Gale, David, and Andreu Mas-Colell. 1975. “An Equilibrium Existence Theorem for a
General Model Without Ordered Preferences.” Journal of Mathematical Economics 2:
9-15.
[16] Green, Jerry, and Daniel Hojman. 2007. “Choice, Rationality, and Welfare Measurement." Mimeo, Harvard University.
[17] Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2001. “Temptation and Self-Control.” Econometrica, 69(6):1403-1435.
[18] Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2006. “Random Expected Utility.” Econometrica, forthcoming.
[19] Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2008. “The Case for Mindless Economics.” In
Andrew Caplin and Andrew Schotter (eds.), The Methodologies of Modern Economics.
Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

43
[20] Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Douglas Joines. 2003. “TimeInconsistent Preferences and Social Security.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2):
745-784.
[21] Iyengar, S. S., and M. R. Lepper. 2000. “Why Choice is Demotivating: Can One Desire
Too Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79, 9951006.
[22] Kahneman, D. 1999. “Objective Happiness.” In Kahneman, D., E. Diener, and N.
Schwarz (eds.), Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
[23] Kahneman, D., P. Wakker, and R. Sarin. 1997. “Back to Bentham? Explorations of
Experienced Utility.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112: 375-406.
[24] Kalai, Gil, Ariel Rubinstein, and Ran Spiegler. 2002. “Rationalizing Choice Functions
by Multiple Rationales.”Econometrica, 70(6): 2481-2488.
[25] Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2008a. “Choices, Situations, and Happiness.”
Journal of Public Economics, 2008, forthcoming.
[26] Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2008b. “Revealed Mistakes and Revealed Preferences.”In Andrew Caplin and Andrew Schotter (eds.), The Methodologies of Modern
Economics. Oxford University Press, forthcoming, 2008.
[27] Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.”Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112(2):443-477
[28] Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 1998. “Self-Control and Saving
for Retirement.”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 91-172.
[29] Mandler, Michael. 2006. “Welfare Economics with Status Quo Bias: A Policy Paralysis
Problem and Cure.” Mimeo, University of London.

44
[30] Manzini, Paola, and Marco Mariotti.

2007.

“Rationalizing Boundedly Rational

Choice.” Mimeo, University of London, 2005.
[31] Mas-Colell, Andreu. 1974. “An Equilibrium Existence Theorem Without Complete or
Transitive Preferences.”Journal of Mathematical Economics, 1: 237-246.
[32] O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Doing It Now or Later.”American Economic Review, 89(1):103-24
[33] Read, Daniel, and Barbara van Leeuwen. 1998. “Predicting Hunger: The E¤ects of Appetite and Delay on Choice.”Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
76(2): 189-205.
[34] Rigotti, Luca, and Chris Shannon. 2005. “Uncertainty and Risk in Financial Markets.”
Econometrica, 73(1): 203-243.
[35] Rubinstein, Ariel, and Yuval Salant. 2006. “A model of choice from lists.” Theoretical
Economics, 1: 3-17.
[36] Rubinstein, Ariel, and Yuval Salant. 2007. “(A,f ) Choice with frames.” Mimeo.
[37] Sen, Amartya K. 1971. “Choice Functions and Revealed Preference.” Review of Economic Studies, 38(3): 307-317.
[38] Shafer, Wayne, and Hugo Sonnenschein, “Equilibrium in Abstract Economies Without
Ordered Preferences.” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 2: 345-348.
[39] Sugden, Robert. 2004. “The Opportunity Criterion: Consumer Sovereignty Without the
Assumption of Coherent Preferences.”American Economic Review, 94(4): 1014-33.
[40] Suzumura, Kotaro. 1976. “Remarks on the Theory of Collective Choice.” Economica,
43: 381-390.

45
[41] Thaler, Richard, and Cass R. Sunstein. 2003. “Libertarian Paternalism.” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93(2): 175-179.
[42] Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics
and Bias.”Science, 185, 1124-1131.

46

Appendix
This appendix is divided into three sections. The …rst contains proofs of miscellaneous
theorems (Theorems 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7). The second pertains to the ; model (Theorems
4, 11, and 12), and the third to convergence properties (Theorems 8, 9, and 10).
A. Proofs of miscellaneous theorems
Proof of Theorem 1: Suppose on the contrary that xN R0 x1 . Without loss of generality,
we can renumber the alternatives so that k = 1. Let X 0 = fx1 ; :::; xN g. Since x1 P x2 and
x1 2 X 0 , we know that x2 2
= C(X 0 ; d) for all d such that (X 0 ; d) 2 G. Now suppose that,
for some i 2 f2; :::; N g, we have xi 2
= C(X 0 ; d) for all d such that (X 0 ; d) 2 G. We argue
that xi+1(mod N ) 2
= C(X 0 ; d) for all d such that (X 0 ; d) 2 G. This follows from the following
facts: xi R0 xi+1 , xi 2 X 0 , and xi 2
= C(X 0 ; d) for all d such that (X 0 ; d) 2 G. By induction,
this means C(X 0 ; d) is empty, contradicting Assumption 2. Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 2: Suppose on the contrary that P is not …ner than Q. Then for
some x and y, we have xQy but

xP y. Because

xP y, we know that there exists some

X containing x and y, as well as some ancillary condition d, for which y 2 C(X; d). Since Q
is an inclusive libertarian relation, we must then have y 2 mQ (X). But since x 2 X, that
can only be the case if

xQy, a contradiction. The statement that mP (X)

mQ (X) for

all X 2 X follows trivially. Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 3: First we verify that M = P . Assume yM x. By de…nition,
ud (y) > ud (x) for all d 2 D. It follows that for any G = (X; d) with x; y 2 X, the individual
will not select x. Therefore, yP x. Now assume yP x. By de…nition, the individual will
not be willing to select x given any generalized choice situation of the form G = (fx; yg; d).
That implies ud (y) > ud (x) for all d 2 D. Therefore, yM x.
Next we verify that M = P 0 .

Assume yM x.

By de…nition, ud (y)

ud (x) for all

d 2 D, with strict inequality for some d0 . It follows that for any G = (X; d) with x; y 2 X,

47
the individual will never be willing to choose x but not y.

Moreover, for d0 he is only

willing to choose y from (fx; yg; d). Therefore, yP 0 x. Now assume yP 0 x. By de…nition,
if the individual is willing to select x given any generalized choice situation of the form
G = (fx; yg; d) , then he is also willing to choose y, and there is some GCS, G0 = (X 0 ; d0 )
with fx; yg

X 0 for which he is willing to choose y but not x.

That implies ud (y)

ud (x)

for all d 2 D, and ud0 (y) > ud0 (x). Therefore, yM x.
The …nal statement concerning optima follows immediately from the equivalence of the
binary relations. Q.E.D
Proof of Theorem 5: To calculate the CV-A, we must …nd the in…mum of the values
of m that satisfy
U (M

p1 z1 + m0 ; z1 j d) > U (M

p0 z0 ; z0 j d) for all m0

m and d 2 [dL ; dH ]

Notice that this requires
m

[p1 z1

p0 z0 ] + d[v(z0 )

v(z1 )] for all d 2 [dL ; dH ]

Since v(z0 ) > v (z1 ), the solution is
mA = [p1 z1
= [p1 z1

p0 z0 ] + dH [v (z0 ) v(z1 )]
Z z0
p0 z0 ] +
dH v 0 (z) dz
z1

= [p1
= [p1

p0 ]z1 + p0 z1 p0 [z0 z1 ] p0 z1 +
Z z0
p0 ]z1 +
[dH v 0 (z) p0 ]dz

Z

z0

dH v 0 (z) dz

z1

z1

The derivation of the expression for mB is analogous. Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 6: Consider the following set:
U (x; X) = fy 2 X j 8i,

xPi y and @ M

1 and a1 ; :::; aM s.t. xPi a1 Pi a2 :::aM Pi yg

48
Because Pi is acyclic, U (x; X) contains x, and is therefore non-empty. It is also apparent
that U (x; X)

fy 2 X j 8i,

We will establish the theorem by showing that

xPi yg.

U (x; X) contains a weak generalized Pareto optimum.
First we claim that, if z 2 U (x; X) and there is some w 2 X such that wPi z for
all i, then w 2 U (x; X).

Suppose not.

Then for some k, there exists a1 ; :::; aN s.t.

= U (x; X), a contradiction.
xPk a1 Pk a2 :::aN Pk wPk z. But that implies z 2
Now we prove the theorem.

Take any individual i.

Choose any z 2 Ci (U (x; X); d)

for some d with (U (x; X); d) 2 G. We claim that z is a weak generalized Pareto optimum.
Suppose not. Then there exists w 2 X such that wPj z for all j. From the lemma, we know
= Ci (U (x; X); d),
that w 2 U (x; X). But then since w; z 2 U (x; X) and wPi z, we have z 2
a contradiction. Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 7: Suppose on the contrary that x is not a weak generalized welfare
optimum. Then, by de…nition, there is some feasible allocation w
b such that w
b n Pn x
bn for all
n.

bn , then bwn > bx
bn . Take any wn with bwn
The …rst step is to show that if wn Pn x

bx
bn : Then wn 2 B n (b). Because x
bn 2 C n (B n (b); dbn ), we conclude that

bn .
w n Pn x

Combining this …rst observation with the market clearing condition, we see that
b

N
X
n=1

(w
b

n

n

z )>b

N
X

from which it follows that
b

N
X
n=1

(w
b

n

n

(b
x

n=1

PN

b
n=1 (w

n

z )=b

Combining the previous two equations yields
b

F
X
f =1

z )=b

f

v >b

F
X
f =1

F
X
f =1

ybf

n

F
X
f =1

ybf

z n ) 2 Y , or equivalently that
P
P
for each f such that N
bn z n ) = Ff=1 v f ,
n=1 (w

Moreover, since w
b is feasible, we know that

there exists v = (v 1 ; :::; v F ) with v f 2 Y f

n

vf

49
But this can only hold if bv f > bybf for some f .

Since v f 2 Y f , this contradicts the

assumption that ybf maximizes …rm f ’s pro…ts given b. Q.E.D.
B. Proofs of results for the ;

model

Proof of Theorem 4: Let
Vt (Ct ) =

T
X

k t

u(ck )

k=t

Given our assumptions, we have, for all Ct , Vt (Ct )

Ut (Ct )

Wt (Ct ), where the …rst

inequality is strict if ck > 0 for some k > t, and the second inequality is strict if ck > 0 for
some k > t + 1.
Suppose the individual faces the GCS (X; ).

Because the individual is dynamically

consistent within each period, we can without loss of generality collapse multiple decision
within any single period into a single decision. So a lifetime decision involves a sequence of
choices, r1 ; :::; rT (some of which may be degenerate), that generate a sequence of consumption levels, c1 ; :::; cT . The choice rt must at a minimum resolve any residual discretion with
respect to ct . That choice may also impose constraints on the set of feasible future actions
and consumption levels (e.g., it may involve precommitments). For any G, a sequence of
feasible choices r1 ; :::; rt leads to a continuation problem GC (r1 ; :::; rt ), which resolves any
residual discretion in rt+1 ; ::; rT .
With these observation in mind, we establish three lemmas.
Lemma 1: Suppose that, as of some period t, the individual has chosen r1 ; :::; rt

1

and

A
A
C
consumed cA
1 ,...,ct 1 , and that Ct remains feasible for G (r1 ; :::; rt 1 ). Suppose there

is an equilibrium in which the choice from this continuation problem is CtB .
Vt (CtB )

Ut (CtB )

Then

Wt (CtA ).

Proof: We prove the lemma by induction.

Consider …rst the case of t = T .

Then

A
A
VT (CTB ) = UT (CTB ) = u(cB
T ) and WT (CT ) = u(cT ). Plainly, if the individual is willing to
A
B
choose cB
T even though cT is available, then u(cT )

u(cA
T ).

50
Now suppose the claim is true for t + 1; we will prove it for t.

By assumption, the

individual has the option of making a choice rt in period t that locks in cA
t in period t, and
A
that leaves Ct+1
available.

bt+1 be a continuation trajectory that the individual would choose from that point
Let C

forward after choosing rt . Notice that

A
b
Ut (cA
t ; Ct+1 ) = u(ct ) +

u(cA
t )+

bt+1 )
Vt+1 (C

(6)

A
Wt+1 (Ct+1
)

= Wt (CtA )
Since the individual is willing to make a decision at time t that leads to the continuation
consumption trajectory CtB , and since another period t decision will lead to the continuation
b
consumption trajectory (cA
t ; Ct+1 ), we must have
Ut (CtB )

Thus, Ut (CtB )

b
Ut (cA
t ; Ct+1 )

Wt (CtA ), and we already know that Vt (CtB )

Lemma 2: Suppose U1 (C1B )

Ut (CtB ). Q.E.D.

Then there exists some G for which C1B is an

W1 (C1A ).

equilibrium outcome even though C1A is available. If the inequality is strict, there exists
some G for which C1B is the only equilibrium outcome even though C1A is available.
Proof:

We prove this lemma by induction. Consider …rst the case of T = 1. Note

A
B
that U1 (C1A ) = u(cA
1 ) = W1 (C1 ). Thus, U1 (C1 )

W1 (C1A ) implies U1 (C1B )

U1 (C1A ). Let

G consist of a single choice between C1A and C1B made at time 1. With U1 (C1B )

U1 (C1A ),

the individual is necessarily willing to choose C1B ; with strict inequality, he is unwilling to
choose C1A .
Now suppose the claim is true for T
c"2

u

1; we will prove it for T . For "
1

W2 (C2A ) + " ,

0, de…ne

51
and C2" = (c"2 ; 0; :::; 0). (Existence of c"2 is guaranteed because W2 (C2A )+" is strictly positive,
and u

1

is de…ned on the non-negative reals.) Notice that U2 (C2" ) = W2 (C2A )+". Therefore,

by the induction step, there exists a choice problem G0 for period 2 forward (a T

1 period

problem) for which C2" is an equilibrium outcome (the only one for " > 0) even though C2A
is available.

We construct G as follows.

At time 1, the individual has two alternatives:

0
(i) lock in C1B , or (ii) choose cA
1 , and then face G . Provided we resolve any indi¤erence at

t = 2 in favor of choosing C2" , the decision at time t = 1 will be governed by a comparison
"
of U1 (C1B ) and U1 (cA
1 ; C2 ). But
"
A
U1 (cA
1 ; C2 ) = u(c1 ) +

= u(cA
1)+
= W1 (C1A ) +

u(c"2 )
W2 (C2A ) + "
"

If U1 (C1B ) = W1 (C1A ), we set " = 0. The individual is indi¤erent with respect to his period
1 choice, and we can resolve indi¤erence in favor of choosing C1B . If U1 (C1B ) > W1 (C1A ), we
set " < U1 (C1B )

W1 (C1A ) =

. In that case, the individual is only willing to pick C1B in

period 1. Q.E.D.
Lemma 3: Suppose W1 (C1A ) = U1 (C1B ). If there is some G for which C1B is an equilibrium
outcome even though C1A is available, then C1A is also an equilibrium outcome.
A
Proof: Consider any sequence of actions r1A ; :::; rTA that leads to the outcome cA
1 ; :::; cT .

bt+1 be the equilibrium continuation consumption trajectory
As in the proof of Lemma 1, let C
that the individual would choose from t + 1 forward after choosing r1A ; :::; rtA and consuming
A
cA
1 ; :::; ct .

b1 = C1B .)
(Note that C

b
According to expression (6), Ut (cA
t ; Ct+1 )

Wt (CtA ).

Here we will show that if W1 (C1A ) = U1 (C1B ) and C1B is an equilibrium outcome, then
A
b
Ut (cA
t ; Ct+1 ) = Wt (Ct ). The proof is by induction.

Let’s start with t = 1.

A
b
Suppose U1 (cA
1 ; C2 ) > W1 (C1 ).

By assumption, W1 (C1A ) =

B
b
U1 (C1B ). But then, U1 (cA
1 ; C2 ) > U1 (C1 ), which implies that the individual will not choose

the action in period 1 that leads to C1B , a contradiction.

52
Now let’s assume that the claim is correct for some t
A
b
Ut (cA
t ; Ct+1 ) > Wt (Ct ).

bt )
Because Ut (C

1, and consider period t. Suppose

b
Ut (cA
t ; Ct+1 ) (otherwise the individual would

bt after choosing r1A ; :::; rtA 1 ), we must therefore have
not choose the action that leads to C

bt ) > Wt (C A ), which in turn implies Vt (C
bt ) > Wt (C A ). But then
Ut (C
t
t
A
b
Ut 1 (cA
t 1 ; Ct ) = u(ct 1 ) +

> u(cA
t 1) +

bt )
Vt (C

Wt (CtA )

= Wt 1 (CtA 1 )
A
b
By the induction step, Ut 1 (cA
t 1 ; Ct ) = Wt 1 (Ct 1 ), so we have a contradiction. There-

A
b
fore, Ut (cA
t ; Ct+1 ) = Wt (Ct ).

Now we construct a new equilibrium for G for which C1A is the equilibrium outcome. We

accomplish this by modifying the equilibrium that generates C1B . Speci…cally, for each every
history of choices of the form r1A ; :::; rtA 1 , we change the individual’s next choice to rtA ; all
other choices in the decision tree remain unchanged.
When changing a decision in the tree, we must verify that the new decision is optimal
(accounting for changes at successor nodes), and that the decisions at all predecessor nodes
remain optimal. When we change the choice following a history of the form r1A ; :::; rtA 1 , all
of the predecessor nodes correspond to histories of the form r1A ; :::; rkA , with k < t

1. Thus,

to verify that the individual’s choices are optimal after the changes, we simply check the
decisions for all histories of the form r1A ; :::; rtA 1 , in each case accounting for changes made
at successor nodes (those corresponding to larger t).
After any history r1A ; :::; rtA 1 , choosing rtA in period t leads (in light of the changes at
successor nodes) to C1A , producing period t decision utility of Ut (CtA ). Since we have only
changed decisions along a single path, no other choice at time t leads to period t decision
bt ). For t
utility greater than Ut (C

A
b
2, we have established that Ut 1 (cA
t 1 ; Ct ) = Wt 1 (Ct 1 ),

bt ) = W (CtA ). But then we have Ut (C
bt )
from which it follows that Vt (C
Ut (CtA ).

Thus, the choice of rtA is optimal.

bt ) = W (CtA )
Vt (C

b1 = C1B , and we have
For t = 1, we have C

53
assumed that W1 (C1A ) = U1 (C1B ), so we have U1 (C1A )

W1 (C1A ) = U1 (C1B ), which means

that the choice r1A is also optimal. Q.E.D.
Using Lemmas 1 through 3, we now prove the theorem.
Step 1: C10 R0 C100 i¤ W1 (C10 )

U1 (C100 )

First let’s suppose that C10 R0 C100 .

Imagine that, contrary to the theorem, W1 (C10 ) <

U1 (C100 ). Then, according to Lemma 2, there is some G for which C100 is the only equilibrium
outcome even though C 0 is available. That implies
Next suppose that W1 (C10 )

C10 R0 C100 , a contradiction.

U1 (C100 ). If the inequality is strict, then according to Lemma

1, C100 is never an equilibrium outcome when C10 is available, so C10 RC100 . If W1 (C10 ) = U1 (C100 ),
then according to Lemma 3, C10 is always an equilibrium outcome when C100 is an equilibrium
outcome and both are available, so again C10 RC100 .
Step 2: C10 P C100 i¤ W1 (C10 ) > U1 (C100 )
First let’s suppose that C10 P C100 .
U1 (C100 ).

Imagine that, contrary to the theorem, W1 (C10 )

Then, according to Lemma 2, there is some G for which C100 is an equilibrium

outcome even though C10 is available. That implies
Next suppose that W1 (C10 ) > U1 (C100 ).

C10 P C100 , a contradiction.

Then according to Lemma 1, C100 is never an

equilibrium outcome when C10 is available, so C10 P C100 .
Step 3: R0 and P are transitive.
First consider R0 . Suppose that C11 R0 C12 R0 C13 . From part (i), we know that W1 (C11 )
U1 (C12 ) and W1 (C12 )
W1 (C11 )

U1 (C13 ). Using the fact that U1 (C12 )

W1 (C12 ), we therefore have

U1 (C13 ), which implies C11 R0 C13 .

Next consider P . Suppose that C11 P C12 P C13 . From part (ii), we know that W1 (C11 ) >
U1 (C12 ) and W1 (C12 ) > U1 (C13 ). Using the fact that U1 (C12 )

W1 (C12 ), we therefore have

W1 (C11 ) > U1 (C13 ), which implies C11 P C13 . Q.E.D.
Proof of Theorem 11: For each point in time t, there is a class of GCSs, call it Gt , for
which all discretion is exercised at time t through a broad precommitment. Then Gc = G1 [

54
G2 [ ...[ GT . For all G 2 Gc , the ancillary condition is completely described by the point in
time at which all discretion is resolved. Thus, we can write any such G as (X; t).
First suppose that C1 solves maxC1 2X1 U1 (C1 ). Consider G 2 G1 such that the individual
chooses the entire consumption trajectory from X1 at t = 1. For that G, we have C(G) =
fC1 g (uniqueness of the choice follows from strict concavity of u). It follows that

C1 P 0 C1

for all C1 2 X1 . Accordingly, C1 is a strict individual welfare optimum (and hence a weak
individual welfare optimum) in X1 .
b1 2 X1 that does not solve maxC1 2X1 U1 (C1 ). There must be some
Now consider any C

b1 ). But then there must also be some C 00 2 X1 with U1 (C 00 ) >
C10 2 X1 with U1 (C10 ) > U1 (C
1
1

b1 ) and c00 6= b
c1 , we can construct C100 as follows.
c1 , then C100 = C10 . If c01 = b
c1 . (If c01 6= b
U1 (C
1
If c01 = 0, simply increase c01 by some small " > 0

If c01 > 0, simply reduce c01 slightly.

(t 1)

and reduce c0t in some future period t by

".) Now consider any X that contains the

b1 and C100 . Notice that (X; 1) 2 G1 ; moreover, (X; t) 2
options C
= Gt for all t > 1, because
b1 ), the
a choice from X resolves some discretion at time t = 1. But since U1 (C100 ) > U1 (C

b1 . It follows that C
b1 is not a weak
b1 from (X; 1). Thus, C 00 P C
individual will not select C
1
individual welfare optimum (and hence not a strict individual welfare optimum). Q.E.D.

Proof of Theorem 12: We begin by de…ning the strict robust multi-self Pareto relation,
MR :
C10 MR C100 i¤ there exists (
bt (C10 ;
and U

Note that C10 MR C100 implies

t)

2 ; :::;

bt (C10 ;
>U

T)
t)

such that U1 (C10 ) > U1 (C100 )
for all t = 2; :::; T .

C100 MR C100 . For any constraint set X, the set of weak robust

multi-self Pareto optimal clearly coincides with the set of maximal elements under MR .
Thus, we prove the theorem by demonstrating that P and MR are equivalent.
First suppose C10 Pc C100 .

Let k denote the earliest period in which C10 and C100 di¤er.

Because C10 is strictly chosen over C10 in periods 1 through k, we must have:
u(c0k )

+

T
X

t=k+1

t k

u(c0t )

>

u(c00k )

+

T
X

t=k+1

t k

u(c00t ),

55
and, if k > 1,
T
X

t k

u(c0t )

t=k

Now choose arbitrary functions
0
0
s (c1 ; :::; cs 1 )

>

T
X

t k

u(c00t )

t=k

k,

and for s > k choose s such that
"
# "
T
T
X
X
t s
00
00
0
0
00
u(ct )
u(cs ) +
s (c1 ; :::; cs 1 ) > u(cs ) +
1 ; :::;

t=s+1

t=s+1

bt (C10 ;
Then we necessarily have U1 (C10 ) > U1 (C100 ), and U
which it follows that C10 MR C100 .
Now suppose

t)

bt (C100 ;
>U

t)

t s

#

u(c00t )

for t = 2; :::; T , from

Again let k denote the earliest period in which C10 and C100

C10 Pc C100 .

di¤er. Because C10 is not strictly chosen over C100 in all periods 1 through k, we must have
either
u(c0k )

+

T
X

t k

u(c0t )

u(c00k )

+

t=k+1

or (in the case of k > 1 only)

T
X

T
X

t k

u(c00t ),

t=k+1

t k

u(c0t )

T
X

t k

u(c00t )

t=k

t=k

If either k = 1 and the …rst inequality holds, or k > 1 and the second inequality holds, then
U1 (C10 )
bk (C10 ;
U

C10 MR C100 . If k > 1 and the …rst inequality holds, then

U1 (C100 ), which implies
k)

bk (C100 ;
U

k)

for all

k,

so again

C10 MR C100 . Q.E.D.

C. Proofs of convergence results
Our analysis will require us to say when one set is close to another. For any compact set
A, let Nr (A) denote the neighborhood of A or radius r (de…ned as the set [x2A Br (x), where
Br (x) is the open ball of radius r centered at x). For any two compact sets A and B, let
U (A; B)

U

= inf fr > 0 j B

Nr (A)g

is the upper Hausdor¤ hemimetric. This metric can also be applied to sets that are not

compact (by substituting the closure of the sets).

56
Consider a sequence of choice correspondences C n de…ned on G. Also consider a choice

b de…ned on X c , the compact elements of X , that re‡ects maximization of
correspondence C
b if, for all " > 0,
a continuous utility function, u. We will say that C n weakly converges to C
there exists N such that for all n > N and (X; d) 2 G, we have

U

".

b
C(clos(X));
C n (X; d) <

b (u), and L
b (u) (de…ned in the text), we also de…ne
In addition to U n (x), Ln (x), U

b (x)
U

b
fy 2 X j u(y) > u(x)g and L(x)

fy 2 X j u(y) < u(x)g .

We begin our proofs of the convergence results with a lemma.

b where C
b is de…ned on X c and re‡ects
Lemma 4: Suppose that C n weakly converges to C,

maximization of a continuous utility function, u. Consider any values u1 and u2 with

b (u1 )
u1 > u2 . Then there exists N 0 such that for n > N 0 , we have yP n x for all y 2 U
b (u2 ).
and x 2 L

b (u1 ) does not contain
Proof: Since u is continuous, there exists r0 > 0 such that Nr0 U

b (u2 ). Moreover, since C n weakly converges to C,
b there exists some N 0 such
any point in L
that for n > N 0 and (X; d) 2 G, we have

U

b
C(clos(X));
C n (X; d) < r0 .

Now we show that if n > N 0 , then for all generalized choice sets that include at least one
b (u1 ), no element of L
b (u2 ) is chosen. Consider any set X1 containing at least
element of U
b (u1 ).
one element of U

b
We know that C(clos(X
1 ))

b (u1 ), from which it follows that
U

0
b
b
Nr0 C(clos(X
1 )) does not contain any element of L (u2 ). But then, for n > N , there is

b (u2 ).
no d with (X1 ; d) 2 G for which C n (X1 ; d) contains any element of L

Since we have assumed that fa; bg 2 X for all a; b 2 X, it follows immediately that yP n x

b (u1 ) and x 2 L
b (u2 ). Q.E.D.
for all y 2 U

Proof of Theorem 8: The proof proceeds in two steps.

For each, we …x a value of

" > 0:

")

b Then for n su¢ ciently large, L
b (u(x0 )
Step 1: Suppose that C n weakly converges to C.
Ln (x0 ).

57
Let u1 = u(x0 ) and u2 = u(x0 )

". By Lemma 4, there exists N 0 such that for n > N 0 ,

b (u1 ) and x 2 L
b (u2 ).
we have yP n x for all y 2 U

Taking y = x0 , for n > N 0 we have

b (u2 )
x0 P n x (and therefore x 2 Ln (x0 )) for all x 2 L
")

b Then for n su¢ ciently large, U
b (u(x0 )+
Step 2: Suppose that C n weakly converges to C.
U n (x0 ).

Let u1 = u(x0 ) + " and u2 = u(x0 ). By Lemma 4, there exists N 00 such that for n > N 00 ,
b (u1 ) and x 2 L
b (u2 ).
we have yP n x for all y 2 U

Taking x = x0 , for n > N 00 we have

b (u1 ). Q.E.D.
yP n x0 (and therefore y 2 U n (x0 )) for all x 2 U

In the statement of Theorem 9, we interpret d1 is a function of the compensation level,

m, rather than a scalar. With that interpretation, the theorem subsumes cases in which G
is not rectangular.
b
Proof of Theorem 9: It is easy to verify that our notions of CV-A and CV-B for C

coincide with the standard notion of compensating variation under the conditions stated in
the theorem. That is, m
bA = m
b B = m;
b the in…mum (supremum) of the payment that leads
the individual to choose something better than (worse than) the object chosen from the initial
opportunity set equals the payment that exactly compensates for the change.
b B.
b A , and limn!1 mnB = m
our task is to show that limn!1 mnA = m

Therefore,

We will provide the

b A ; the proof for limn!1 mnB = m
b B is completely analogous.
proof for limn!1 mnA = m
b
Step 1: Consider any m such that y Pb x for all x 2 C(X(

b
(Since C(X(
; m))
b

0 ; 0))

b
and y 2 C(X(

1 ; m)).

int(X), we know that arg maxz2X(a;m) u(z) is strictly increasing in m at

m = m,
b so such an m necessarily exists.) We claim that there exists N1 such that for n > N1
and m0

m, we have yP n x for all x 2 C n (X(

0 ; 0); d0 )

and y 2 C n (X(

1 ; m); d1 (m)).

(It

follows that mnA exists for n > N1 .)
De…ne u1 =

b
C(X(

1 ; m)).

1
u(w)
3

+ 23 u(z) and u2 =

2
u(w)
3

b
+ 13 u(z) for w 2 C(X(

0 ; 0))

and z 2

Since u1 > u2 , Lemma 4 implies there exists N10 such that for n > N10 , we

b (u1 ) and x 2 L
b (u2 ).
have yP n x for all y 2 U

58
Next, notice that since u is continuous (and therefore uniformly continuous on the comb
pact set X), there exists r1 > 0 such that Nr1 C(X(
b (u1 ) for all m
U

C n (X(

0 ; 0); d0 )

for all m0
C n (X(
and m

1; m

m.
0

m0 .

b (u2 ), and Nr1 C(X(
b
L

0 ; 0))

0 ; 0))

and C n (X(

1; m

0

); d1 (m0 ))

Consequently, for n > N100 , we have C n (X(
b (u1 ) for all m0
U

0 ; 0); d0 )

b
Nr1 C(X(

0 ; 0))

1; m

0

))

b
and x 2 C(X(

1 ; m)).
0 ; 0); d0 )

1 ; m); d1 (m)).
1
u(w)
3

De…ne u1 =

+ 23 u(z) and u2 =

2
u(w)
3

b
+ 13 u(z) for z 2 C(X(

0 ; 0))

and w 2

Since u1 > u2 , Lemma 4 implies there exists N20 such that for n > N20 , we

b (u1 ) and x 2 L
b (u2 ).
have yP n x for all y 2 U

b
Next, notice that since u is continuous, there exists r2 > 0 such that Nr2 C(X(

b (u1 ), and Nr2 C(X(
b
U
we have C n (X(

0 ; 0); d0 )

Consequently, C n (X(

1 ; m))

b
Nr2 C(X(

0 ; 0); d0 )

0 ; 0))

b (u2 ). Moreover, there exists N 00 such that for n > N 00 ,
L
2
2
0 ; 0))

and C n (X(

b (u1 ) and C n (X(
U

1 ; m); d1 (m))

1 ; m); d1 (m))

b
Nr2 C(X(

b (u2 ).
L

that, for n > N2 = maxfN20 ; N200 g, we have yP n x for all x 2 C n (X(
y 2 C n (X(

0

); d1 (m0 )).

We claim that there exists N2 such that for n > N2 , we have yP n x for all y 2 C n (X(

1 ; m)).

1; m

b (u2 ) and
L

0 ; 0); d0 )

and y 2 C n (X(

b
Step 2: Consider any m such that y Pb x for all y 2 C(X(

b
C(X(

))

m. It follows that, for n > N1 = maxfN10 ; N100 g

m0 , we have yP n x for all x 2 C n (X(

and x 2 C n (X(

0

Moreover, there exists N100 such that for n > N100 , we have

b
Nr1 C(X(

); d1 (m0 ))

1; m

1 ; m))

It follows

1 ; m); d1 (m))

and

0 ; 0); d0 ).

Step 3: limn!1 mnA = m
b A.

Suppose not. Recall from step 1 that mnA exists for su¢ ciently large n. The sequence
mnA must therefore have at least one limit point mA 6= m
b A . Suppose …rst that mA > m
b A.

Consider m0 = (mA + m
b A )=2. Since u satis…es non-satiation and m0 > m
b A , we know by step
1 that there exists N1 such that for n > N1 , we have yP n x for all x 2 C n (X(

y 2 C n (X(

1; m

0

); d1 (m0 )). This in turn implies that mnA

0 ; 0); d0 )

and

m0 < mA for all n > N1 , which

contradicts the supposition that mA is a limit point of mnA . The case of mA < m
b A is similar

except that we rely on step 2 instead of step 1. Q.E.D.

.

59
Proof of Theorem 10: Suppose not.

Without loss of generality, assume that xn

b1 ; :::; C
bN ; X c ) (if necessary, take a convergent subseconverges to a point x 2
= W (clos(X); C

quence of the original sequence). Then there must be some x0 2 X, some " > 0, and some
b (u(x0 )
N 0 such that, for all n > N 0 , we have xn 2 L
i
b (u(x0 )
exists N 00 such that for n > N 00 , we have L
i

") for all i. By Theorem 8, there
")

Lni (x0 ) for all i. Hence, for all

n > maxfN 0 ; N 00 g, we have xn 2 Lni (x0 ) for all i. But in that case, xn 62 W (X; C1n ; :::; CNn ; G),
a contradiction. Q.E.D.

(b) Individual
welfare optima

(a) Upper and
lower contour sets
z

z

.

(y’’,z’’)P*(y’,z’)
a

(y’,z’)
X

(y’,z’)P*(y’’,z’’)

.
b

.

IH

IL
y

Figure 1: Coherent arbitrariness

IH
IL
y

(a) CV-A

(b) CV-B

p

p

p1

p1

p0

A
(+)

B
(+)

z1

D(dH)
D(d1)
D(d0)
z0

z

p0

A
(+)
C
E
(+)
(-)
z1

D(d1)
D(d0)
D(dL)

z0

Figure 2: CV-A and CV-B for a change from (p0,d0) to (p1,d1)

z

y2
I1H
z1

I2

0
TH

I1L

.

.

TL
I1H
I1L

0

y1

Figure 3: The generalized contact curve

z2

