NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEDERAL INSTITUTIONS AND THE DEMOCRATIC TRANSITION:
LEARNING FROM SOUTH AFRICA
Robert P. Inman
Daniel L. Rubinfeld
Working Paper 13733
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13733

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January
2008 at Berkeley Law School, Cornell, Michigan,
The work here has benefitted significantly from
presentations
NYU Law School, Norwegian Institute of Technology (Trondheim), Penn Law School, Stanford, Wesleyan,
Wharton Applied Economics Summer Workshop, and the WZB Seminar on Federalism. The comments
of John Ferejohn, Jean-Pierre Benoit, our referee, and editor (Pablo Spiller) significantly improved
the presentation and focus of our argument. Special thanks are due Carolyn Ballay, Grant Long, and
Jon Stott for extraordinarily valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Finally, the authors had the very unique opportunity to serve as advisors to the constitutional commission
– known as the Financial and Fiscal Commission – that established the economic ground rules for
new federal constitution (1994-1996) and to then advise and assist the Departments of Finance, Education,
and Welfare (1996-2000) in implementing the financial arrangements of the new constitution. In this
regard, we thank Dr. Junaid Ahmad of the World Bank for facilitating our work with the Commission
and Mr. Murphy Morobe and Dr. Antony Melck, co-chairs of the Commission, for their openness
to our ideas and their patience as we sought to learn the details of the South Africa’s new political
economy. As is often the case, academics learn the most from those who do it for real. Our experiences
are no exception. We hope this effort at generalization does justice to their wisdom and leadership
in shaping South Africa’s new democracy.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Robert P. Inman and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Federal Institutions and the Democratic Transition: Learning from South Africa
Robert P. Inman and Daniel L. Rubinfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 13733
January 2008, Revised January 2011
JEL No. H11,H77,P26
ABSTRACT
We present a model of a peaceful transition from autocracy to democracy using federal governance
as a constitutional means to protect the economic interests of the once ruling elite. Under “democratic
federalism” the constitution creates an annual policy game where the new majority and the elite each
control one policy instrument of importance to the other. The game has a stable, stationary equilibrium
that the elite may prefer to autocratic rule. We apply our analysis to South Africa’s transition from
white, elite rule under apartheid to a multi-racial democracy. We calibrate our model to the South
African economy at the time of the transition. Stable democratic equilibria exist for plausible estimates
of redistributive preferences and rate of time preference (‘impatience’) of the new majority during
the early years of the new democracy. The future of the democratic federal bargain is less certain under
the new populist presidency of Jacob Zuma.
Robert P. Inman
Department of Finance
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
inman@wharton.upenn.edu
Daniel L. Rubinfeld
Robert L. Bridges Professor of Law and
Professor of Economics
788 Simon Tower, Boalt Hall
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
rubinfeld@law.berkeley.edu

Federal Institutions and the Democratic Transition:
Learning from South Africa
Robert P. Inman and Daniel L. Rubinfeld
“(I)t may not be enough to work purely on one-person one-vote, because every national group would like to
see that the people of their flesh and blood are in the government. The ordinary man . . . must look to our
structures and see that as a colored man I am represented . . . and an Indian must also be able to say, ‘I am
represented’ . . . and the whites must say, ‘I have representation.’ . . . Especially in the first few years of the
democratic government we may have to do something to show that the system has got an inbuilt mechanism
which makes it impossible for one group to suppress the other.” Nelson Mandela, from a speech in
Stellenbosch, May, 1991 (As quoted in Waldmeir, pp. 213-214; Italics added.)
1. Introduction
A central challenge for those seeking a peaceful transition from autocracy to democracy is to provide
credible protections for the civil and economic rights of the once ruling minority. Setting promises aside, the
once oppressed majority will have the political power, and perhaps the inclination, to expropriate elite assets
and incomes once the new democracy is in place. The elite understands this possibility and may therefore
continue suppression and autocratic rule, despite sizeable costs. The current political economy literature on
democratic transitions has suggested three mechanisms for protecting elite interests in a new democracy: 1)
Continued elite control of the military (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2001); 2) An upper legislative chamber
controlled by the elite with veto powers over redistributive legislation (Lijphart, 1984); and 3) the gradual
extension of the franchise timed to match the growth of a propertied middle class (Conley and Temini, 2001;
Boix, 2003; Lizzeri and Persico, 2004).
None of these three strategies are likely to be embraced by today’s oppressed majorities, however.
Allowing the elite continued control over the military or one legislative chamber favors the status quo
distribution of economic resources; both grant the current elite veto power over any re-allocations it does not
favor. Limiting the franchise to the middle class requires opening that class to the current poor majority either
through affirmative action or education, a path that again depends upon elite (now private sector) decisions
and may take generations. South Africa’s successful transition from apartheid to a multi-racial democracy
suggests a fourth approach for guaranteeing minority economic rights – a federal constitution with minority

1

elite control over important redistributive services in at least one politically important province.1
Sections 2-4 offer a formal, game-theoretic model of how a federal constitution might provide
credible protections for elite economic interests. Section 2 details the requirements necessary for democratic
federalism to be the mutually preferred constitution by both the new majority and the old ruling minority.
Section 3 specifies a political economy model of fiscal redistribution in which taxes on the talented elite and
redistributive services and transfers to the poor majority are set by democratic politics. If governed by a
unitary constitution, tax rates will be set to fully exploit the elite minority and to maximize redistributive
transfers to the poor majority. Under a federal constitution, provincial boundaries can be drawn to create at
least one elite-run province responsible for redistributive services and transfers to the province’s poor
residents. If so structured, federal governance creates a “hostage” game between a majority controlled central
government and the elite-run province(s). Section 4 presents our central result; Proposition 1 provides the
necessary and sufficient conditions for such a federal constitution to implement an equilibrium level of
redistributive taxation that is less than the fully exploitive tax rate observed under unitary governance.
Section 5 then calibrates our model to the political economy of South Africa – preferences,
technology, and institutions – at the time of the democratic transition. We find that the federal constitutional
contract has provided sufficient protection to sustain a democratic agreement between the new majority and
the once ruling elite. Though significant, observed redistribution has been less than maximal redistribution.
Section 6 explores the less than certain future for democratic federalism in South Africa.
Section 7 concludes our analysis by considering, first, the potential applicability of the South African

1

Waldmeir (1997) and Steytler and Mettler (2001) provide detailed accounts of the bargaining positions of the
two major parties to South Africa’s transition – the African National Congress headed by Nelson Mandela and the
National Party led by F. W. de Klerk – as they negotiated the interim and final constitutions. Mandela made it very clear
from the beginning of the negotiations that the ANC would control the police and the army in the new democracy, that
there will be no upper chamber controlled exclusively by the elite, and that all citizens would be entitled to vote
immediately; see Waldmeir (1997, Chapters 10-13). With those options off the table, a new approach was needed. A
federal constitution with significant provincial powers and elite control of at least one province was the answer. For the
details of the negotiations over provincial powers, see Waldmeir (1997, pp. 193-197 and 241-244). For negotiations over
provincial boundaries to ensure elite control of at least one province, see Muthien and Khosa (1998).

2

“model” to other emerging democracies and then, second, how our analysis of federal governance as a
transition institution fits into the new political economy analysis of federalism generally.

2. Federalism and the Democratic Transition: An Overview
Six assumptions specify the underlying political economy at the time of the transition:
1. The oppressed majority does not have sufficient military strength to defeat the current autocratic regime
and unilaterally impose a constitution;
2. Once a democratic constitution is in place, the current ruling elite turns over control of its military to the
new majority;
3. The oppressed majority will be a demographic and political majority in the new democracy;
4. Elite residents are free to leave the country and/or adopt tax avoidance strategies;
5. Both the majority and the elite understand each others’ motives for setting policies and have full
information about each others’ economic positions; and,
6. Constitutional negotiators for the elite and the majority seek a democratic constitution that protects the
long-run welfare of their average constituent.
Assumptions (1) and (2) restrict our analysis to peaceful democratic transitions. Assumption (3)
ensures that the new (poor) majority will be decisive over central government economic policy. Assumption
(4) makes redistributive taxation less than fully efficient. Assumptions (5) and (6) require the choice of the
new democratic constitution to be a rational long-run choice by both the elite and the new majority within
a full information, dynamic redistribution game. We will focus our attention on a description of the subgame
perfect, Nash equilibrium to this game.
Specifying a successful federal constitution at the time of transition proceeds in two stages. The first
stage is the constitutional stage. Residents or their representatives must choose either of two democratic
constitutions. The first is a unitary constitution with all policies decided by a democratically elected central
government. The second is a federal constitution, where policy responsibilities are shared between the
national government and constitutionally created provinces. We assume that simple majority rule determines
policies in both cases. Both unitary and federal constitutions allow amendments. In this sense, the

3

constitutional rules and institutions must be self-enforcing.
Under federalism, the constitution specifies provincial boundaries that allocate a share : of all
majority residents to live within elite populated provinces: 0 < : # 1. Once provincial boundaries are drawn,
all residents are free to move in response to provincial policy choices. The federal constitution also specifies
the assignment of redistribution policies. Redistributive taxation of the elite at rate J per elite taxpayer and
the level of lump-sum income transfers b per poor resident are always assigned to the central government.
If not, all elite residents would move to elite controlled provinces and set redistributive taxation and income
transfers at zero.2
The central government also finances and decides the level of redistributive public services q to be
provided to the poor, services such as education, health, care, public housing, or neighborhood environment.
Responsibility for the provision of these redistributive services may lie with either the central government
or, if there is a federal constitution, with the provinces. Responsibility may lie exclusively with provinces,
or more typically, be a “concurrent” responsibility of either the central or provincial governments. Our
analysis allows this decision to be endogenous to the majority run central government. We specify the
constitutionally assigned redistributive services by the utility parameter 8 > 0, reflecting the relative value
a typical majority resident places on the assigned services. Important assigned services such as education,
health care, and housing will have a high value of 8, while less important services such as street lighting or
road paving will have a low value. We assume that elite residents do not receive services from the
redistribution budget, though they may consume those services from a separately funded general service
budget.
The second stage of the transition game is an annual policy game. The central government, whose
policies are set by a majority elected national government, chooses a constitutionally allowed redistributive
tax rate paid by the elite (J) to fund redistributive public services (q) and lump-sum transfers (b) for the new
2

Indeed, this was the National Party’s original proposal for a federal constitution. It was quickly rejected by

the ANC.

4

majority. The elite do not receive q or b. Under unitary governance the central government provides services
and transfers directly. Under federal governance, the central government uses redistributive tax revenues to
fund intergovernmental grants for provincially-provided redistributive services and lump-sum transfers.
Consistent with the view that provincial governments can reallocate at least some of those central government
transfers to their own uses we allow for elite-controlled provinces to reallocate a portion of its transfer
revenues to services for elite residents. We call such reallocations “elite capture” or “elite shirking,” as
measured by a share n (0 # n # 1) of lump-sum transfers so allocated.3 Since the elite does not control the
national government or majority-run provinces, there is no elite capture in unitary democracies or in majority
provinces.
We solve this two-stage game by backward induction. First, at the policy stage (in any year t) for
any choice of the democratic constitution there will emerge a set of policy outcomes that define the utilities
of the typical majority and elite resident in that stage. For a typical majority resident this will be:

Tt(C) = Wt + f(qt, bt, nt),
and for the typical elite resident:
yt(C) = Yt + h(Jt, bt, nt),
with Wt and Yt being the majority and elite residents’ pre-transfer and pre-tax incomes, respectively. The
policy outcomes will depend on choices made by the central government, and in the case of a federal
constitution, by the provinces. Those choices depend on the constitutional choices of : and 8 and the
underlying political economy designated as Vt.
Given the outcomes of the annual policy game, the value of any constitution will then be the

3

We constrain elite shirking to taking of the lump-sum transfer. This specification of the capture “technology”
assumes that q – which we specify below as redistributive inputs – can be easily monitored. Our formal analysis does
not depend crucially on this specification, but we do need the possibility of some elite capture. On this more general
point, there is an extensive literature for United States local governments estimating capture of intergovernmental
transfers intended for lower income recipients; see, for example, Duggan (2000) and Gordon (2004). For evidence on
the presence of capture in developing economies, see Reinikka and Svensson (2004) for Uganda and Bardhan and
Mookherjee (2006) for India.

5

discounted present value of all future utilities that follow from the choice of (:, 8). For majority residents:
VM(:, 8) = 3*t•Tt(:, 8*Wt; Vt),
while for elite residents:
VE(:, 8) = 3*t•yt(:, 8*Yt; Vt),
where * is the discount factor bounded as 0 < * # 1 and t = 0 ... 4. The set of feasible democratic
constitutions will be those for which both VM(:, 8) and VE(:, 8) are greater than or equal to constituent
welfare under the autocratic status quo, assumed to be exogenous and denoted by the constants VM(C) and
VE(C) for the poor majority and the elite, respectively.
3. The Annual Fiscal Policy Game
Redistributive fiscal policies in the new democracy will be decided in the annual fiscal policy stage
game specified by the underlying political economy (Section 3.1 below) , the chosen constitution (Section
3.2), and majority and elite welfare (Section 3.3). Given the specification of citizen welfare, we model
majority and elite choices of fiscal policy in each year (Section 3.4). When the policy game is played only
once, the outcome will be maximal redistribution chosen by the majority controlled central government. If
there is to be any protection of elite incomes, the policy game will need to be played repeatedly, as specified
in Section 4.
3.1 Political Economy: The underlying political economy is assumed to be exogenous and defined
by citizen demographics and incomes, public service technologies, and citizen preferences.
Demographics and Incomes: At the date of the transition, there are M oppressed majority adults and
N0 ruling elite adults, where M > N0. Majority residents remain within the country and for simplicity we
assume no population growth. Elite residents may exit the country however, or more generally, stay within
the country but “drop out” of the taxable economy depending upon the government’s choice of the
redistributive tax rate. We assume that N(J) = N0 - $J, where $ $ 0 measures the exit response of elite
residents with respect to redistributive taxation. Redistributive tax revenues are JA N(J) = N0J - $J2, and the

6

redistribution maximizing tax rate is JU = N0/2$. JU is always chosen under a unitary democracy. Majority
adults earn W, while elite adults earn Y, and Y > W.
The Cost of Redistributive Public Services: Majority residents will receive lump-sum transfers and
redistributive public goods in the new democracy. Redistributive public goods are produced by public
employees of varying quality: “Expert” elite providers who have ae years of training; trained majority
providers with am years of training, and untrained majority providers with au years of training (ae > am > au).
Public employee productivity is directly related to years of training. All public employees are paid a common
civil service wage, S.4 The cost per majority resident of providing the common bundle of redistributive
services is specified as se(q) < sm(q) < su(q), using elite, majority trained, and majority untrained providers,
respectively.5 The elite’s control over the low cost technology for the provision of valued public services
provides the elite with a basis for bargaining with the majority for less than a fully exploitative redistributive
tax rate.
Preferences: Elite residents care only about their after-redistributive tax incomes, allowing for elite
capture in elite run provinces of income transfers to the provinces’ poor residents; the rate of capture is n.
Elite residents do not consume redistributive services, though they may consume comparable services out of
private income. Each elite resident’s annual welfare is therefore:
y(C) = Y - J + nb.
Majority residents care about their private income, W, plus redistributive income transfers after elite capture,
(1 - n)b, plus redistributive services (q). Majority residents do not pay redistributive taxes. Their annual

4

The use of a common public employee wage is not crucial to our analysis, though it does reflect the reality
in most public bureaucracies. The key assumption here is that public employee wages do not fully reflect the worker’s
marginal product. See Dixit (1997; pp. 94-98) on the use for low-power incentives not tied to marginal product in
bureaucracies.
5

We assume that public services are provided by a common linear technology proportional to the trainingadjusted level of public employees: q = a(X/M), where (X/M) is public employees (X) per majority resident (M) and a
is employee productivity measured by years of training. For example, if there is one employee for every 25 majority
adult residents and that employee has 14 years of training, then q = 14(1/25) = .56. The cost of provision is s(q) =
S(X/M), so that se(q) = S(q/ae), sm(q) = S(q/am), and su(q) = S(q/au).

7

welfare is:

T(C) = W + (1 - n)b + 8L(q),
where 8 is the majority resident’s preference “weight” for assigned redistributive services and where LN(q)
> 0 and LO(q) < 0.
3.2 Constitutions: Both federal and unitary constitutions use simple majority rule to elect
governments. Since M > N0 $N(J), all policies decided by a unitary democracy will be controlled by the new
majority. However, provinces where the elite has a local majority will choose elite favored policies.
Borders (:): We specify provincial borders by the percent of the majority population (:) residing in
an elite-controlled province(s): : = Me/M > 0. In specifying : we will allow for the fact that the majority can
leave elite provinces, and the elite can leave the public sector (and possibly the economy) in response to
redistributive service provision and redistributive taxation.
Assignment (8): With a federal constitution, service responsibilities are allocated between central and
provincial levels of government. For the elite to have any influence over the new majority, services assigned
to the provinces and under the control of the elite in at least one province must be highly valued by the
majority. Constitutional assignment will be specified here by the “utility value” of the assigned services,
denoted by the majority’s preference parameter, 8. If important redistributive services such as education,
health care, and housing are assigned to the provinces, then 8 has a relatively high value. Assigned, but
unimportant services such as street cleaning, will have a low value for 8.
Enforcement: Only constitutions that are sustainable (i.e., self-enforcing) in the second-stage policy
game will be considered by the elite and the majority as credible constitutions when playing the first-stage
constitutional game. With the new majority in control of the army, unitary democracy is always sustainable.
We focus on finding sustainable constitutions that implement democratic federalism. A federal
constitution with elite-run provinces is not by itself sufficient to ensure provinces have influence. The
majority-run central government can always set a maximal redistributive tax rate, JU, while still using

8

provinces to provide redistributive services. We call this possibility administrative federalism; provinces in
this case are simply administrative units of the central government. Or, stronger still, the central government
can choose maximal redistribution and use a central bureaucracy to provide redistributive services. Here
provinces are irrelevant to the policy outcomes, a regime we call de facto unitary democracy. Only under
democratic federalism are elite policy preferences respected.
3.3 Specifying Annual Elite and Majority Welfare: All fiscal policies are decided subject to the
aggregate public sector redistributive budget constraint specified generally as:
s(q) + b = g(J) = [J@N(J) - Z]/M,
where s(q) is the average cost per majority resident of providing redistributive services, b is a lump-sum
redistributive transfer per majority resident, g(J) is total redistributive spending per majority resident, J@N(J)
is total redistributive revenues from the imposition of a national tax rate, Z allows for payments to (> 0) or
from (< 0) parties outside the elite-majority fiscal agreement.
Under unitary governance, the central government sets the redistributive tax rate equal to its maximal
rate, JU, and then allocates redistributive revenues to the constitutionally specified redistributive services and
transfers so as to maximize majority residents welfare. Elite residents pay JU in taxes and receive no capture
revenues. Majority residents receive redistributive services and b = g(JU) - sU(q) in lump-sum transfers, where
sU(q) = m@sm(q) + (1 - m)@su(q) is the average cost per majority resident of providing redistributive services
under unitary government using m trained and ( if necessary) (1 - m) untrained majority employees. For
simplicity, we have assumed that all elite public employees exit public service to the private economy under
the unitary regime. This assumption is not necessary for our results. All that is required is that there be some
shirking or “moonlighting” by elite public employees when the majority controls the provision of
redistributive services.6

6

See, for example, the theoretical work of Akerlof and Kranton (2004) and the extensive empirical work
summarized in Williams and O’Reilly (1998). on the adverse consequences for organizational efficiency of racial and/or
educational diversity between managers and workers.

9

Under federalism, the central government again sets the redistributive tax rate as JF (# JU). The level
of redistributive services is likely to differ under the federal and unitary regimes to the extent that the costs
of service provision differ. Majority residents in majority controlled provinces receive a basic grant bm =
g(JF) - sm(q). Majority residents in elite controlled provinces receive a basic grant net of elite capture of (1 -

n)be = (1 - n)[g(JF) - se(q)]. If : of the majority residents reside in elite-run province(s) and (1 - :) residents
reside the majority-run provinces, then under federalism, the average cost of redistributive services over all
majority residents will be sF(q) = :@se(q) + (1 - :)@sm(q). From the fact that se(q) < sm(q) < su(q), it follows that
sU(q) > sF(q) for any value of : > 0. If it can be sustained, federalism is the low cost institution for providing
redistributive public services. This cost advantage is the source of the elite’s influence over the majority.
Under federalism, the rate of elite capture will be either of two values: nL and nH, where 0 < nL < nH

# 1. The lower bound, nL is set by the ability of majority residents to observe capture of the lump-sum grant.
The elite-run province will push n to the point where capture remains just unobserved, nL. If n > nL and
capture is observed, then we assume the majority in the elite province organize protests that impose a cost
of D on each elite resident. Higher values of D suggest a more militant and better organized majority. The
upper value nH is set by the desire of majority residents to exit the elite province for a majority run province.
The more attractive is the elite province to majority residents, the higher will be nH.7 If the majority exits the
elite province, then no redistributive transfers will be sent to the elite province. Thus the elite will never
choose to capture more than nH. We treat nL and nH as exogenous, and for a fixed cost D, the elite will
choose either nL or nH.
By definition, under democratic federalism (denoted as regime F) the majority selects a redistributive
tax rate less than the maximal rate, JF < JU, so that g(JF) < g(JU). For simplicity we denote g(JF) as gF. The

A typical majority resident receives W + (g - sm(q)) + 8AL(q) in a majority province and W + (1 - n)[g - se(q)]
+ 8AL(q) + E in an elite province, where E is their saved costs of exit, or equivalently, the amenity value of living in the
elite province. For common values of q across provinces, the value of n which leaves the majority resident just
indifferent between staying or leaving the elite province defines nH : n # nH = ([E + (sm(q) - se(q))]/[g - se(q)] # 1.
Strong majority attachments to elite provinces allow high rates of elite capture.
7

10

welfare of a majority resident in an elite province is then:

Te = W + (1 - nL, H)[gF - se(q)] + 8L(q),
depending on whether the elite chooses low or high capture. Welfare for majority residents in a majoritycontrolled province is specified similarly, except that there is no capture:

Tm = W + [gF - sm(q)] + 8L(q).
The majority’s political leadership is assumed to be interested in the welfare of the average majority
resident. In equilibrium, majority residents initially allocated to the elite province by the constitution’s choice
of : remain in the elite province. They will exit if the elite leadership chooses n > nH. Since this will mean
that all majority residents leave the province and the elite province receives no central government financing,
there can be no capture. The elite leadership will therefore choose n # nH, and the constitutionally assigned
value of : = (Me/M) will hold in equilibrium. Average majority resident welfare under democratic
federalism is therefore specified as :

T(F) = :Te + (1 - :)Tm,
where : is the percent of majority residents residing in elite controlled provinces. Upon substitution for Te
and Tm:

T(F; nL, H) = W + gF[1 - nL, H@:] - sF(q) + nL, H@:Ase(q) + 8@L(q).

(1L, 1H)

The majority will prefer low capture.
Again by definition, under administrative federalism (regime A) the central government sets J = JU
and thus total redistribution spending equals g(JU) or (notationally) gU. Provinces continue to have
responsibility for providing redistributive services, however. Thus elite capture is still possible. The
weighted average welfare for the typical majority resident under administrative federalism is therefore:

T(A; n L, H) = W + gU[1 - nL, H@:] - sF(q) + nL, H@:Ase(q) + 8@L(q).

(2L, 2H)

Finally, under unitary, or equivalently de facto unitary, democracy (regime U) the redistributive tax
rate is again set at JU with gU = g(JU) and services are now provided directly by the majority-run central

11

government at a cost of sU(q). The lump-sum grant paid to each majority resident will be b = gU - sU(q). Since
elite provinces have no redistributive responsibilities, there is no capture. The average majority resident’s
welfare is therefore given by:

T(U) = W + [gU - sU(q)] + 8L(q).

(3)

Under democratic federalism, elite welfare is:
y(F; nL) = Y - JF + nL[gF - se(q)][Me/N(JF)],

(4L)

for low capture, and:
y(F; nH) = [Y - D] - JF + nH[gF - se(q)][Me/N(JF)],

(4H)

for high capture, when majority residents in the elite province imposes a penalty in protest costs of D. Under
administrative federalism elite resident welfare is:
y(A; nL) = Y - JU + nL[gU - se(q)][Me/N(JU)], and,

(5L)

y(A; nH) = [Y - D] - JU + nH[gU - se(q)][Me/N(JU)],

(5H)

for low and high capture, respectively. Finally, under a de facto unitary democracy the elite resident’s
welfare is:
y(U) = Y - JU.

(6)

For any rate of capture, elite residents prefer democratic federalism to administrative federalism and
administrative federalism to unitary governance.
Table 1 summarizes the pay-offs in any single year of the fiscal policy game for a typical majority
and elite residents under each of the three forms of governance and the two levels of capture.
[TABLE 1 HERE.]
3.4 Choice of Redistributive Fiscal Policies: Three important fiscal choices are made in each year
of the annual policy game: the redistributive tax rate and the level of redistributive services, and then from
the budget constraint, the level of lump-sum transfers. Fiscal policy emerges as an equilibrium from the
annual policy game whose payoffs are described by the strategy choices in Table 1. Under unitary

12

governance, the central government sets the redistributive tax rate at JU and provides services and transfers
centrally. Under federal governance, the central government can select democratic federalism (Strategy F)
setting J = JF < JU and use provinces to provide services and transfers, or administrative federalism (Strategy
A) setting J = JU and again use provinces to provide services and transfers, or finally, de facto unitary
governance (Strategy U) setting J = JU and provide services and transfers centrally. Elite run provinces can
adopt either a low (Strategy nL) or high (Strategy nH) rate of capture. As both federal and provincial
governments can “wait out” the other when making policy, we assume these decisions are made
simultaneously.
Setting the Tax Rate: To obtain JF < JU as an equilibrium tax rate, the majority must prefer average
majority welfare in Table 1, Cells (1, L or H) as an equilibrium outcome. Since JU > JF and thus gU > gF,
however, the majority will always be tempted in any single budget period to defect from the federal strategy,
F, given either value of elite capture. The elite clearly prefers to have the majority choose JF, but they too
may be tempted to defect from the equilibrium federal allocation of Table 1, Cell (4L) to high capture in
Table 1, Cell (4H) if the returns from high capture exceed the costs D imposed by protests. Given these
incentives to defect, the federal fiscal allocation described by Table 1, Cells (1L) and (4L) may not be a
stable, long-run equilibrium when the fiscal policy game is played only once, or more generally, a finite
number of times. For JF to remain an equilibrium policy choice, both the elite and majority must have
credible and sufficiently harmful punishment strategies when the other defects from the federal fiscal choice.
We present the necessary and sufficient conditions for such strategies in Section 4.
Setting the Level of Redistributive Services: We consider two alternative specifications for how the
central government might set the level of redistributive services. The first assumes either a binding
constitutional constraint on the level of services or a strong executive with agenda-setter powers. In either
case, q = q. The second specification allows the level of redistributive services to be chosen endogenously
by a majority-run central legislature. In this case, q = q* is chosen so as to maximize the majority resident

13

welfare under each of the three regime choices – F, A, or U – conditional on the elite’s choice of capture.
Given our specification of majority preferences as separable between income and redistributive services (no
income effects) and of costs favoring elite provision in federalism, less redistributive services will be chosen
by the majority under unitary governance than under either democratic or administrative federalism.8
4. Protecting the Elite Through Democratic Federalism
A peaceful transition from autocracy to democracy requires the agreement of both the ruling elite and
the new majority. Crucial to such an agreement will be a credible promise by the majority not to fully
expropriate the elite’s economic wealth under the new regime.

One means for providing credible

commitments, often used in private contracting, is for the majority to offer the elite a valued “hostage” which
can be harmed or “taken” if the majority breaks its promise of less than full expropriation.9 The hostage
remains and is cared for if the promise is kept. We argue here that the institutions of democratic federalism
provide for the possibility of a successful hostage strategy. Proposition 1 provides the necessary and
sufficient conditions for this to be true in our political economy as well as specifications for the lower and
upper bounds for redistributive taxes and transfers.
While democratic federalism creates the institutional framework for implementing a hostage strategy,
its success depends upon a credible threat by the elite to harm majority residents in those instances when the
majority adopts maximal taxation. If the majority were to defect to JU from the cooperative federal agreement

8

For each regime, the demand curves are specified as:
(F, nL): 8@LN(q) = sFN(q) - nLA:AseN(q) = pL(:) Y q* = q*F(:, 8; nL) = q*L(:, 8)
(F, nH): 8@LN(q) = sFN(q) - nHA:AseN(q) =pH(:) Y q* = q*F(:, 8; nH) = q*H(:, 8)
(A, nL): 8@LN(q) = sFN(q) - nLA:AseN(q) = pL(:) Y q* = q*A :, 8; nL) = q*L(:, 8)
(A, nH): 8@LN(q) = sFN(q) - nHA:AseN(q) = pH(:) Y q* = q*A(:, 8; nH) = q*H(:, 8)
(U): 8@LN(q) = sUN(q)= pU(:) Y q* = q*U (8).

The comments in the text follow directly from these specifications of demand and our specification for costs of providing
services: sUN(q) > sFN(q; nL) = sAN(q; nL) > sFN(q; nH) = sAN(q; nH). The majority’s demands for q will satisfy: q*U (8)
< q*A(:, 8; nL) = q*F(:, 8; nL) < q*A(:, 8; nH) = q*F(:, 8; nH). Comparative static results imply: Mq*L/M: > 0 and
Mq*H/M: > 0 and Mq*L/M8 > 0 and Mq*H/M8 > 0.
9
Schelling (1960, pp.135-136) first proposed the use of “hostages” as a means for enforcing incomplete
contracts; see also Williamson (1983).

14

in Cells (1L) and (4L) of Table 1, then the elite’s punishment strategy will be to adopt high capture. This is
only possible if the elite controls provincial fiscal policies and prefers nH to nL under maximal tax rates.
Formally:
DEFINITION: CREDIBLE ELITE PUNISHMENT. The high capture strategy will be a credible elite
punishment strategy when:
(i) The elite prefers the high capture strategy to low capture when the majority defects to
administrative federalism, i.e., y(A; nH) > y(A; nL);
(ii) The elite remains a political majority (and wins all ties) in at least one province, i.e.,
N(JU) $ Me ; and,
(iii) The poor majority prefers provinces and administrative federalism to unitary
governance as their defection alternative – T(A; nL) > T(U) – and as their punishment
strategy when the elite defects – T(A; nH) > T(U).
These three requirements define two constraints on the federal constitution. First, a Border
Constraint specifies lower and upper bounds for the constitutional parameter : and ensures that conditions
(i) and (ii) are met. Second, an Assignment Constraint specifies lower and upper bounds for values for q or
q* (or equivalently 8) so that condition (iii) is met. We specify Border and Assignment Constraints for both
the q- and q* regime.
Border and Assignment Constraints in the q-regime: Condition (i) holds and y(A; nH) > y(A; nL)
if the elite province has a sufficiently large population of majority residents receiving redistributive transfers.
If so, then benefits of high capture to the elite compensates for the potential protest costs imposed on each
elite resident by the denied majority: : > :min(q), where :min(q) rises with q. The precise specification of

:min(q) for our political economy is given in Appendix A.1. The strict inequality follows because we assume
the elite prefers to cooperates and adopt nL if y(A; nH) = y(A; nL). Condition (ii) requires the elite to be a
political majority in its province(s). Thus : cannot be too large; N(JU)/M = :max $ :. Together these two
conditions define the q-Border Constraint specified as:

:max $ : > :min(q).

(7q)

Condition (iii) requires that if the central government defects or punishes the elite, it does so within

15

a federal structure where provinces still have fiscal responsibilities. To satisfy condition (iii), therefore, T(A;

: ,q, nL) > T(U; q) when considering defection and T(A; :, q, nH) > T(U; q) when the majority punishes.
Since T(A; :, q, nL) > T(A; :, q, nH) > T(U; q), the binding constraint is from the decision to punish where

T(A; :, q, nH) > T(U; q). The strict inequality follows because we assume the majority prefers unitary
governance to federalism. This condition holds when q is large enough that the cost advantage of using
efficient elite provinces to provide redistributive services more than offsets the loss in the majority’s welfare
from high capture in those provinces. For condition (iii) to hold, therefore, we require q > qmin(:; nH); see
Appendix A.1.
But the constitutionally mandated level of redistributive services cannot be set too high either. As
q increases, the net return to capture declines for the elite and may eventually fall below the amount needed
for the elite to find the high capture strategy a preferred response to defection. The maximum value of q that
protects nH as a credible punishment strategy will be that qmax(:) where the : = :min(q) just holds for the
constitutionally chosen value of :; see Appendix A.1. The q-Assignment Constraint is defined by:
qmax(:) $ q > qmin(:; nH).

(8q)

Lemma 1 follows.
LEMMA 1: CREDIBLE ELITE PUNISHMENTS IN THE q-REGIME. For political economies satisfying
the q-Border and q-Assignment Constraints, the high capture strategy will be a credible punishment strategy
for the elite whenever the majority adopts a revenue-maximizing (centralizing) redistributive tax rate. (Proof:
See Appendix A.2.)
Figure 1 illustrates the feasible constitutional values of : and q sufficient to ensure credible elite punishments
at the time of the South African transition decision. The q-Border Constraint requires that : lie above the

:min(q) curve and below the :max line. The q-Assignment Constraint requires that q lie to the right of the
qmin(:; nH) curve and at or to the left of qmax(:). The shaded area shows the constitutional assigned values
of : and q where all constraints for a credible elite punishment are satisfied.
[FIGURE 1 HERE]
Border and Assignment Constraints in the q*-regime: This regime applies when the majority is free

16

to choose the level of redistributive services that provinces must supply. Services are assigned by the
constitution, but their level to be funded by the central government and to be provided by the provinces is
endogenous to the preferences of those controlling the central government. Exactly who that might be is left
open, although we do require the decision-maker(s) to have a continuous downward sloping demand curve
with respect to the marginal costs of services. Since q is one-dimensional in this model, we have in mind
a majority voter with the median “taste” (8) for redistributive services as setting q*. Other specifications for
majority politics are of course possible.
As in the constrained regime, the q*-Border Constraint follows from the requirement that the elite
province rationally adopt the high capture strategy when the majority defects to administrative federalism.
In this case, we require y(A; q*H, nH) > y(A; q*L, nL) which again allows us to specify a lower bound on the
share of majority residents that must be allocated to the elite provinces: : > :min(q*H); see Appendix A.1.
Condition (ii) requiring elite political control continues to define the upper bound of N(JU)/M = :max $ :.
Conditions (i) and (ii) together define the q*-Border Constraint:

:max $ : > :min(q*H).

(7q*)

The q*-Assignment Constraint ensures condition (iii) holds. Again, the decision to punish defines
the binding constraint so T(A; :, qH*, nH) > T(U; qU*) must hold. Since the majority is free to choose q*,
the assignment constraint is specified as a comparison of consumer surpluses under administrative federalism
and unitary governance. Consumer surplus comparisons depend upon elite cost advantages and the relative
attractiveness of the assigned redistributive services. Higher values of 8 increase the consumer surplus of
redistributive services to the majority, increasing the relative attractiveness of administrative federalism using
low cost elite providers. The value of 8 where the majority just prefers administrative federalism to unitary
governance defines a minimal value for 8, denoted as 8min = 8min(:; nH ). For each value of : there is an
associated value of 8 and thus a minimal q*H consistent with a credible elite punishment: q*Hmin(:) = q*H(:,

8min(:)); see Appendix A.1.

17

There is an upper bound on q*H as well, now specified as an upper limit on preference parameter, 8.
If the assigned services are too important (high 8), the majority demands a high value of q*H(:, 8), which
reduces the amount of resources that can be captured by the elite when adopting strategy nH. Given the cost

D of the high capture strategy, there is a value of 8 above which high capture is no longer a credible choice
for the elite. This maximal value for 8 will define a majority chosen maximal amount of q*Hmax(:) = q*H(:,

8max(:)). Given a choice of provincial borders :, q*Hmin(:) and q*Hmax(:) define the lower and upper bounds
for q*H – or equivalently bounds on the value 8 associated with constitutionally assigned services – for the
q*-Assignment Constraint:
q*Hmax(:) $ q*H(:; 8) > q*Hmin(:).

(8q*)

When the q*-Border and q*-Assignment Constraints are jointly satisfied, nH is a credible elite
punishment.
LEMMA 2: CREDIBLE ELITE PUNISHMENTS IN THE q*-REGIME. For political economies
satisfying the q*-Border and q*-Assignment Constraints, the high capture strategy will be a credible
punishment strategy whenever the majority adopts a revenue-maximizing (centralizing) redistributive tax
rate. (Proof: See Appendix A.2.)
The shaded area in Figure 2 shows the set of provincial borders (:) and assignments (8) and the associated
values of q*H that satisfy the q*-Border and q*-Assignment Constraints for simple (median) majority rule for
the South African economy, specified for its transition economy.
[FIGURE 2 HERE]
Comparing the coordinates of the shaded areas in Figures 1 (points ABC) and 2 (points A*B*C*)
shows that the set of federal constitutions allowing credible elite punishments in the q*-regime is a subset of
federal constitutions allowing credible elite punishments in the q-regime. This result holds generally as
Lemma 3:
LEMMA 3: FEASIBLE FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONS: When the Border and Assignment Constraints of
Lemmas 1 and 2 are met, the set of feasible constitutions allowing democratic federalism is smaller in the
q*-regime than the q-regime. For any elite provincial border (:), the level of minimally acceptable
assignment must satisfy, q*Hmin(:) > q(:). For any common qH* = q, the size of the minimally acceptable elite
province must satisfy :min(qH*) > :min(q). The maximal size of the elite province, :max, is the same in both the

18

q*- and q-regimes. (Proof: See Appendix A.2.)
Allowing the majority the right to choose the level of constitutionally assigned redistributive services,
rather than having that level set exogenously, narrows the set of constitutions which can sustain credible elite
punishments and therefore constitutional promises not to adopt maximal taxation.
Ensuring the feasibility of elite punishments does not by itself guarantee that a federal fiscal
allocation can exist as a long-run equilibrium of the annual policy game, however. The cooperative allocation
of democratic federalism will only survive if punishments for deviating are sufficient to in fact discourage
defections. Formally:
DEFINITION: SUSTAINABLE FEDERAL ALLOCATIONS: The strategy pair (F, nL) will be a
sustainable fiscal allocation if that pair is a subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium for the infinitely repeated
fiscal policy game.
Proposition 1 defines the conditions for when democratic federalism is an equilibrium, and thus
sustainable, by specifying minimum and maximum bounds on central government tax rates and
intergovernmental transfers. We do so for the case where majority and elite residents both play “grim trigger”
strategies in an infinitely repeated fiscal policy game. Under the grim trigger strategy, the elite plays nL <

nH , but were the majority to defect from democratic federalism and select JU, the elite would punish the
majority by selecting nH forever.10 Similarly, the majority plays JF < JU but were the elite to defect from the
federal allocation and play nH, the majority would respond by playing JU forever.11
The minimal tax rate (Jmin) and associated intergovernmental transfer (gmin) defines the minimal

It is useful to ask whether the elite could select a “tighter” threshold tax rate that will be less than JU for the
implementation of its punishment strategy, nH. For elite punishments limited to a known upper rate of capture, as here,
the answer is no. Announcing a lower threshold tax rate, say J < JU, for implementing nH would not be credible. Once
the lower threshold J was crossed and nH imposed, no further punishment is possible. Given a fixed nH , the majority’s
optimal strategy is to then raise taxes to JU; see Table 1 (Cell 2H). The elite’s only credible threshold for its trigger
strategy is therefore JU. It would be instructive to consider whether credible elite punishment “schedules” could be
designed which might allow a more aggressive trigger strategy and thus a tighter upper limit for JF.
10

11

These grim trigger strategies are the most extreme form of punishment one player can impose on the other
for defection in this game. These strategies therefore give democratic federalism its best chance of being sustained; see
Gibbons (1992, p. 99).

19

redistribution required for the majority to find the strategy pair (F, nL) its preferred long-run outcome, rather
than defect to (A, nL) and run the risk of (A, nH). The maximal tax rate (Jmax) and associated transfer (gmax)
defines the maximal level of redistribution the elite will accept in (F, nL), rather than defect to (F, nH) and
then too run the risk of (A, nH) as a long-run equilibrium. For a subgame perfect equilibrium for the annual
fiscal policy game we require Jmax $ JF > JF min, or equivalently, gmax $ gF > gmin. Our central proposition uses
the bounds gmax $ gF > gmin.
PROPOSITION 1: SUSTAINABLE DEMOCRATIC FEDERALISM: For a political economy satisfying
the payoff structure of Table 1 and appropriate Border and Assignment Constraints, there exists a grim
trigger strategy equilibrium in which democratic federalism is sustainable, and in that equilibrium:
1) The central government majority chooses a level of redistributive transfers (tax rate)
bounded between a maximal grant (tax rate) acceptable to the elite and a minimal grant (tax
rate) acceptable to the majority specified as:
gU > gmax(*; 6) $ gF > gmin(*; 6) > 0,
for each constitutional (6 = q or q*) regime and common discount factor (0 < * # 1), and
2) The elite province(s) adopts the fiscal strategy nL.
The proof for Proposition 1 is outlined in Appendix A.2.12
Comparative static properties follow directly from the Border and Assignment Constraints and from
the specifications of the upper and lower bounds for redistributive services. Three seem worth stressing here.
First, it is possible that no choice of : will satisfy the Border Constraint, either because there are too few elite
residents making :max = N(JU)/M too low, or because the cost advantage of elite production is so slight that
credible high capture requires too many majority residents making :min(q or q*H) too high. Second, in the
q*-regime, credible elite punishments may not be possible when the majority has a very high value (8) for
redistributive services. If so, federal institutions will be insufficient to protect elite interests. Finally, as the
majority and elite residents become less patient and * declines, gmin will increase and gmax decline. This
narrows the range of federally sustainable redistributions. It is possible for sufficiently impatient residents

12

Proposition 1 generalizes easily to having different discount factors for the majority and elite residents.

20

(particularly majority residents) that gmin(*; 6) > gmax(*; 6) and there will be no value of gF that can be
sustained in the long-run.13
5. Democratic Federalism and the South African Transition
5.1 Background: There is little doubt that at the time of the 1994 negotiations for the new
constitution, the two important minority parties, the white elite National Party (NP) and the tribally based
Zulu Inkata Freedom Party (IFP), needed credible assurances that their once favored economic positions
would be protected in the new democratic regime. Simple promises by the new majority ANC were not
sufficient. Both pressed for a federal solution with political control over at least one province, with each
province promised significant fiscal powers; see Waldmeir (1997, Chapter 13). An agreement was reached
in mid-April of 1994, codified as the Interim Constitution. The Interim Constitution drew the boundaries for
nine new provinces, six to be controlled by the ANC, one by the IFP (KwaZulu Natal), and up to two by
the National Party (the rural Northern Cape and the urban Western Cape). Borders were drawn explicitly to
have political majorities for the IFP and NP provinces.14 In addition, the Interim Constitution outlined fiscal
assignment for redistributive services. K-12 education, health care, and the administration of welfare services
and payments were specified as “concurrent” functions which may be managed by the national government
alone (our de facto unitary governance), by the provinces alone (our democratic or administrative federalism),
or shared.15

13

Comparative statics for the model’s other important exogenous parameters as they impact gmax and gmin and
thus the bargaining range for redistribution can also be specified. First, a larger outside obligation or less outside aid,
a greater majority population, a lower rate of maximal elite capture (nH, holding nL fixed), and a larger penalty for high
capture (D) each increases gmax and reduces or leaves unchanged gmin. In each case the bargaining range for acceptable
redistribution expands. Second, in the q*-regime, higher values of 8 raise both gmin and gmax , but gmax tends to gu in the
limit and as a consequence the bargaining range declines. Third, a smaller cost advantage for the elite because ae falls
relative to am and au increases both gmax and gmin; again as gmax tends to gu in the limit the bargaining range declines.
14

Provincial borders were originally drawn to facilitate a NP victory in the Northern Cape to accommodate the
rural whites; see Muthien and Khosa (1998). While the white landowners voted for the NP, the white farmhands failed
to vote and the Northern Cape was won by the ANC by a small majority. It has remained an ANC province ever since.
15

Shared provision would involve a pre-assigned level q0 to be provided by the national government with the
provinces then providing the difference between q or q* and q0 on their own. The specified q0 operates in our model
simply as a targeted lump-sum grant for redistributive services provided at a cost of sm(q0). The analysis here would

21

With the Interim Constitution in place, elections for the new President and the provincial legislatures
could go forward. Nelson Mandela was elected President, and the NP and IFP each won political control over
one province, the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal respectively. Because of a boycott of the elections by
its hardline right-wing voters, the NP barely lost the rural Northern Cape.
While the Interim Constitution created independent provinces and the needed fiscal assignments, it
left the details of federal governance largely unspecified. The final Constitution approved in October, 1996
filled the gap. It maintained the provincial borders (Chapter 6, 103) and concurrent redistributive service
assignments (Schedule 4, Part A) as specified in the Interim Constitution, but now assigned all important
taxation, except for property taxation, as central government responsibilities unless permitted by an explicit
act of Parliament (Chapter 13, 228).
Finally, the new Constitution gives formal agenda-setting powers to the President. All policies
relating to fiscal affairs of provinces must begin with the President (Chapter 4, 73). The President is
responsible for administering and executing all laws approved by Parliament, including supervising the
provision of redistributive services (Chapter 5, 100-1b). The President may veto any parliamentary approved
legislation (Chapter 4, 79). The President’s ability to exercise these agenda powers turns on his or her support
within the national parliament. Subject to the constraints of democratic federalism, ANC party leadership
has determined South Africa’s fiscal policies; see Wittenberg (2006, p. 346).
Table 2 summarizes South Africa’s post-apartheid redistributive fiscal policies. The Table lists
aggregate central government revenues, total redistributive grants per capita (gF) for the country as a whole,
for the elite-run Western Cape and for the other, majority-run provinces; provincial spending for assigned
redistributive services in the elite (se(q)) and majority provinces (sm(q)); the feasible level of redistributive

go through completely. South Africa has not chosen this option, and wisely so. It is inefficient as sm(q0) > se(q0) in the
elite province.

22

services q measured in input units as years of public employee training per majority resident;16 and finally,
the basic grant available to the elite (be) and majority provinces (bm) to fund other redistributive services
including direct income transfers to households by the provinces.
[TABLE 2 HERE]
.

Four facts are evident from Table 2. First, as required for democratic federalism provincial

governments have been given a significant role in the provision of redistributive services, funded entirely by
grants from the central government. Second, the elite Western Cape receives on average 20 percent less in
assigned services grants, se(q), consistent with their efficiency advantage in providing redistributive services.
Third, basic service grants, be, available for capture by the elite and crucial for a credible elite punishment
are economically significant, never less than 380 Rand per capita (• $300 Million in total) in the elite
provinces. Fourth, there was an upward break in the level of required redistributive services funded by these
budgets in FY 2006/07. This year corresponds to a time of growing militancy by the left-wing of the ANC,
suggesting a shift from moderating presidential to more redistributive majority rule politics.
The question we wish to answer is this: Has this level and allocation of redistributive public spending
been sufficiently constrained so as to sustain democratic federalism in South Africa? That is, have the
requirements of Lemmas 1 or 2 been satisfied, and if so, has the overall level of redistributive taxation and
spending been consistent with the requirements of Proposition 1 for sustainable democratic federalism? To
provide one set of answers to these questions we have parameterized our model to the South African political
economy at the time of the transition; see Appendix B for details.

The majority receives an input bundle, q, which it values as 8@L(q). For the purposes of Table 2 and the
analysis which follows, we specify that input bundle by q = a@(X/M), where X/M is public employees (X) per adult
majority resident (M) and where a is the measure of employee productivity equal to ae = 17 years of education for the
average elite public employees, am = 14 years of education for the average “trained” majority employee, and au = 7 years
of education for the average “untrained” majority employee. For example, in FY 1995/96 in the elite province, qe =
17@(1/32) = .56 while in the average majority province qm = 14@(1/32) = .44. The number of employees per majority
resident was set by national standards, but the quality of the employees – measured by years of schooling – was typically
much higher in the elite province. See Appendix B for the details behind Table 2. Thus majority residents in the elite
province receive approximately 25 percent more redistributive services than majority residents in a majority-run
province. Modest exit costs – see fn. 7 – are sufficient to check migration into the elite province.
16

23

5.2 Is Democratic Federalism Feasible in South Africa? For democratic federalism to be a viable
long-run constitution it must first satisfy the border and assignment constraints specified for the q-regime
(Lemma 1) or q*-regime (Lemma 2); see Figures 1 and 2.
Common to both regimes are provincial borders. Crucial to our argument is that at least one
important province be politically controlled by the elite. This has been the Western Cape.17 The borders of
the Western Cape were explicitly drawn to ensure elite political control over provincial politics and a
sufficiently large share of majority residents as “hostages” so that elite high capture would be a credible
punishment if the poor majority chose maximal taxation at the national level; see Muthien and Khosa (1998).
The resulting share of the majority voting-age population residing in the elite province is estimated as : =
.184.18 This value of : satisfies the required border constraints for both the q and q* constitutional regimes;
see Figures 1 and 2.
The Mandela presidency was arguably a q-regime. During his tenure the level of redistributive
services was recommended by a constitutionally created independent commission (Chapter 13, 220-222)
known as Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC), forwarded to the legislature without change by President
Mandela, and then approved without amendment by the ANC controlled legislature.19 The FFC membership
was appointed by Mandela and was equally divided between ANC and National Party representatives.
Commission decisions were typically made by unanimous agreements between the representatives of the two

17

The ANC has never won more than 45 percent of the vote in the Western Cape. Coalitions of the various
elite opposition parties having won at least 51 percent of the vote; see www.elections.org.za. In the latest election
(2009), the Democratic Alliance won 48 percent of the Western Cape and the “break-away” moderate party from the
ANC called the Congress of the People won 9 percent. The ANC won only 32 percent of the Western Cape vote.
We define : = (Me/M) so that N(JF)/[Me + N(JF)] = .51; see fn. 19 above. For the adult populations, N(JF)
is estimated to be only slightly larger than 4.8 Million. If so, then Me = 4.6 Million, and therefore : = (Me/M) =
4.6M/25M = .184.
18

19

The 1998 budget proposals by the Finance Department to the legislature commented that “its (FFC’s)
recommendations for the division of resources between the three spheres of government form the basis of the current
allocations” (1998 Budget Review, Department of Finance, as quoted in Financial and Fiscal Commission: A Ten Year
Review).

24

parties.
The FFC’s recommended level of redistributive services was 1 teacher per 38 school-aged children,
3.5 preventive health care clinic visits a year for each majority adult and child, and 4500 (real 2000) Rand
for each income eligible child, elderly, and disabled majority resident for social insurance transfers.20
Together, these targets required redistributive grants sufficient to pay for .038 public employees per majority
resident or, for an average level of training of 14 years per employee, q = .53 public employee training-years
per majority resident.21 To fund this FFC recommended level of redistributive services, transfers of 1635
Rand/capita are needed in the majority provinces and 1,347 Rand/capita in the elite province.22
Beginning in FY 1998/99 and continuing to FY2000/01 (the last Mandela budget), actual transfers
as reported by the Ministry of Finance and reported in Table 2 are very close to the FFC recommended levels,
confirming our specification of the Mandela years as a q-regime. Budgets before FY 1998/99 did not provide
full redistributive spending to the majority provinces (actual qm < q) but favored the Western Cape. These
budgets are best seen as transition budgets designed to “wean” the once favored elite residents of the Western
Cape away from their pre-apartheid public allocations. By FY 1998/99, however, the new redistributive qregime was in place. Given : = .184, q •.53 falls within the set of feasible assignments satisfying Lemma

20

See FFC, The Allocation of Financial Resources Between the National and Provincial Governments, FY
1996/97, September 8, 1995.
21

The value of (X/M) is estimated from FFC targets and the assumption that (1) each majority adult has one
child requiring .026 education professionals per majority resident; (2) each medical professional can provide 3.5 visits
to each of 500 majority residents a year requiring .002 health care professionals per majority resident; and (3) that
approximately 17 percent of the majority population qualifies for some form of income assistance for an average
spending per majority resident of 765 Rand per year or, in fiscally equivalent units of a public employee, about .0095
public employees per majority resident. Together the mandates require funding sufficient to pay for .0375 public
employees per majority resident. See FFC, The Allocation of Financial Resources Between the National and Provincial
Governments, FY 1996/97, September 8, 1995, p. ii. Assuming an average level of training of 14 years per public
employee, this implies the need for .53 public employee training-years per majority resident.
Required spending per majority adult to support q = .53 equals SA(X/M) = SA(q/a) = 80,000A(.53/14) = 3030
Rand/majority adult. The average ratio of majority adults to total population is .54 (=25M/46M), implying a required
redistributive service grant per capita of 1635 Rand/capita (= 3030R x.54). To fund q = .53 in the elite province, SA(q/a)
= 80,000A(.53/17) = 2494 Rand/majority adult is required or approximately 1,347 Rand/capita (= 2494R x.54). These
estimates are very close to actual funding as reported in Table 2.
22

25

1 for a q-regime; see Figure 1, shaded area ABC. The Mandela presidency could sustain democratic
federalism.
Matters became less certain under the leadership of Mandela’s successor, Thabo Mbeki. The Mbeki
budgets funded levels of redistributive services very near the Mandela/FFC recommendations (q = .53) until
FY 2005/06, at which time redistributive spending began a strong upward trend towards today’s values of
q = .85; see Table 2. This break in redistributive spending suggests a break in underlying political regimes
as well, away from a strong president setting services exogenously and towards a president increasingly
responsive to the preferences of the majority controlled ANC. Concurrent political events culminating in the
ouster of President Mbeki, first as head of the ANC (December, 2007), and then as President (September,
2008) strongly suggest such a regime change.23 If so, South Africa’s federal policies must now meet the
requirements of Lemma 2 for a q*-regime; see Figure 2. By Lemma 3, the set of feasible federal democracies
in the q*-regime is smaller than those under the q-regime.24
We bound our estimate of the majority’s preferences for redistributive services in a q*-regime as
6100 $ 8 $ 4230, with the lower bound corresponding the last (FY 2008/09) Mbeki budget and the upper
bound corresponding to the stated ambitions of the left wing of the ANC for full public service equality; see
Appendix B. The lower bound of 8 = 4230 is consistent with q*L = .79 (Table 2, FY 2008/09) under
democratic federalism. But does this value of 8 satisfy the requirements of Lemma 2? The border and
assignment constraints set q*Hmax(: = .184) = .98; see Figure 2. For 8 = 4230, we compute q*H(: = .184; 8
= 4230) = .88. Thus Lemma 2 holds and democratic federalism is still feasible for the last Mbeki budget:
q*Hmax(: = .184) = .98 > .88 > .59 = q*Hmin(: = .184); see Figure 2.

23

President Mbeki began to feel pressure from the left wing of the ANC mid-way through his presidency,
particularly on matters of public services for the poor. This pressure culminated in his ouster as head of the ANC and
finally his resignation from the Presidency in September, 2008. On this growing pressure from the left, see “Boost for
Zuma’s Leadership Campaign,” Financial Times (September 21, 2007, p. 4).
24
Compare the ABC coordinates in Figures 1 and 2 to see that this is so for our parameterization of the South
African political economy.

26

The last budget for which we have full data, FY 2009/10, is arguably a new ANC majority budget,
a majority now unconstrained by the Mandela-Mbeki moderates. The ouster of Mbeki as leader of the ANC
in favor of Jacob Zuma in December, 2007 has established the party’s pro-redistribution wing as the new
“decisive voter” for the majority. The FY 2009/10 budget sets q*L = .85, a 7.6 percent increase in real
redistributive spending over the last Mbeki budget and a 34 percent increase over what might reasonably be
seen as the last pro-moderate budget of FY 2005/06; see Table 2. The implied value of 8 for this last ANC
budget of q*L = .85 is 8 = 4550.25 For 8 = 4550, we compute q*H(: = .184; 8 = 4550) = .95 which falls just
within the upper bound for Lemma 2: q*Hmax(: = .184) = .98 > .95; see Figure 2. Any value of 8 > 4700, only
a 3 percent (1.03 = 4700/4550) increase in distributive demands, will push q*Hmax(: = .184) > .98 and lead
to a constitutional “contract” outside the shaded area A*B*C* in Figure 2 defining feasible democratic
federalism as set by Lemma 2.
5.3 Is South Africa’s Federal Contract Sustainable? Even if the requirements of Lemmas 1 and
2 are met and democratic federalism is feasible, it may not be sustainable by the requirements of Proposition
1. For sustainability, the parties to the constitution must be sufficiently far-sighted that they check their shortterm inclinations to exploit the other party. Far-sighted players will have values of their discount factor (*)
near 1; short-sighted players nearer 0. We assume the elite has a discount factor *e = .93 while the majority’s
discount factor is bounded as .93 $ *m $ .33; see Appendix B.
For these discount factors and for both the q and q* regimes, gmax(*e; 6) > gmin(*m; 6) and democratic
federalism is sustainable. For the q-regime, gmax(*e = .93; 6=q=.63) = 3300 Rand/resident > gmin(*m=.33;

6=q=.63) = 3234 Rand/resident > gmin(*m=.93; 6=q) =3108 Rand/resident. For the q*-regime, gmax(*e=.93;
6=q*; 8 = 4550) = 3304 Rand/Resident > gmin(*m=.33; 6=q*; 8 = 4550) = 3261 Rand/resident > gmin(*m=.93;

25
The demand for q*L = 8/pL(:). We estimate the average pL(:) = 5355R for this political economy; see
Appendix B. For q*L = .85, 8 = 4550 • .85@5355.

27

6=q*; 8 = 4550) = 3187 Rand/resident.26
We conclude for our calibration of the South African political economy that at least to today, the
proposed federal constitution has been both feasible as a self-enforcing constraint on maximal redistribution
and democratically sustainable as required by our Proposition 1.
6. The Future of Democratic Federalism for South Africa
Though democratic federalism has provided a valuable check on redistributive taxation in South
Africa for the early years of its democracy, and arguably offered the “inbuilt mechanism which makes it
impossible for one group to suppress the other” that President Mandela thought so important to transition
from apartheid to democracy, there is no guarantee that these federal institutions can continue to play this
important role in the future. The ability of democratic federalism to credibly check elite taxation rests
crucially upon the majority’s demand for redistributive services. If majority preferences for redistributive
services move above the threshold required for self-enforcing federalism (q*H > .98; Figure 2), then the elite
province will lose its ability to credibly threaten the high capture penalty necessary to constrain maximal
redistribution. While the majority has seen a near doubling of redistributive service inputs per majority
resident since the start of the new democracy – from qm = .44 in FY1995/96 to qm = .85 in FY 2009/10 (Table
2) – current levels still fall short, perhaps as much as 34 percent short, of what is now provided to the typical
elite family.27
If a future majority demands redistributive services outside the feasible set in Figure 2, then
democratic federalism can no longer limit redistribution and unitary governance or its de facto equivalent may

An impatient majority (*m = .33) will always demand more immediate redistribution than a patient majority
(*m = .93) as is observed for our simulated values of gmin.
26

27

The typical elite resident is now provided with 1 teacher for every 20 students and 3.5 heath care visits per
family member. Assuming a doubling of the current income transfer for children in poverty and disabled and elderly
pensioners, then qm would need to equal 1.14 public employee training years per majority residents. The ratio of 1.14/.85
= 1.34 implies a 34 percent shortfall in inputs for majority residents relative to the typical middle class (elite) resident.

28

result.28 We then need to ask: What additional institutions, if coupled with provincial governments as
modeled here, might help to check the majority’s demand for redistributive services? The task is to return
democratic federalism to a q-regime of constrained redistribution, with q set independently from majority
preferences. Two possibilities suggest themselves.29
The first sets q through majority party politics by giving a moderate minority in the majority party
control over party policy through the control of party resources and candidates for parliament. This was the
case when the older, Mandela-Mbeki establishment controlled the ANC. This coalition set the budgets for
fiscal years FY1996 to FY 2006; see Figure 1. The moderates’ control of the ANC has been “overturned”
by more redistributive inclined party members with the election of Jacob Zuma as party leader.
The second possibility concedes majority control over the majority party and therefore parliament,
but then sets q less than majority preferred q* using presidential agenda powers and a 33 percent veto-proof
coalition of elites and other fiscal moderates. Provided the reversion budget after the veto is within the
feasible set of Lemma 2, as it now would be at q*H = .95< q*Hmax = .98, then overall redistributive taxation
can still be constrained; see Figure 2. The South African constitution does provide the president with strong
agenda-setting powers and there is a sufficient coalition of elite and independent moderates to sustain a veto.30

28

That the preferences of the majority can undo the stability of institutions was first stressed by William Riker
(1980) in his friendly critique of the then new institutional political science when he asked: Where do institutions come
from? If the majority does not like the performance of an institution, they can change it. So too here. We thank our
referee for reminding us of this important point.
29

There is a third alternative worth mentioning but it does not appear likely within South Africa in the near
term. This is the emergence of a strong centrist party within Parliamentary elections. This alternative would break the
ANC’s monopoly hold on fiscal policy and the likely outcome would be the median position on redistribution between
that of the elite and the current ANC. At the moment the main centrist party is the Democratic Alliance and they hold
17 percent of the seats in Parliament. In response to their loss of the ANC party apparatus in December of 2007, a group
of ANC moderates broke away from the ANC to form a new party called the Congress of the People (COPE). In the most
recent parliamentary elections COPE was third with 7.5 percent of the vote. The ANC still controls 65 percent of the
seats in the new parliament.
30

See Romer and Rosenthal (1979) for a model where agenda-setting powers coupled a veto coalition of 33
percent in the legislature and a sufficiently low reversion for the provision of redistributive services will be sufficient
for a President to check Parliament’s preferences for redistributive services. As to agenda-setting powers in South
Africa, all policies relating to fiscal affairs of provinces must begin with the President (Final Constitution, Chapter 4,
73) and the President is responsible for administering and executing all laws approved by Parliament, including

29

The question remains: Who elects the President? In South Africa the answer is the Parliament by
simple majority rule. This will continue to be the majority party with potentially high redistributive demands.
We are back then to the preferences of the majority members of the ANC for redistributive services and the
inclination and ability of President Zuma, like his predecessors, to use party resources to hold possibly
“excessive” demands in check. It is here, within ANC party politics and the specification of majority and
presidential preferences, that the future of federalism in South Africa as an effective constraint on fiscal
policy is likely to be decided.31
7. Summary and Extensions
Any nation state hoping to move from autocratic, elite rule to a functioning democracy with protected
property rights, and to enjoy the economic benefits such a transition can confer, faces the challenge of
providing credible assurances to the elite that their economic interests will not be fully exploited after the
transition. Three strategies used in prior transitions – continued elite control of the military, elite veto power
in the legislature, or the gradual extension of the franchise – are unlikely to be accepted by any repressed
majority today.
South Africa’s transition from apartheid to democracy suggests a fourth alternative, what we have

supervising the provision of redistributive services (Final Constitution, Chapter 5, 100-1b). The President may veto any
parliamentary approved legislation (Final Constitution, Chapter 4, 79). The ANC now controls 65 percent of
Parliament’s set. The major “elite party” known as the Democratic Alliance has 17 percent of the seats while the break
away moderate ANC party known as the Congress of the People now has 7 percent of the seats. The anti-ANC Inkata
Freedom Party has 5 percent of the seats. What is required is an additional 4 percent of the legislature. The President
has the discretionary resources he needs to win over the required additional votes from the small conservative, moderate,
and even radical parties.
31

Our analysis for South Africa’s federal institutions helps us to understand where to look, and what to look
for, in plotting the future path of RSA fiscal policies, but it does not provide compelling answers to what determines
majority preferences, leadership preferences, and how those two are balanced within the structure of the ANC. These
are important questions but ones we have not pursued here. At least to date, Jacob Zuma remains in control of the party.
However, his current platform (shown as q*H = .95 in Figure 2) has been strongly criticized by Julius Malema, leader
of the ANC Youth League, who is advocating significantly more redistributive services paid for through the
expropriation of white owned assets. Zuma and the older ANC leadership have so far been able to isolate Malema,
labeling him an “anger young man.” Malema has recently been assigned to take anger management classes; see C.
Hunter-Gault, “Letter From South Africa,” The New Yorker (July 5. 2010).

30

called democratic federalism. If the economic elite is sufficiently large and geographically concentrated so
that an elite controlled province can be established (our Border Constraint) and if the constitution assigns to
the provinces, particularly the elite run province, the right to provide important redistributive public services
(our Assignment Constraint), then a federal democracy, even with universal suffrage and a majority controlled
army and central legislature, can provide protection for elite economic interests. So constructed, democratic
federalism creates a “hostage game” played between the new majority’s control of taxation and the elite’s
efficient provision of redistributive services that can constrain the majority’s inclination to exploit the old
elite. To date, democratic federalism appears to have so checked maximal redistribution in South Africa.
Federalism as a path to democracy may not be for everyone, however. Our Border Constraint
requires a geographically concentrated elite. South Africa could meet this requirement by establishing elite
provinces around either Johannesburg or Cape Town. The constitution chose Cape Town with the creation
of the province of Western Cape. In contrast, early efforts to establish a federal democracy in then Rhodesia
were undone by the reluctance of the rural elites spread throughout the country to accept minority status in
all provinces; Barber (1967; Chapters 1-8).

Our Assignment Constraint requires that the assigned

redistributive services be efficiently provided by the political minority. Recent efforts to establish a federal
democracy in Sri Lanka failed for just this reason as the Tamal minority had no comparative advantage in the
provision of any majority valued government service. One can imagine democratic federalism succeeding
in Iraq, however. Like South Africa there is a talented elite minority (the Sunni) concentrated in a major
urban center (Baghdad) and a poor, largely rural majority now in control of the central government (the
Shiite). A federal structure and provincial boundaries are now part of the interim Iraqi constitution; see
Dawisha and Dawisha (2003) and Anderson and Stansfield (2005). What appears to be missing to date is a
trusted leader, a “Mandela,” capable of persuading the competing groups that such a federal compromise is

31

in all parties’ long-run interests.32
Finally, our specification of democratic federalism is not that typically seen in federal public
economies of most mature democracies, but it can be extended to accommodate the richer institutional and
political environment that typically characterize such economies.

First, under our constitution all

redistributive taxation has been assigned to the central government and all redistributive spending to
provinces. Typically, these functions are shared between the two levels of government. We adopted our
“knife-edge” specification to simply the analysis, but all our qualitative results in Lemmas 1-3 and
Proposition 1 go through for shared responsibilities.33 Second, our political economy has only a monolithic
poor majority seeking maximal redistribution. This assumption can be relaxed as well by allowing a
significant faction within the majority to have more moderate demands for redistributive services. Again,
all our qualitative results go through, but now the moderate faction acts as a decisive median when setting

32

Beyond case studies, our model of how federal institutions can facilitate the transition does provide the
foundation for including a “federal” variable in a larger empirical study of the transition into democracy as, for example,
in Przeworski, et. al. (2000) or Boix (2003). Our model suggests that a federal democracy is more likely than a unitary
democracy to facilitate a democratic transition when both the majority and the elite prefer democratic federalism to
autocracy but the elite prefers autocracy to a very redistributive unitary democracy. In this case, democratic federalism
is necessary for the transition; see Section 2. This ranking depends upon how much lower will be redistribution under
federalism than under unitary governance with maximal taxation. Redistributive taxation under federalism falls as gmax
falls towards gmin., provided democratic federalism remains sustainable by our Proposition 1. In our model, gmax declines
as the initial elite population is larger relative to the poor majority, as the ability of the elite to protect its interests in
federalism through “high capture” increases, as the possible penalty imposed by the majority for high capture declines,
as the initial ability difference (education) in providing public services between the elite and the majority increases, and
as the distributive demands of the majority are less; see the comparative statics summarized in fn. 13 above. Were one
to run a regression on the probability of a transition to democracy – as do Przeworski, et. al. and Boix – then our analysis
suggests a two-stage specification, first where the transition depends upon the use of unitary or federal institutions with
federal institutions more successful than unitary institutions, and then second, where the use of federal institutions over
unitary institutions is conditioned on the ratio of the elite-to-majority populations, elite-to-majority average educations,
determinants of majority mobility as the key determinant of high capture, strength of majority unions or local political
parties as a determinant of penalties for elite capture, and attributes of the majority population likely to predict the
demand for redistributive services.
33

Sharing redistributive taxation with the provinces can be modeled as an inward and downward shift in the
central government’s revenue hill by altering the values of N0 and $, the intercept and slope of the tax base relationship
respectively. Sharing redistributive taxation will reduce the aggregate level of redistribution. Sharing responsibility for
redistributive services reduces the value of the exogenous or demanded level of q assigned to provinces; see fn. 15
below. Of course, there will be limits to sharing. Democratic federalism will not succeed if the provinces have almost
“all” control over taxation, and the center has almost “all” control over providing redistributive services. Clearly our
“knife-edge” assignment gives democratic federalism its best chance of facilitating the transition. Finding the limits
to shared responsibilities for actual federal economies would be a valuable extension of our analysis.

32

the central government’s demand for redistributive services.34
With these extensions, our analysis fits comfortably within the current literature studying the virtues
of federalism in more mature democracies. First, with some decentralization of redistributive taxation,
provinces can then compete for the location of business investment and human capital as in Weingast’s
(1995) analysis of “market-preserving federalism.” The virtue of such policy decentralization will be
expanded economic investment and higher economic growth as the country can now credibly commit to low
taxation of new assets. The costs to the poor majority will be an lower level of redistribution. The task at
the time of the transition is to persuade that majority that their future incomes from improved growth will
more than compensate for today’s lower level of redistributive taxation.35
Second, with sufficiently large political factions within the poor majority, provinces can serve as
“testing grounds” for political leadership as in Myerson’s (2006) analysis of “politically competitive
federalism.” Here provincial governments provide elected politicians an opportunity to demonstrate their
commitment to democratic rule and efficient government. Political competition within provinces and
“yardstick” comparisons across provinces allows voters to identify and defeat corrupt or inefficient
politicians. Those politicians that provide honest and efficient leadership at the provincial level develop a
reputation that can lead to national election. Further, the threat of credibly honest and capable provincial
leaders disciplines current national leaders.36 In Myerson’s analysis, federalism contributes to democratic
survival as Boix (2003) finds.
34

There has emerged such a moderate faction within the ANC majority, but right now the do not constitute a
decisive median. See fn. 29 above.
35

In fact in the early specification of South Africa’s new federal constitution, there were explicit proposals by
the FFC to share redistributive taxation with the provinces. Those proposals were ultimately rejected by the ANC (poor
majority) leadership.
36

This was indeed the hope of the National Party’s President F. W. de Klerk. He expected the new ANC run
governments to reveal their incompetence and perhaps corrupt behaviors, and that such performance would stand in sharp
contrast to the well-run Western Cape. “When asked whether he would miss the supremacy of the National Party, (h)e
responded that he would not be out of office for long. He wasn’t the only one who believed that liberation movements
often fail at governing.” C. Hunter-Gault, “Letter from South Africa,” The New Yorker (July 5, 2010). On the potential
for political competition within the South African provinces, see Hawker (2000) and Lodge (2005).

33

Contemporary analyses of federal governments from Tiebout (1956) to Riker (1964) to Buchanan
and Brennan (1980) to Weingast (1995) have focused on the virtues and difficulties of federal governance
within established democracies. Our work has sought to answer a prior question: Can federal institutions
facilitate the transition from autocracy to democracy, and if so, what should be the structure of those
institutions? From our analysis the answer is yes, provided federal institutions, perhaps as specified here,
create provinces and assign fiscal responsibilities in ways that mutually empower and then benefit both the
new majority and the old elite.

34

REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2001. “A Theory of Political Transitions,” 91 American Economic
Review 938-63.
Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton. 2005. “Identity and the Economics of Organizations,” 18 Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9-32.
Anderson, Liam and Gareth Stansfield. 2005. “The Implications of Elections for Federalism in Iraq: Toward
a Five-Region Model,” 35 Publius 359-382.
Barber, James. 1968. Rhodesia: The Road to Rebellion, New York: Oxford University Press.
Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee. 2006. “Pro-poor Targeting and Accountability of Local Governments
in West Bengal,” 79 Journal of Development Economics 303-327.
Boix, Carles. 2003. Democracy and Redistribution, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Buchanan, James and Geoffrey Brennan. 1980. The Power to Tax: Analytic Foundations of a Fiscal
Constitution, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Collins, William and Robert Margo. 2007. “The Economic Aftermath of the 1960's Riots in American
Cities: Evidence from Property Values,” 67 Journal of Economic History 849-883.
Conley, John and Akram Temimi. 2001. “Endogenous Enfranchisement When Groups’ Preferences
Conflict,” 109 Journal of Political Economy 79-102.
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996), Act 108 of 1996.
Dawisha, Adeed and Karen Dawisha. 2003. “How to Build a Democratic Iraq,” 82 Foreign Affairs
May/June, 36-45.
Duggan, Mark. 2000. “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending,” 115 Quarterly Journal of
Economics 1343-1375.
Dixit, Avinash. 1997. The Making of Economic Policy: A Transaction-Cost Politics Perspective, Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Gibbons, Robert. 1992. Game Theory for Applied Economists, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Gordon, Nora. 2004. “Do Federal Funds Boost School Spending? Evidence from Title I,” 88 Journal of
Public Economics 1771-1792.
Gruber, John and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and Implications,”
84 Journal of Public Economics 1-32.

R-1

Hawker, Geoffrey. 2000. “Political Leadership in the ANC: The South African Provinces, 1994-1999,” 38
The Journal of Modern African Studies 631-658.
Karlin, Dean and Jonathan Zinman. 2008. “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply Decisions
to Estimate the Impacts,” Working Paper, Yale University and Dartmouth College.
Lijphart, Arend. 1984. Democracies: Patterns of Majoritarian and Consensus Government in Twenty-One
Countries, New Haven, CN: Yale University Press.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico. 2004. “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suffrage? Democracy and
the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of Reform’,” 119 Quarterly Journal
of Economics 707-765.
Lodge, Tom. 2005. “Provincial Government and State Authority in South Africa,” 31 Journal of Southern
African Studies 737-753.
Muthien, Yvonne and Meshack Khosa. 1998. “Demarcating the New Provinces: A Critical Reflection on the
Process,” in Y. Muthien and M. Khosa (eds.), Regionalism in the New South Africa, Brookfield, U.S.:
Ashgate.
Myerson, Roger. 2006. “Federalism and Incentives for Success of Democracy,” 1 Quarterly Journal of
Political Science 3-23.
Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, José Antonio Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi. 2000. Democracy and
Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World, 1960-1990, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Reinikka, Ritva. and Jakob Svensson. 2003. “The Power of Information: Evidence From a Newspaper
Campaign to Reduce Capture,” World Bank, December.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson.2004. “Local Capture: Evidence From a Central Government Transfer
Program in Uganda,” 119 Quarterly Journal of Economics 679-709.
Riker, William. 1964. Federalism: Origin, Operation, Significance, Boston MA: Little Brown.
Riker, William. 1980. “Implications from the Disequilibrium of Majority Rule for the Study of Institutions,”
74 American Political Science Review 432-446.
Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal. 1979. “Bureaucrats vs. Voters: On the Political Economy of
Resource Allocation by Direct Democracy,” 93 Quarterly Journal of Economics 562-587.
Schelling, Thomas. 1960. The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Steytler, Nico and Johann Mettler. 2001. “Federal Arrangements as a Peacemaking Device During South
Africa’s Transition to Democracy,” 31 Publius: The Journal of Federalism, 93-106.
Tiebout, Charles. 1956. “A Pure Theory of Local Public Expenditures,” 60 Journal of Political Economy
415-424.

R-2

Waldmeir, Patty.1997. Anatomy of a Miracle: The End of Apartheid and the Birth of the New South Africa,
New York: W. W. Norton and Company.
Weingast, Barry. 1995. “The Economic Role of Political Institutions: Market-Preserving Federalism and
Economic Development,” 11 Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 1-31.
Williams, Katherine and Charles O’Reilly, III. 1998., “Demography and Diversity in Organizations: A
Review of Forty Years of Research,” 20 Research in Organizational Behavior 77-140.
Williamson, Oliver. 1983. “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchange,” 73 American
Economic Review 519-540.
Wittenberg, Martin. 2006. “Decentralization in South Africa,” in Pranab Bardhan and Dilip Mookherjee
(eds.), Decentralization and Local Governance in Developing Countries, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

R-3

Figure 1: Feasible Federalism for the q-Regime

m

Border
H
qmin(m
;
j
)
min
m
(q)

B

C

max
m
=.192

m
=
.
1
8
4

A
0

.53 .63
qmin(m
=
.
1
8
4
)
=
.
5
0

Assignment

Mandela Assignment q=.53
Mbeki Assignment (FY 05/06) q=.63

Coordinates for Points:
A: m
= .050; q = .20
B: m
= .192; q = .51
C: m
= .192; q = 1.02

1.007 = qmax(m
=
.
1
8
4
)q

Figure 2: Feasible Federalism for the q*-Regime
m

Border
q*H min(m
)

min
m
(q*)
H

C*

B*

max
m
=.192

m
=
.
1
8
4

A*

0

q*Hmin(m
=
.
1
8
4
)
=
.
5
9

max
=
.
1
8
4
) q*H
.88 .95 .98= q*H (m

Assignment

Mbeki Assignment (FY 08/09) q*=.88
H
Zuma Assignment (FY 09/10) q*=.95
H

Coordinates for Points:
A*: m
= .055; q*H = .25
B*: m
= .192; q*H = .61
C*: m
= .192; q*H = .99

TABLE 1: THE POLICY GAME
MAJORITY PAYOFFS per MAJORITY CITIZEN
MAJORITY

MAJORITY

MAJORITY

STRATEGY F: (JF; PROVINCES > 1)

STRATEGY A: (JU; PROVINCES > 1)

STRATEGY U: (JU)

ELITE

(1L)

(2L)

(3)

STRATEGY: nL

T(F; nL) = W + gF[1 - nL@:] - sF(q) + NL@:@se(q) + 8L(q)

T(A; nL) = W + gU[1 - nL@:] - sF(q) + nL@:@se(q) +8L(q)

T(U)=W+gU-sU(q) + 8L(q)

ELITE

(1H)

(2H)

(3)

STRATEGY: nH

T(F; nH) = W + gF[1 - nH@:] - sF(q) + nH@:@se(q) + 8L(q)

T(A; nH) = W + gU[1-nH@:] - sF(q) + nH@:@se(q) + 8L(q)

T(U)=W+gU-sU(q)+ 8L(q)

STRATEGIES

ELITE PAYOFFS per ELITE CITIZEN
MAJORITY

MAJORITY

MAJORITY

STRATEGY F: (JF; PROVINCES > 1)

STRATEGY A: (JU; PROVINCES > 1)

STRATEGY U: (JU)

ELITE

(4L)

(5L)

(6)

STRATEGY: nL

y(F; nL) = Y - JF + nL@[gF - se(q)]@[Me/N(JF)]

(A; nL) = Y - JU + nL@[gU - se(q)]@[Me/N(JU)]

y(U) = Y - JU

ELITE

(4H)

(5H)

(6)

STRATEGY: nH

y(F; nH) = [Y - D] - JF + nH@[gF - se(q)]@[Me/N(JF)]

y(A; nH) = [Y - D] - JU + nH@[gU - se(q)]@[Me/N(JU)]

y(U) = Y - JU

STRATEGIES

TABLE 2: RSA INTERGOVERNMENTAL TRANSFERS: Real (2000) Rand per Capita†
FISCAL
YEAR

Cen Gov.
Revenues

gF
National
Average

gF
Western
Cape

se(q)
Western
Cape

qe
Western
Cape

be
Western
Cape

gF
Majority
Provinces

sm(q)
Majority
Provinces

qm
Majority
Provinces

bm
Majority
Provinces

1995/96

4237

2189

2923

1371

.56

1552

2119

1356

.44

763

1996/97

3938

2030

2587

1334

.52

1253

1978

1345

.44

633

1997/98*

3942

2000

2424

1250

.49

1174

1959

1332

.43

627

1998/99

4265

2154

2206

1398

.55

808

2149

1709

.55

440

1999/00

4093

2108

2097

1368

.54

729

2110

1674

.54

436

2000/01

6636

2242

2185

1455

.57

730

2247

1778

.58

469

2001/02

5570

2302

2196

1494

.59

702

2313

1826

.59

487

2002/03**

5178

1903

1720

1342

.53

378

1923

1500

.49

423

2003/04

5630

2151

1896

1479

.58

417

2180

1700

.55

480

2004/05

5610

2231

1941

1514

.60

427

2264

1766

.57

498

2005/06

5962

2327

2011

1609

.63

402

2363

1890

.61

473

2006/07

6764

2559

2186

1750

.69

436

2603

2082

.68

521

2007/08

7760

2735

2293

1835

.72

458

2787

2230

.72

557

2008/09

8381

3005

2522

2018

.79

504

3063

2450

.79

613

2009/10

8113

3213

2710

2168

.85

542

3273

2619

.85

654

SOURCES: FY: 1995/96 to 1997/98: Financial and Fiscal Commission, The Allocation of Financial Resources Between the National and Provincial Governments:
FY 1997/98, Tables 2, 3, 6b. FY 1998/99 to 2009/10: Minister of Finance, Division of Revenue Bill, Various Years, Part 4: Provincial Allocations.

†

NOTES TO TABLE 2

COLUMN DEFINITIONS: For the purposes of this analysis, all allocations to KwaZula-Natal are included as part of the allocations to “Other Provinces.” Central
Government Revenues = Total revenues per capita raised by central government taxation; gF = Total intergovernmental transfers per capita paid to the province(s),
averaged over all provinces (National Average), for the Western Cape, and for all other provinces excluding the Western Cape (Ave. Other Provinces); s(q) = Assigned
service grants per capita to fund 5-17 education, primary health care services for (lower income) citizens qualifying for medical assistance, and social security grants
for the elderly, disabled, and children, for the Western Cape (se(q)) and the average for all other provinces (sm(q)); qe and qm are estimates of the redistributive service
bundle provided in the elite (Western Cape) province and all other majority-run provinces computed as qe = se(q)/Se = se(q)/2541R and qm = sm(q)/Sm = sm(q)/3086R
respectively (Se and Sm are computed from estimates in Table 3 adjusted to reflect costs per resident, not majority adult); and b = “basic grant” per capita to fund all
other provincial services and is defined as b = gF - s(q) and includes funding for “basic government services,” government administration, and provincial economic
development initiatives.
*Data for FY 1997/98 is based upon projected grants provided in the FFC, The Allocation of Financial Resources Between the National and Provincial Governments:
FY 1997/98, Table 6b.
** Beginning with the FY 2002/03 Budget, the Department Finance adjusted the accounting procedures for funding of the provincial activity. There is therefore an
unavoidable break in the data sequence. All financial data from FY 2002/03 onward is recorded on a consistent basis.

APPENDIX A: Model Specification and Proofs
Specification
Demographics:
M =
Me =
: =
N=

Adult (Voting Age) Population.
Adult Population Residing in Elite Province(s).
Me/M = Share of Adult Population Residing in Elite Province(s).
Elite Residents.
Income:

W = Income (exogenous) of Majority Residents.
Y = Income (exogenous) of Elite Residents.
Technology of Public Service Provision:
q = a@(X/M) = Quality Adjusted (a) Public Employees (X) per Majority Resident (M).
ae = Years of Training of Elite Public Employees.
am = Years of Training of Majority Public Employees.
au = Years of Training of “Untrained” Public Employees.
Costs of Public Service Provision:
S = Salary (uniform) Paid to Public Employees.
se(q) = SA(X/M) = SA(q/ae) = Cost per q in Elite Province(s) Using Elite Employees..
sm(q) = SA(X/M) = S@(q/am) = Cost per q in Majority Province(s) Using Majority Employees.
su(q) = SA(X/M) = SA(q/au) = Cost per q Using Untrained Employees in Unitary Governance.
m = Share of Unitary Governance Employees Considered “Untrained.”
sF(q) = :@se(q) + (1 - :)@sm(q) = Average cost per q Under Federalism.
sU(q) = mAsm(q) + (1 - m)Asu(q) = Average Cost per q Under Unitary Governance.
Government Budget Constraint:
g = Redistributive Grant per Majority Resident = g(J) = [J@N(J) - Z]/M;
J = Redistributive Tax Rate per Elite Resident (N).
N(J) = Elite Residents Paying the Redistributive Tax Allowing for Tax Avoidance.
JU = Maximal Redistributive Tax Rate.
Z = Outside (Exogenous) Payments (Z >0) or Transfers (Z < 0) to the Redistribution Budget.
Majority Preferences and Demands Under the q*-Regime:

L(q) = 8Aln(q), 8 > 0.
q*L(:, 8) = Demand for q when Elite Capture Equals nL.
q*H(:, 8) = Demand for q when Elite Capture Equals nH.

A-1

q*U (8) = Demand for q when Under Unitary Governance.
Majority Citizen Welfare:

Te(J, n) = W + (1 - nL, H)Are(J; q) + 8Aln(q) = Majority Welfare in Elite Province.
nL = Low Elite Capture.
nH = High Elite Capture.
re(J; q) = [g(J) - se(q)] = “Free” Provincial Revenues per Majority Resident.
Tm(J, n) = W + rm(J; q) + 8Aln(q) = Majority Welfare in Majority Province.
rm(J; q) = [g(J) - sm(q)] = “Free” Provincial Revenues per Majority Resident.
T(J, n) = :Te(J, n) + (1 - :)Tm(J, n) = “Average” Majority Welfare under Federalism.
T(U) = W + r(JU; q) + 8Aln(q) = Majority Welfare Under Unitary Governance.
r(JU; q) = [gU - sU(q)] = “Free” Central Government Revenues per Majority Resident.
Elite Citizen Welfare:
y(J; nL) = Y - J + nLAre(J; q) = Elite Welfare in Elite Province with Low Capture.
y(J; nH) = Y - J + nHAre(J; q) - D = Elite Welfare in Elite Province with High Capture.
re(J; q) = [g(J) - se(q)]A[Me/N(J)] = “Free” Provincial Revenues per Elite Resident.
D = Penalty per Elite Resident for Adopting High Capture.
y(U) = Y - JU = Elite Welfare Under Unitary Governance.
Proofs
A.1 Defining Border and Assignments Constraints

q-Border Constraint: Condition (i) for a credible elite punishment requires the elite to prefer the
strategy nH whenever the majority defects from democratic federalism to administrative federalism with the
central government setting taxes at the maximal tax rate, JU. In the q-Regime this requires:
y(JU; nH) > y(JU; nL) ] (nH - nL)[gU - se(q)][Me/N(JU)] > D,
or:
(Me/M) = : > {D[N(JU)/M]}/{(nH - nL)[gU - se(q)]} /:min(q).
where : is the fraction of majority residents who reside in the elite province. We use a strict inequality,
assuming that the elite prefers to cooperate rather than defect, all else equal. Because condition (ii) for a
credible elite punishment must also hold : cannot be too large. Thus N(JU) $Me, or dividing by M:
N(JU)/M = :max $ : = (Me/M).
For high capture to be a credible punishment strategy for a given q, the constitutionally mandated population
size of the elite province must satisfy the q-Border Constraint specified as:

:max $ : > :min(q).

A-2

q-Assignment Constraint: Condition (iii) for credible elite punishments requires that if the central
government defects or punishes the elite, it continues to do so within the federal structure where provinces
still have fiscal responsibilities – that is, within administrative federalism with tax rates set at JU and not
unitary governance. The binding constraint is the requirement that when the majority punishes the elite for
defection, it does so using provinces rather than moving fully to centralized government provision.1 For the
majority’s punishment strategy, condition (iii) requires:

T(JU; nH) > T(U) ] sU(q) - [sF(q) - nHA:Ase(q)] > nHA:AgU,
which holds when q meets the constraint:2
q > qmin(:; nH) = (nHA:AgU)/[S@â(:; nH)].
The constraint ensures that the majority’s punishment strategy for an elite defection is not unitary governance.
q cannot be set too high either. The maximum value of q that protects nH as a credible punishment strategy
will be that q (= qmax) where the : = :min(q) just holds for the constitutionally chosen value of :. From the
definition of : = :min(q):
qmax(:) = {gU@(nH - nL)A: - DA[N(JU)/M]}/[(nH - nL)]@:A(S/ae)].
The q-Assignment Constraint is defined by:
qmax(:) $ q > qmin(:; nH).

q*-Border Constraint: In the q*-Regime, condition (i) for credible high capture by the elite
requires:
y(JU; q*H, nH) > y(JU; q*L, nL) ] {nHA[gU - se(q*H(:, 8))] - nLA[gU - se(q*L(:, 8))]}A[Me/N(JU)] > D,
or:
(Me/M) = : > {D[N(JU)/M]}/{nHA[gU - se(q*H(:, 8))] - nLA[gU - se(q*L(:, 8))]} = :min(q*H),
where for pair of values of : and q*H there is an associated value of 8 and thus of q*L which then allows us
to specify a value for :min = :min(q*H). Condition (ii) requiring elite political control again sets the upper
bound, :max, defined as above. Together, the q*-Border Constraint is specified as:

:max $ : > :min(q*H).
q*-Assignment Constraint: Again, condition (iii) for credible elite punishment must be met, now

1

We also require that when the majority defects from the cooperative federal allocation it defects to a regime
still using provinces. This is needed so that the elite can still punish the majority for that defection. This requirement
is specified as: T(JU; nL) > T(U). We show in the full Technical Appendix that this requirement places less of a
constraint on the minimal level of q than does the constraint needed for majority punishment for elite defection.
2
From the definitions of sU(q), sF(q), and se(q): â(:; nL,H) = :A[(1/am) - (1/ae)] + (1 - m)@[(1/au) - (1/am)] +
(:AnL,H /ae) > 0.

A-3

defined for majority chosen values of q* as T(JU; :, q*H(:, 8), nH) > T(U; qU*(8)) to ensure provinces
survive the majority’s decision to punish any defecting elite province.3 From Table 1's specifications of
T(JU; :, q*H(:, 8), nH) and T(U; qU*(8)), this requirement reduces to:
[L(q*H(:, 8)) - pH(:)@q*H(:, 8)] - [L(q*U(8)) - pU@q*U(8)] > nH@:AgU,
where the LHS measures the difference between the consumer surplus earned by a typical majority resident
under federalism with JU when the price of assigned services under federalism is pH(:) and that surplus
earned by the majority resident under unitary democracy when the price of a comparable service bundle under
unitary governance is pU. Since pU > pH(:), consumer surplus is greater under federalism. Because of elite
capture, however, federalism also imposes an income loss nH@:AgU on the average majority resident. The
more important are assigned services to the majority (88), the larger becomes the gain in consumer surplus
from moving to federalism from unitary governance. The value of 8 where the inequality above just holds
defines a minimal value for 8, denoted as 8min = 8min(:). For each value of : there is an associated value of
q*H that defines the minimal q*H consistent with a credible elite punishment:
q*H(:, 8) > q*Hmin(:) = q*H(:, 8min(:)).
As for the q-Regime here too there is an upper bound on majority demanded q consistent with a feasible
federal allocation, now specified as an upper limit on 8. Given : and the cost of high capture, D, there is a
value of 8 for which high capture is no longer a credible choice for the elite: :max = :min(8): 8max = 8max(:).
For each value of :, define: q*Hmax(:) = q*H(:, 8max(:)). Given :, the q*-Assignment Constraint is specified
as:
q*Hmax(:) $ q*H(:, 8) > q*Hmin(:).
A.2. Specifying Feasible and Sustainable Democratic Federalism
We outline the proofs here. The algebraic details are provided in a Technical Appendix available from the
authors upon request.
LEMMA 1: CREDIBLE ELITE PUNISHMENTS IN THE q-REGIME. For political economies satisfying
the q-Border and q-Assignment Constraints, the high capture strategy will be a credible punishment strategy
for the elite whenever the majority adopts a revenue-maximizing redistributive tax rate.
OUTLINE OF PROOF: To show sufficiency of the q-Border and q-Assignment Constraints for meeting the
three conditions for high capture, nH, to be a credible elite punishment, first show that if the upper bound on
the q-Assignment Constraint is met, then gU - D/(nH - nL) $ Sq/ae = se(q) or 1 $ D/(nH - nL)A[gU - se(q)].
Multiplying both sides through by N(JU)/M then shows that :max $ : = Me/M, and therefore N(JU) $ Me,
satisfying condition (ii) for a credible punishment. If the lower bound on the q-Border Constraint is met, then
: = Me/M >{D[N(JU)/M]}/{(nH - nL)[gU - se(q)]}, which implies, (nH - nL)[gU - se(q)][Me/N(JU)] > D. Adding
(Y - JU) to both sides and re-arranging terms gives y(JU; nH) > y(JU; nL), satisfying condition (i) for a credible
elite punishment. Finally, from the lower bound of the assignment constraint, q > (:@gU@nH)/[S@â(:)].
Multiplying both sides by S@â(:) and using the definitions for se(q), sm(q), su(q), sF(q), and sU(q), will give
The requirement that provinces survive the majority’s decision to defect – T(JU; :, q*L(:, 8), nL) > T(U;
qU*(8)) – is also met if the “tighter” requirement that provinces survive the majority’s decision to punish is satisfied.
This is shown in the full Technical Appendix.
3

A-4

[sU(q) - sF(q)] > nHA:A[gU - se(q)]. Adding W + gU + L(q) to both sides and again re-arranging terms and using
the definitions of T(JU; nH) and T(U), we have T(JU; nH) > T(U). And since T(JU; nL) > T(JU; nH) for nH
> nL, it also follows that T(JU; nL) > T(U) as well. Thus condition (iii) for a credible punishment is met.
Necessity is shown in the complete Technical Appendix.
LEMMA 2: CREDIBLE ELITE PUNISHMENTS IN THE q*-REGIME. For political economies
satisfying the q*-Border and q*-Assignment Constraints, the high capture strategy will be a credible
punishment strategy whenever the majority adopts a revenue-maximizing redistributive tax rate.
OUTLINE OF PROOF: For sufficiency, use the same argument as for Lemma 1 to show that if the upper
bound of the q*-Border Constraint is met, then N(JU) $Me and condition (ii) for the a credible punishment
is satisfied. If the lower bound of the q*-Border Constraint is met, then by the argument presented above for
Lemma 1, condition (i) for a credible punishment holds. Finally, to show that condition (iii) is met when the
q*-Assignment Constraint holds, note that because LN(q) > 0 and LO(q) < 0, the majority’s preferences for q
are single-peaked. If the assignment constraint is to hold for a given 8 and q*H(:, 8) is the preferred level
of q for those values of : and 8, then any q … q*H(:, 8) gives the majority less utility than that obtained at
q*H(:, 8). This is the case for the two values of q equal to either q*Hmax(:) and q*Hmin(:). By definition,
q*Hmax(:) and q*Hmin(:) give a majority utility equal to that available under unitary governance – T(U;
qU*(8)). Thus T(JU; nH) = T(JU; :, q*H(:, 8), nH) > T(U; qU*(8)) = T(U).4 Necessity is shown in the
complete Technical Appendix.
LEMMA 3: FEASIBLE FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONS: When the Border and Assignment Constraints of
Lemmas 1 and 2 are met, the set of feasible constitutions allowing democratic federalism is smaller in the
q*-Regime than the q-Regime. The maximal size of the elite province is the same in both regimes.
OUTLINE OF PROOF: First, to show that :min(qH*) > :min(q) for common values qH* = q, we proceed by
construction. Since qH*(:,8) > qL*(:,8), it will be true that 0 > -nLA[se(q*H(:,8)) - se(q*L(:,8))]. Under the
assumption that qH*(:,8) = q, it will also be true that (nH - nL)A[gU - se(q)] > (nH - nL)A[gU - se(q*H(:,8))] nLA[se(q*H(:,8)) - se(q*L(:,8))]. Adding [nLAgU - nLAgU] to the RHS and rearranging terms, implies that
D[N(JU)/M]}/{nHA[gU - se(q*H(:,8))] - nLA[gU - se(q*L(:,8))]} /:min(q*H) > :min(q) / {D[N(JU)/M]}/{(nH nL)[gU - se(q)]},for common values of qH*(:,8) = q. Second, when the Assignment Constraints for the two
regimes hold, we know [L(qH *min(:)) - pH(:)@qH*min(:) ] - [L(q*U) - pU@q*U] = nH@:AgU = qmin(:)ASAâ(:; nH),
must hold from the definitions of qH*min(:) and qmin(:). Next, since qH*min(:) … q*U when demand curves
slope downward, it will also be true that [L(q*U) - pU@q*U] > [L(qH* min(:)) - pU@qH*min(:) ],since qU* is optimal
for the price pU. Re-arrange this expression and add [pUAq*U - pH(:)@qH*min(:)] to both sides. This gives: [pU pH(:)]@qH*min(:) > [L(qH *min(:)) - pH(:)@qH*min(:) ] - [L(q*U) - pU@q*U] = qmin(:)ASAâ(:), using the step above.
Finally, from the definitions of pU = sUN(q), pH(:) = sFN(q) - nHA:AseN(q), and â(:;nH), we can show [pU pH(:)]@qH*min(:) = [S@â(:;nH)]@qH*min(:). Thus [S@â(:;nH)]@qH*min(:) > qmin(:)A[SAâ(:;nH)], from which it
follows that qH*min (:) > qmin(:). This completes the proof of Lemma 3.
PROPOSITION 1: SUSTAINABLE DEMOCRATIC FEDERALISM: For either the q- or q*- Regime and
political economy satisfying the appropriate Border and Assignment Constraints, there exists a grim trigger
strategy equilibrium in which democratic federalism is sustainable. In that equilibrium:
4

As for the q-Regime, we will also require that the majority defection strategy even if the elite cooperates
retains the use of provinces – that is, T(JU; nL) > T(U). We show in the full Technical Appendix that this constraint
is met if the requirement that provinces remain in place if majority punishes elite defection – that is, if T(JU; nH) > T(U).

A-5

1) The central government majority chooses a level of redistributive transfers bounded
between a maximal grant acceptable to the elite and a minimal grant acceptable to the
majority for appropriate elite and majority discount factors, and,
2) The elite province(s) adopts the low-capture strategy.
We prove existence of a democratic federalism as a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the q- and q*Regimes for at least some discount factor bounded as 0 < * # 1. The proof moves in three steps.
STEP 1: Specify the minimal grant (tax rate) the majority will accept and the maximal grant (tax rate)
the elite will allow such that the majority and elite prefer democratic federalism when the other prefers
democratic federalism. The minimal grant acceptable to the majority will be unambiguously positive, while
the maximal grant that the elite will be pay will be less than that available from maximal taxation.
STEP 2: Show that the elite’s maximal grant is larger than the majority’s minimal grant for either
regime and for the potentially most favorable discount factor, * = 1:

U(q or q*, * = 1) = gmax(q or q*, 1) - gmin(q or q*, 1) > 0.
If U(q or q*, * = 1) > 0, then there is a economically feasible fiscal policy in the annual policy game that will
sustain democratic federalism, at least for infinitely far-sighted majority and elite residents (* = 1).
STEP 3: Show that the more general specification U(q or q*, *) = gmax(q or q*, *) - gmin(q or q*, *)
is a continuous function of *, implying there is a * < 1(though perhaps only slightly less than 1) where U(q
or q*, *) > 0 continues to hold.

*),g

max

The full details of the algebra for STEPS 1-3 as well as the specifications for gmax(q, *), gmin(q,
(q*, *), and gmin(q*, *) are provided in a longer Technical Appendix available upon request.

A-6

APPENDIX B: Political Economy of South Africa at Transition
Demographics and Incomes: The initial, pre-democracy elite and majority voting age populations
were N0 = 9.6 million and M = 25 million residents. Elite and majority pre-democracy incomes are Y0 =
86,000 (real 2000) Rand/Elite Adult (•$22,000 USD in 1996) and Wo = 9,700 (real 2000) Rand/Majority
Adult (•$2,500 USD), respectively. Because no South African data were available to directly estimate the
elite’s response to redistributive taxation, we calibrated $ to imply a plausible peak to the national revenue
hill from elite resident taxation. Setting $ = .00015 implies a revenue maximizing tax rate of approximately
67 percent; see Gruber and Saez (2002).
Technology and Costs of Redistributive Services: Redistributive public services per majority
resident, q, are specified as proportional to units of training adjusted public employees per majority resident:
q = a@(X/M), where a is the level of training of the public employees. We use as our estimates of training,
the years of schooling of white elite teachers (ae = 17 years), certified trained majority teachers (am = 14
years), and uncertified or untrained majority teachers (au = 7 years), respectively. Table 2 provides estimates
of q for post-apartheid South Africa for the constitution’s specified redistributive services: K-12 education,
primary health care services, and redistributive transfers. For comparison, we have estimated q in the last
years of apartheid to be .36.
The cost per majority resident of providing q is s = S@(X/M), where S is the uniform salary paid to
public employees, (X/M) is public employees per majority resident. From the specification of q, costs in the
elite province equal se(q) = SA(q/ae) and in the majority province, sm(q) = S@(q/am). Under unitary governance,
when untrained public employees may be required, the per unit cost is sU(q) = mAsm(q) + (1 - m)Asu(q), where
su(q) = SA(q/au) and where m is the share of majority residents that served by majority trained employees.
m was estimated to be .825. S is the average teacher salary in 2001 equal to $80,000 Rand per employee.
Therefore:
se(q) = (S/ae)Aq = (80,000/17)Aq = 4,706Aq (Real 2000) Rand/Majority Adult.
sm(q) = (S/am)Aq = (80,000/14)Aq = 5,714Aq (Real 2000) Rand/Majority Adult.
su(q) = (S/au)Aq = (80,000/7)Aq = 11,428Aq (Real 2000) Rand/Majority Adult.
Outside Transfers: Payments made by the central government to KwaZula-Natal as part of the
implicit agreement for the IFP to peacefully join the new democracy are estimated to be 600 Million Rand
per year.
Preferences and Discount Factors: The majority residents’ demand for redistributive public goods
is specified as 8CL(q) = 8Cln(q), where 8 measures the intensity with which the majority demands
redistributive goods is bounded as 6100 $ 8 $ 4230. The lower bound corresponds to the level of q = .79,
chosen during the last year (FY 2008/09) of the Mbeki presidency when it is plausible to assume he
responded to the demands of the ANC’s majority member at that time; see Table 2. The upper bound is set
under the assumption that the majority will demand that level of education and health care services currently
received by upper income households plus twice the currently proposed level of transfers for poor children,
disabled, and elderly persons, implying a value of q = 1.14.
The discount factor for elite residents assumes a rate of time preference of .08, the real rate of return
on ten year South African bonds over the period 1996-2006: * = 1/(1 + r) = .93. The upper estimate for the
poor majority’s * assumes that the poor are not credit constrained and can access the capital markets at the
same rate as can the elite; therefore, * = .93. A lower bound estimate for * is from Karlan and Zinman (2008)

B-1

estimate the rate of time preference for South Africa’s urban poor as r = 2.00 for which * = .33.
Elite Rates of Capture and Protest Costs: Estimates of the elite’s potential rate of capture of
unallocated grants are from recent estimates of the rates of capture by bureaucrats running Ugandan local
schools: nL = .20 and nH = .85; See Reinikka and Svensson (2003, 2004). These estimates are consistent
with the international literature on the ability of local officials to capture central government transfers for their
own uses; see, for example, Duggan (2000) and Gordon (2004). The estimates of protests costs born by the
elite when they adopt high capture are from Collins and Margo (2007). They estimate the decline in property
values of cities having experienced a moderate to severe urban riot during the 1960's and 1970's as ranging
from ½ to 1 percent of property owners’ annual income; we set protest costs imposed on elite residents from
engaging in high capture at .01 of elite resident income or D = 860 (real 2000) Rand/Elite Resident (=
.01C86,000 Rand/Elite Resident).
A full Data Appendix available upon request and provides the details and data sources for Table B.1.

B-2

