NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MIXING FAMILY WITH BUSINESS:
A STUDY OF THAI BUSINESS GROUPS AND THE FAMILIES BEHIND THEM
Marianne Bertrand
Simon Johnson
Krislert Samphantharak
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper 13738
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13738

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, NBER and CEPR; MIT Sloan, NBER, CEPR
and BREAD; University of California at San Diego; MIT Sloan, NBER and CEPR. We thank Thorsten
Beck, Utpal Bhattacharya, Alexander Dyck, Francisco Pérez-González, Randall Morck, Andrei Shleifer,
and seminar participants Emory University, INSEAD, the Mitsui Life Symposium on Global Financial
Markets (University of Michigan), the IMF, the MIT Organization Lunch, the MIT Finance Lunch
Vanderbilt University, UCSD, UCLA, NBER Conference in Corporate Finance and the European
Summer Symposium in financial markets at Gerzensee for many helpful comments. We particularly
thank the organizers and participants at the Darden-World Bank emerging markets conference in May
2006.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Marianne Bertrand, Simon Johnson, Krislert Samphantharak, and Antoinette Schoar. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mixing Family With Business: A Study of Thai Business Groups and the Families Behind
Them
Marianne Bertrand, Simon Johnson, Krislert Samphantharak, and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 13738
January 2008
JEL No. D13,G30,J12,Z19
ABSTRACT
Families run a large fraction of business groups around the world. In this paper, we analyze how the
structure of the families behind these business groups affects the groups' organization, governance
and performance. To address this question, we constructed a unique data set of family trees and business
groups for nearly 100 of the largest business families in Thailand. We find a strong positive association
between family size and family involvement in the ownership and control of the family business. The
sons of the founders play a central role in both ownership and board membership, especially when
the founder of the group is gone. The availability of more sons is also associated with lower firm-level
performance, especially when the founder is no longer present. We identify a possible governance
channel for this performance effect. Excess control by sons, but not other family members, is associated
with lower firm performance. In addition, excess control by sons increases with the number of sons
and with the death of the founder. One hypothesis that emerges from our analysis is that part of the
decay of family-run groups over time may be due to a dilution of ownership and control across a set
of equally powerful descendants of the founder, which creates a race to the bottom in tunneling resources
out of the group firms.

Marianne Bertrand
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@gsb.uchicago.edu
Simon Johnson
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-562
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu

Krislert Samphantharak
IR/PS
UC, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
krislert@ucsd.edu
Antoinette Schoar
Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive, E52-455
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Family firms have attracted a lot of interest over the last few years. Recent
research shows that the U.S. prevalence of dispersed ownership, with strong separation of
ownership and control, is unusual. Instead, most firms around the world are likely to be
part of a group of companies, linked together through common ownership. Often the
ultimate ownership and control lies with a single family. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer (1999) show that a large fraction of public and private firms around the world are
family-controlled. Family controlled firms often use pyramidal ownership structures to
exert control over a large network of firms.2 While family firms appear to be more
prevalent in countries with weak minority shareholder protection, a number of recent
studies show that family involvement is quite widespread, even in the U.S.3
But the finance literature so far has mostly treated the families behind business
groups as monolithic entities. Most economic theories of family businesses focus on the
role of families as second best solutions to imperfections in the financial markets, the
market for corporate control or the market for managerial talent. See, for example,
Burkart, Panunzi and Shleifer (2003) and Caselli and Gennaioli (2005). These models
generally assume that trust relationships between family members can serve to (partially)
solve principal-agent problems between owners and outside managers, if monitoring of
managers is difficult. However, these theories typically ignore that families are
constituted of individual members who have their own personal objectives and claims
over the family businesses. The divergence in objectives might even lead to an erosion of
trust within families, especially once the founder has passed control to the next
generation.
Our goal in this paper is to explore how these within-family dynamics affect the
organization, governance, and performance of business groups. For this analysis we
created a new data set that contains detailed information on the family trees – starting
with the founder and following until the current generation – and the exact group
structure of over 90 of the largest family groups in Thailand.4 We have three main sets of
findings. First, we document in detail how control, management and ownership are
allocated across different family members. The sons of the founder are central in
ownership and control for these groups and substantially increase their role in ownership
once the founder is gone. In groups where the founder had more sons, the sons hold a
significantly larger fraction of the ownership and control rights of the group firms. In
2

Anderson and Reeb (2003) find that founding families are present in one third of S&P 500 firms
and hold on average about 18% of equity in these firms. See also Claessens, Djankov, Fan and
Lang (2000) for a study of family involvement in East Asian countries, and the work of the
European Corporate Governance Network reported in Gugler (2001) for a similar study for
European countries.
3
See also Battacharya and Rabikumar (1999) and Pérez-González (2006).
4
Our data sources do not allow us to determine which family members have died (we are able to
do this for founders only after substantial additional work for each). For this reason, measures of
family size, number of sons, etc are measured from the start of the family business, unless
otherwise noted.

1

fact, we find that sons “crowd-out” the ownership and control rights of other family
members.
Second, we show that larger families, more precisely families where the founder
had more sons, are associated with lower firm-level performance. Family structure
appears to be a major determinant of firm-level performance. This effect is especially
pronounced when the founder is dead. In contrast we find that the relationship between
firm performance and the number of daughters or number of other family members is
much smaller and in most cases insignificant.
Third, we identify a possible governance channel for these performance results.
Families that have more sons tend to show a larger discrepancy between control and
ownership rights (excess control), which is usually associated with poor governance and
incentives for tunneling. The same increase in excess control cannot be found in families
that have more daughters or other family members. Moreover, sons show higher levels of
excess control once the founder is gone. A parallel relationship can be found for the
organizational structure of the groups. Once the founder is gone, larger families are
associated with larger groups (more firms in the group) and more pyramidal groups.
Finally, we find that, controlling for family ownership, excess control by the founder’s
sons is associated with lower firm-level performance, again especially when the founder
is dead. The same effect of excess control is not found for other family members. This
suggests that a family member’s ability to extract resources from a group firm depends on
that family member’s position within the family hierarchy and not just whether he or she
has a position on the firm board.
One interpretation that emerges from our analysis is that the decay of family-run
groups over time may in part reflect in-fighting for group resources as control becomes
more diluted among rival family members, and in particular the sons of the founder. If
powerful insiders compete against each other this could lead to a race to the bottom
where one brother tries to tunnel resources out of the firm before another brother does.
These rivalries across family members seem to become more pronounced when the
founder of the family group has more sons and when the founder himself is gone.
However, we should stress that our analysis does not allow us to rule out
additional explanations for the negative relationship between family size (and especially
number of sons) and firm performance. A greater number of sons may lead to worse
management decisions within the group if these family insiders crowd-out potentially
more able professional managers. In addition, the average quality of a son may be lower
as the number of sons increases, because of the limited parental resources that have to be
shared across a larger set of children. The founder might feel compelled to let his sons
manage the group firms irrespective of their ability because of personal preferences or
cultural inheritance norms, see Bertrand and Schoar (2006).
There are a number of reasons why we focus our analysis on Thailand. First,
Thailand is one of the few countries we are aware of where such detailed family structure
data could be constructed with reasonable accuracy. For the major family groups now in

2

existence we were able to identify the founder who created the family business and to
trace down the lineage of his children and future generations, in some cases for up to 5
generations. Second, there is a great amount of publicly available data for both publicly
traded and privately held Thai family firms, which enables us to explore the role of
private firms in more detail than is possible in many countries. Given the structure of
business groups it is important improvement over previous studies that only relied on the
public firms within the family groups. This data was collected for 1996, i.e. a year before
the financial crisis.5 For each of these business groups, we also constructed organizational
charts that describe the network structure of the groups as of 1996.
Our paper builds on several recent studies that document that family firms have
on average lower stock market valuations and lower rates of return than non-family firms,
however none of these studies have data on the private firms within the family groups
(see for example Claessens, Djankov, Fan and Lang (2002), or Conqvist and Nilsson
(2003)). More recently, Pérez-González (2006) and Villalonga and Amit (2006) show for
U.S. firms that this negative performance effect is in large part related to the passing of
active management and control from the founder to the descendants. Bennedson, Nielsen,
Pérez-González, and Wolfenzon (2007) show a similar result for the case of small private
firms in Denmark but are able to use gender composition as an instrument for the
availability of male heirs. Our data allow us to go one step further and investigate the
within family dynamics and the changes in governance structure that are associated with
larger families and founder succession in business groups. But not all papers conclude
that family firms perform worse on average. For example, Anderson and Reeb (2003)
find higher performance for family firms in the U.S., while Khanna and Palepu (1997)
show that business groups in India (which are for the most part family-controlled) on
average perform better than stand-alone firms in matched industries. Morck, Stangeland
and Yeung (2000) offer an explanation for the positive outcomes of family firms in some
countries. If the government plays a central role in the economy, family connections may
provide access to limited resources that in turn can lead to an even greater concentration
of political influence in the hands of a few families.6
Our results are also related to the sociology literature on family groups that tends
to focus more on detailed descriptions of within-family dynamics. For example, a number
of sociological studies, relying for the most part on case studies, interviews or anecdotal
evidence, have stressed the importance of cultural factors in explaining the emergence of
family firms. Redding (1990), Jones and Rose (1993) and Whyte (1996) explore this
argument in the context of Chinese families. These papers suggest that family traditions
and inheritance rules might be central to the evolution of family businesses. They also
highlight the possibility of conflicts within business families and how those might alter
the direction and growth of the businesses.

5

In separate work, we look at the effects of the 1997-98 financial crisis on family group structure
and performance.
6
See Marman (2002) for a similar description of the emergence of family firms in South Korea
and Israel.

3

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we provide some brief
background information on Thai business history, including the evolution of family
businesses. Section 3 explains how our data was collected on both families and their
groups of firms. Section 4 discusses the descriptive statistics. Section 5 establishes that
greater family involvement, particularly by sons of the founder, is associated with worse
performance. Section 6 presents our main findings and finally section 7 concludes.
2. Brief Historical Background
The Thai economy was integrated into the world economy in 1855 when the
Bowring Treaty was signed between Britain and Siam. This treaty ended the King's
monopoly power over international trade and lowered the tariff on exports and imports.
In the wake of this increased openness European businesses entered Thailand, mainly
through trading-houses, banks, and in the forestry, mining, and engineering sectors. Over
the same period, the number of Chinese immigrants increased. Almost three million
Chinese immigrants arrived in Thailand between 1882 and 1931. By the end of the 1920s,
almost 12% of the total population of Thailand was of Chinese origin (Limlingan, 1986).
Most of these immigrants were poor and worked as laborers in the growing export
industries such as rice milling. But a number of these immigrants became entrepreneurs
in various industries such as agriculture, trade, and mining, and started to expand their
business extensively. The origin of some of the best-known business families can be
traced back to this period (Suehiro, 1997).
The revolution of 1932 marked the end of the absolute monarchy and led to an
expansion of many family business groups that are important to this date. After the
Second World War, Thailand entered a long period of successive military dictatorships
that lasted until the 1970s. During this period, the government and military leaders
became involved in business through share holdings or board participation in both stateowned enterprises and private companies. These connections allowed the related
companies to grow rapidly. The First National Economic Development Plan was
introduced in 1961, which marked the beginning of the industrialization of the country.
The manufacturing sector started to expand rapidly but was concentrated around few
business groups that had connections with the banking sector and the government. The
financial liberalization of the late 1980s and early 1990s created investment opportunities
in real estate, telecommunication, and tourism and gave rise to new business groups that
grew rapidly and eventually reached similar importance as the old groups in shaping the
modern Thai corporate sector.
3. Data
The data for this project was collected from a number of different sources. In the
following we will explain the data collection process in detail.
a. Firms
Each registered firm in Thailand has to submit annual financial statements, audited by an
authorized auditor to the Ministry of Commerce. Registered firms include registered

4

partnerships, privately held limited companies, and publicly traded companies.7 The
financial statements of the largest 2,000 firms are published every year in a book series
called Thailand Company Information (TCI). The criteria that TCI uses for including
firms are (1) annual revenues of at least 200 million Baht (approximately eight million
US dollars, using 1996 exchange rate), (2) listed on the Stock Exchange of Thailand, or
(3) one of the leading companies in its industry. We collect this information for the cross
section of all firms in 1996, since we wanted to capture the groups’ structures and
organizations before the Asian financial crisis. In total, our sample contains 2,153 firms
in 1996, which includes all publicly traded firms and the largest privately held firms in
Thailand.
The TCI database contains financial, ownership and board composition information at the
firm level. For all firms, the financial information includes total assets, total liabilities,
total revenues and net profits. The database also reports ownership data, the names and
the percentage of company shares held by each shareholder, and the names of directors
on the firm’s board. For publicly traded firms, specific positions on the board a particular
person holds are also reported. The database provides information on industry
classification similar to 1-digit and 2-digit SIC codes, and founding year for each firm.
We supplement this data with direct requests made to the Department of Business
Development in the case of missing information. We had to hand-collect the data for our
business groups, since TCI only publishes this data in book format.
For publicly listed firms, we can obtain additional information from the Stock
Exchange of Thailand (SET), SET’s Listed Company Info. This data is available in
electronic format and distinguishes between consolidated and unconsolidated financial
statements. We use unconsolidated financial statements in our analysis when looking at
the outcomes of subsidiary firms within the group.
b. Families
To construct family trees for the family groups in our sample that are as accurate
as possible we rely on a number of sources. We start at a publication by the Brooker
Group entitled Thai Business Groups: A Unique Guide to Who Owns What., which
covers the 150 leading business groups in Thailand and the history of each of these
groups from the time the first business was founded. We then construct family trees for
these business groups: For each of the family groups, we identify the founder and trace
all of his direct descendants to the youngest generation that is active in business. We
exclude family members that are younger than 15 years in 1996. We can infer this from
the person’s title, since in Thailand people drop their junior title when they turn 15.
Since the Booker book does not provide a full coverage of all family members we
gather more detailed descriptions from alternative sources. First, when available, we
collect family tree information from the funeral books published and distributed for the
group founders or other family members. It is customary in Thailand when a public
person dies that the descendants compile a funeral book that contains information about
7

The Department of Business Development was previously known as the Department of Commercial
Registration until the government reorganization that became effective in October 2002.

5

the person's life and his or her family relationships. These funeral books are collected at
the National Library in Bangkok. Second, we compile data from various biographical
accounts written on Thai families. For example, Sapphaibul (2001a, b) provide detailed
information on 55 of the most famous business families. We supplement the information
with articles, obituaries, wedding announcements and anniversary celebrations of these
businesses families in various local magazines and newspapers. The full list of the
biography and funeral books as well as articles is provided in the data appendix. Finally,
we conduct informal interviews with family members of a few business families to verify
the accuracy of our data.
The descriptive data are then systematically code in the form of family trees. We
include in our family trees all of the family members we identify, whether or not they are
involved in the family business. The founder generation is coded as generation one, his
children are generation two, and so on. For each family member, we collect information
on their specific position in the family tree (defined as the relationship to the founder),
gender, birth order (defined as the rank order of children within a specific marriage), and
biological vs. adopted status. We also code the information on individual education,
working experiences, and involvement in family business, but these are less complete.
We also rely on these sources to identify in which of the families the founder is still alive
in 1996 and where an heir has taken over. Note that we cannot systematically track
whether a given family member is still alive for most of the other family members.
Finally, we collect the information on the name of the spouse(s) for each family member.
This information is especially interesting for the founder, since several of founders have
multiple wives and also children from multiple wives. We do not, however, count
spouses as part of the family when we construct measures of family size. We carefully
keep track of changes in last names, especially for married female family members and
her descendants.
Since we have to rely on secondary sources to construct the family trees, there is
some concern about the completeness of this information. In particular, one might be
worried that there is a bias in coverage of family members that are involved in business,
while family members that are more private will not be mentioned in these sources. For
that purpose, we have limited our sample to 93 families for which we can cross check the
information using several different sources. But even for these families, there is still some
concern that the information we have obtained may not be complete. For example, the
coverage of female family members seems to be incomplete. Specifically, the fraction of
females including all generations and adopted children is 38%. The fraction of females in
the family trees excluding the first generation (the founders) and excluding adopted
children is 42%.
As an example, Figure 1 displays one of the family trees we have constructed
based on these sources. The Bhirom Bhakdi family owns and manages a beer business in
Thailand under the brand "Singha." Boonrwad Satrabutr started the family business in
1932. Boonrawd is coded as the first generation in our data. He adopted Wit, who is a son
of his brother, as his child. He later had two other sons, Prachuab and Chamnong, from
his own wife. Wit, Prachuab and Chamnong are considered as the family's second

6

generation. There are eleven family members in the third generation: five males and six
females. They are sons and daughters of Wit, Prachuab and Chamnong.
Each individual in the family tree then has to be matched to the ownership and
board composition data collected at the firm-level, allowing us to determine whether a
specific family member is involved in the family business, in which capacity (through
ownership and/or control) and in which firms. There are two major data challenges in
performing this matching exercise. First, there are typically many different English
spellings for a given Thai name, forcing us to do most of this matching by hand. Second,
special care had to be taken in matching female family members to the ownership and
board information as they may have dropped their maiden name after getting married. To
alleviate any bias in matching that might result from the change in last name we also
match all the daughters of a given family by first name only. This creates a unique match
in all but one case, since in Thai culture it is very uncommon that two children within a
family are given the same first name. Overall, we identify the firms that belong to each of
our 93 business families. The criterion is that the family as a whole has the highest
percentage of ultimate ownership in that company. Ultimate ownership is defined as the
cash-flow rights derived from holding shares in the firm directly or indirectly through
pyramids or cross-shareholdings.
4. Descriptive Statistics
The Family: Table 1 provides a first overview of the business families in our
sample. We have detailed information on 93 families. The data appendix explains
precisely how we obtained our sample of firms, including how we ascertained that a
family controlled a particular firm. Taken as a whole, the 93 families in our dataset
control more than 40 percent of all the assets in our 1996 sample of Thai firms.
While the average family size is 12.9 members, there is wide variation in family
size, where the largest family has as much as 122 members and the smallest has three.8
Note that we use here all family members in the family tree (but not children under age
15 at the time of our study – it is impossible to ascertain exactly how many of them are
present in most families). We include all family members in our calculation, regardless of
whether we have evidence that they are involved in the business or not, since we would
create endogeneity bias in the family size variable otherwise. Due to data limitations,
family size does not include spouses or the founder’s siblings (and their descendants).
In-laws are also excluded. We were not confident in our ability to collect high quality
data on these relatives across all families.
There are two main sources of variation in family size: (1) the number of children
each couple has, and (2) the number of generations that have passed since the founder
started the business. On average, each family group has been around for 2.5 generations,
with a minimum of 1 generation (three families), and a maximum of five generations
8

We directly address the skewness of the family size variable when moving to our empirical
tests. We verify the robustness of all results to dropping the largest families or performing median
regressions.

7

(only one family).9 The vast majority of the families in our data have only 2 or 3
generations. On average the number of male direct descendants of the founder is 9 and
the total number of female direct descendants of the founder 5.9. The number of sons is
3.3 and the number of daughters is 2.4. These calculations include the founder's children
from all wives. For 72 out of the 93 families, we have been able to ascertain if the
founder had more than one wife.10 This was the case in 24% of the 72 families. Finally,
we can document that the founder is dead in a little under half of the families in our
sample (48%).
Group Firms: Table 2 reports characteristics of the firms that these families own
and operate. Every family in our sample controls at least one firm; 16 out of 93 groups
control only one firm (for which we have data), while the remaining families control
groups of firms.11 The average family in our sample controls 6.56 distinct companies in
1996. There is wide variation between families with the biggest family group owning 58
firms. Since this family presents a large outlier in our group size distribution we rerun all
our results in the following paper without this family and the results are robust to this
omission. The average ROA of the groups is only 3% while leverage is almost 70%,
measured as total liabilities divided by book value of total assets. The low average ROA
and high leverage reflect the timing of the data, which was at the onset of the Asian
financial crisis. On average the groups in our sample own 1.9 public firms and 4.7 private
firms. To provide a better picture of the structure of the groups in our sample, we
calculate the depth of the groups. "Depth" is measured as the largest number of vertical
ownership links between firms within a group. We set the depth of firms at the top of the
group structure as zero. For example, if firm A owns B and firm B own C, we calculate
the maximum depth of the group as two. Table 2 shows that the average depth of the
groups in our sample is 1.64, where the flattest groups have a maximum depth of zero
(i.e., they are not pyramidal at all) and the deepest group has seven levels, i.e. seven
layers below the firm at the top of the group. We also calculate two more statistics on the
complexity of the upstream and downstream ownership holdings within the groups.
“Number of firms owning a particular firm” calculates the largest number of downstream
ties of an individual firms in the groups, while “number of firms owned by a particular
firm” describes the same for upstream ties. The values for these are 1.57 and 2.33
respectively.

9

Eight families in our sample are 4 or more generations old. However, several second generation
family members are still alive in these families. In fact, in 4 out of these 8 families, we identify
2nd generation members with ownership and/or board positions in 1996. We have replicated the
main parts of our analysis by dropping those 4 families that are 4 or more generations old and for
which we do not see 2nd generation family members with ownership and/or board positions. The
main regression results do not change.
10
In some instances the founder had more than one wife at the same time, while in other cases the
wives were consecutive. We do not differentiate between these two kinds of multiple wife
situations in our analysis.
11
By our criterion of assigning a firm to the family with highest ownership, no firms in our
sample are owned by, controlled by, or involve more than one family.

8

Involvement of Family Members in Family Business: Panel A of Table 3 reports
the ownership structure of the firms across different family members and the second
panel repeats this structure for the board positions of the family members. Table 3, row
(1) shows that average family ownership is 45.2% in the firms in our sample and on
average 6.23 family members have ownership stakes in at least one firm within the
family group. The sons of the founder on average hold 12.6% of the outstanding equity in
the group firms while the daughters hold only 5.5%. About 1.4 sons on average have
ownership in at least one of the group firms but only 0.8 of the daughters do. Overall, the
fraction of family ownership held by the sons is 28% while the daughters own only 10%
of the equity that is in the hand of family members.
Panel B shows that the numbers are even more skewed for the distribution of
board positions that provide control rights over the firm. The fraction of board positions
held by the sons relative to the fraction of other family members with board positions is
even higher, at 51%. In contrast, the fraction family ownership held by daughters of the
founder is 10% and only 10% of daughters hold board positions.
5. Family Structure and Family Involvement in the Business
As a first step toward understanding the role of individual family members in the
performance and governance of the group firms we analyze the ownership and control
positions of the different family members. We focus on two types of involvement: (1)
board membership and (2) share ownership. We analyze how family involvement in
business (board membership and ownership) varies with the size and composition of the
family. The idea behind this analysis is to understand whether greater "availability" of
family members is associated with more family members taking part in business. A
possible alternative would be to select the same number of family members to run the
firms, after choosing from a larger talent pool.
a. Ownership Structure
For that purpose, in Table 4, we first compute for each family the number of
family members who hold some ownership in at least one of the group firms. In column
(1) we regress the number of family members that have some ownership in one of the
group firms on the size of the family measured as the number of family members across
all generations. These regressions are estimated at the firm level, but standard errors are
clustered at the family (i.e., group) level to account for the fact that the decisions to
involve family members could be made at the central group level and not at the
individual firm. We also include dummy variables for the number of generations since
the group was founded and a control for the age of the business group, measured as the
year in which the oldest firm in the group was established.12
If the involvement of family members was not sensitive to their “supply” of the
members, we should not see a relationship. However, we find a strong positive
correlation between the size of the family and the number of family members who are
involved in business. The estimated coefficient of 0.241 means that for every 4 additional
12

All results are robust to running median regressions or dropping the largest families from the
sample.

9

family members one additional person will have ownership. In column (2) we show that
even when we include a dummy variable whether the founder is dead we find literally no
change in the coefficient on family size and the coefficient on the founder dead dummy is
negative but not significant at all. This suggests that even if the founder is dead there is
no significant difference in the overall holdings of the family members.
But, these effects mask stark differences in the roles of different relatives of the
founder, which we explore in the remaining columns of Table 4. For that purpose we
break down ownership by the fraction of family ownership held by the sons of the
founder, the daughters of the founders and the other family members (excluding the
founder). In columns (3)-(5) we look at the ownership of sons as a function of the number
of sons. Column (3) shows that the fraction of sons’ ownership increases sharply with the
number of sons. Indeed, the estimated coefficient is 2.651 which economically quite
larger. An extra son in the family is roughly equivalent to a 3% more of the group
ownership in the hands of the sons. This suggests that the fraction of the group ownership
held by the sons is closely tied to the number of sons in the family. Interestingly, in
column (4) when we include a dummy for whether the founder is dead, we find a very
large positive and significant coefficient. The effect is equivalent to a 20% larger
ownership stake be the sons in firms where the founder has died. This suggests that most
of the shares of the founder go to the sons after his death. In column (5) we also include a
control for family size. The coefficient on family size is negative but barely significant so
that other family members have a minor crowed out effect on the sons.
In sharp contrast when we repeat the same analysis for the daughters in columns
(6)-(8), we find no significant relationship between the number of daughters and their
fraction of ownership in the group firms. Moreover, the holdings of daughters are not
higher in families where the founder dead. We find similar result when looking at “other”
family members (apart from the children of the founder) in column (9). There is no
significant relationship between the share of family ownership held by other family
members and by the number of other family members. However, there is a strong
negative relationship between the number of sons in the family and the ownership for
other family members. There is no such negative result for the number of daughters. Thus
we see that sons heavily crowed out other family member but not their sisters. However,
the sisters do not seem to hold much of the ownership to start with.
The results in Table 4 suggest that the number of family members involved in
business increases with the number of "available" people in the family. However this
result is entirely driven by the sons of the founders. If the founder has more sons, they
increase their ownership stake at the expense of other family members. Once the founder
has passed away, the ownership stakes of the sons increase, while the stakes of other
family members including the daughter of the founder do not.
b. Board Positions
In Table 5 we repeat the regressions from Table 4 but where the dependent
variable is the number of board positions held by various family members. Parallel to the
family ownership, we find that involvement of family members on the board of firms

10

increases with the size of the family (column 1), and there is no significant change in the
overall number of board positions when the founder is dead (column 2). As before, we
find a very strong relationship between the number of sons of the founder and the fraction
of board positions held by the sons (column 3). But in contrast to the effect of founder
death on ownership the faction of board positions held by the sons is not significantly
higher when the founder is dead (column 4). This difference to the ownership results
suggests that the sons already assume board positions before the founder is dead, but
ownership only passes on afterwards. Moreover, in column (5) we find that the number of
other family members has a negative and significant (albeit small) relationship with the
fraction of board positions held by the sons.
In columns (6) to (8) we show that the fraction of board position held by
daughters is positively related to their number in the family, but the relationship is much
weaker than that for the sons. In column (7) we show that the fraction of daughters’ board
positions is not higher in families where the founder is dead. And in larger families other
family members reduce the share of board seats for daughters (column 8). Finally in
column (9) we find a significant and positive relationship between the fraction of board
seats to other family members and the number of “others” in the family. Again this is a
contrast to the ownership results where a larger number of other family members did not
result in a higher fraction of ownership. However, we again find that the coefficient on
the number of sons is negative, indicating that sons crowd out board positions of other
family members.
One concern that we find the effects from founder’s sons and not from the
daughters is that our data on daughters may be less complete than sons. However, given
that the daughters included in our sample are more likely to be the ones with ownership
and position, the regression coefficients for daughters should be positively biased, if
anything. This is contrary to our results.
6. Real Effects of Family Structure on the Businesses They Run
We now turn to the question of whether the differences in the size and
composition of families are associated with differences in group performance. Several
hypotheses have been put forward as to why we could expect lower performance for
groups run by larger families. If family managers are less skilled than outside managers,
greater involvement of family members will negatively affect performance. Larger family
involvement might also lead to more infighting over resources and segregation of
business lines across family members. I It is also possible that business families are faced
with a quantity/quality trade-off. As the number of family members increases, the amount
of resources that can be devoted to each family member declines, leading to lower
average managerial quality. Under these views, a larger family would have worse
performance at the group and firm level.
On the other hand, one might conjecture that the market for corporate control and
top executive talent is thin in Thailand. A larger family offers a deeper talent pool of
potential managers to draw from. Moreover, if governance of professional (outside)
managers is difficult to establish, relying on trust relationship along kinship lines might

11

be preferential since it could serve as a substitute for direct monitoring. These theories
would imply that larger families would be positively related to group performance.
a. Family Structure and Firm Performance
In Table 6 we study the relationship between firm performance and the structure
of the families behind the firms. Panel A presents regressions for all firms in the group
and separately breaks out groups where the founder dead or alive. Panel B separately
examines private and public firms. The unit of observation is a group firm (i.e., a firm
that belongs to a family group). The dependent variable is residual Return on Assets
(ROA), which we construct as follows. We first define firm ROA as the ratio of net
profits in 1996 divided by the firm assets in 1996. We then regress firm-level ROA in
1996 on one-digit industry codes and a control for the measure of the log of total assets of
the firm. The residual ROA is computed as the residual from this regression. The
estimation of residual ROA includes all firms in our dataset, not just the group firms.
Therefore, residual ROA 1996 measures the performance of the firms net of industry and
firm size effects.
All regressions in Table 6 also include a dummy variable for the number of
generations since the group was started and control for the age of the firm. Standard
errors are clustered at the family-group level. In column (1) of Panel A, we regress
residual ROA on the size of the family, measured as the number of people in the family
tree. The coefficient on the family size is negative and not significant. However, when we
include a measure for the number of sons in column (2) of Table 6, the coefficient on the
number of sons is negative and highly significant. The estimated coefficient is -0.34. This
means a one standard deviation move in the number of sons leads to a 1% decrease in the
residual ROA of the family firms. This effect is quite large since all industry variation has
already been taken out. The coefficient on the family size measure becomes in significant
and very close to zero. In column (3), we add a dummy for the presence of sons from
different wives (of the founder). The coefficient on the multiple wives dummy is
negative but not significant. In column (4) we add the number of daughters of the
founder, and find a negative effect that is similar in magnitude to the effect of sons. The
presence of an additional daughter of the founder reduces residual return on assets by
0.216.
When we separate out firms where the founder is still alive versus those where the
founder is dead, columns (5)-(8), we find a dramatic asymmetry in the results. In those
firms where the founder is not alive anymore (columns (5) and (6)) we see a significant
and robust negative relationship between performance and the number of sons, a
somewhat smaller negative relationship to the number of daughters. In contrast, for firms
in groups where the founder is still active (columns 7-8) we find a positive but not
significant relationship between firm performance and number of sons. These results
indicate that the negative relationship between firm performance and the number of sons
(and to a lesser degree the number of daughters) is only present in families where the
founder has passed away. In contrast while the founder is still alive the composition of
the family does not appear to affect the performance of the firms. These findings are also
consistent with previous studies such as Pérez-González (2006) and Villalonga and Amit

12

(2006), who also find that the performance of family firms is particularly poor once the
founder is gone.
In Panel B of Table 6 we separate family firms into those that are publicly traded
and those that are private. When we compare the results for private and public firms in
Panel B we find that the negative relationship between the number of sons and firm
performance is approximately of the same magnitude in both types of firms. There is no
evidence for a significant negative effect of daughters when we divide up the firms in this
fashion.
These results are interesting on a number of dimensions. They suggest that the
lower performance of family firms is not uniformly due to a greater involvement of all
family members if the family is larger. Instead, our results suggest that the sons of the
founder may play a particular role, since the poor performance of family firms is mainly
associated the number of founders’ sons in the family. The results are not consistent with
the hypothesis that trust relationships among family members (in particular the sons) and
the ability to draw from a deeper talent pool in larger families provides a source of
comparative advantage to these families. These findings are instead more supportive of
theories that suggest efficiency losses through greater involvement of sons. As we
discussed before, an alternative explanation for this finding could be that family firms
forgo the opportunity of hiring outsiders whose managerial skills might be much superior
to those of family members; such a difference in managerial quality between family
members and outsiders might be especially acute in larger families because of the
quantity-quality trade-off in raising children. We unfortunately do not have data on the
talent or educational background of sons, which could help us test this alternative story
more directly. However, we do not think that this hypothesis is very plausible since these
are some of the richest families in Thailand where the quality-quantity tradeoff would not
be binding. Moreover, the results in the following section suggest that changes in
governance structure do play an important role in the performance of group firms.
b. Governance and Family Structure
A number of papers have documented that pyramidal group structures allow the
expropriation of minority shareholders by the shareholders of higher-up group firms by
tunneling resources out of these firms, see for example Bertrand et al. (2001) or
Claessens et al. (2000). A similar logic can apply even between family members or in our
context even between sons of the founder. One plausible explanation for the lower
performance of family groups with more sons is that the dilution of ownership between
equally powerful sons increases the amount of tunneling from lower down group firms. If
the sons of the founder do not trust each other to use their control rights in the interest of
the firm, it can lead to a race to the bottom where one brother tries to tunnel resources out
of the group firms before another brother can do so.
To investigate whether these performance results can be explained by a
deterioration in the governance structure of family groups with more sons, we first
analyze whether families with more sons display a greater discrepancy between cash flow

13

and control rights, which provides incentives for tunneling. We construct several
measures of the discrepancy between control and ownership for each of the firms in the
groups covered in our sample. We follow the standard measures of excess control defined
as the gap between total family ownership and total family control as calculated in Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1999), and Claessens, Djankov and Lang (2000).
However, our data also allow us to also compute similar measures of excess control for
each individual family member’s ownership and control rights within each of the group
firm. Given the central role played by sons in the results above, it is of interest to contrast
excess control by sons with excess control by other family members.
In Table 7 we analyze whether groups become more pyramidal (i.e. larger excess
control structures) if there are more family members (and in particular sons) especially
once the founder is gone. While certainly not a proof of tunneling, such evidence would
be consistent with greater incentives to tunnel. In Panel A of Table 7 we first regress the
existence of family excess control (i.e. a dummy for whether total family control is larger
than total family ownership) on number of sons, controlling for the number of
generations the group has been in existence. As before this family excess control variable
includes the holdings of all family members. We find a positive, but only marginally
significant relationship. In column (2), we include the number of daughters in the
regression and find no significant relationship between family excess control and number
of daughters. However, we find a very different picture if we separate the groups where
the founder is dead versus those where he is still alive. For those groups where the
founder is dead we find a strongly positive relationship between the measure of family
excess control and the number of sons in the firms (column 3). We do not find this
relationship for the number of daughters (column 4). However, for groups where the
founder is still present, this relationship is negative and significant (column 5). Again we
do not find this result for the number of daughter (Column 6).
We also replicate these results for the private and public firms within the groups,
columns (7)-(10). We find that the sensitivity of family excess control to the number of
sons is larger and more significant in public firms. This indicates that more sons is
associated with especially high tunneling incentives in publicly-traded firms, especially
when the founder is gone. Of course though, because we do not directly measure
tunneling, there are other possible interpretations for this finding. For example, this
finding may also reflect a desire by founders to have each son manage a (more
prestigious) publicly-traded firms, leading to an increase in the number of publicly-traded
firms in the lower levels of the pyramidal structure.
In Panel B we focus on excess control in the hands of the sons relative to the rest
of the family. The dependent variable is a simple count of the number of sons with excess
control. This measure of excess control allows us to understand whether sons in particular
see an increase in excess control once the founder is dead. We find that families with
more sons also have larger number of sons who have excess control (column1). However,
when we include the number of daughters as an explanatory variable (column 2) we find
a significant negative coefficient. This suggests that in families with more daughters,

14

daughters crowd out some of the excess control from the sons. However, the number of
sons that have excess control is much larger for families where the founder is gone than
where he is still alive (columns 3-6). In fact, the coefficient on the number of sons is
about twice as large when the founder is gone (column 14) versus when he is still alive
(column 16). And again, we find that the results are stronger for public firms than for
private firms (columns 17-20).
We also replicate the results using a measure of the average difference between
control and ownership among sons at a given firm (Panel C, columns 21-30). We find
that more sons are associated with a higher average difference between control and
ownership for sons. The relationship is stronger when the founder is dead and stronger in
the subset of publicly-traded firms.
Overall, these results further suggest that the presence of more sons leads to a
governance structure that is more pyramidal, which means that the gap between control
and ownership rights is becoming more skewed in the hands of the sons. This allows for
more "expropriation positions” for sons once the founder is gone. Moreover, if the trust
relation between the sons is not strong, there are increased incentives for tunneling
between the sons as they race to secure their part of the profits before one of the other
brothers can tunnel it out.
One should note that it is theoretically possible that an increase in the number of
controlling shareholders might improve corporate governance. For example, Gomes and
Novaes (2006) suggest that under certain conditions it is optimal for founders to share
control with multiple outside shareholders to increase the value of the firm instead of just
selling ownership stakes to outside shareholders. Their model assumes that under shared
control each of the large shareholders has veto power against decisions that would reduce
the value of their individual ownership stakes. This can enhance the overall value of the
firm if private benefits are distributed unequally among controlling shareholders and
projects with low public benefits but high private benefits can thus be blocked. Thus the
critical difference between these results and our interpretation relies on the assumption
that even controlling shareholders cannot exercise effective veto power if each controlling
shareholder can tunnel resources from the firm unilaterally. In other words, the
hypothesis we propose in the current paper relies on the idea that controlling shareholders
cannot block each other’s transgression and thus engage in a race to the bottom. These
types of misbehaviors become bigger when there are more sons involved as large
shareholders. While we admittedly cannot prove this assumption, we think it is a
reasonable description of emerging markets where enforcement is weak. In contrast we
think that the board negotiation process described in Gomes and Novaes (2006) might be
more representative of shareholder behavior in more developed capital markets.
In regressions not reported here, we also directly analyzed how the depth of
business groups relates to family size. This analysis very much parallels the analysis
performed in Table 7. We defined depth as being the maximum number of layers within a
group separating a group firm from the firm(s) at the top of that group. This variable
ranges from 0 to 6, with a mean of about 2. Not surprisingly given the results above, we

15

found that larger families are associated with deeper groups. In families where the
founder is dead we see a strong positive relation between the number of sons and group
depth. But there is a negative and barely significant relationship when the founder is still
around. In other words, consistent with the results in Table 7, larger families are
associated with deeper and more pyramidal group structures once the founder is dead.
c. Group Size and Diversification and Family Structure
The above analysis suggests that the organizational and control structure of groups are
importantly related to the size and composition of the family behind them, especially
once the founder is dead. We now discuss possible relationship between family structure
and other group characteristics. Specifically, we analyze whether the number of firms in a
group and its level of industry concentration change when there are more sons in the
group or the founder is dead. In Table 8, we regress these different group characteristics
on our family structure variables. The regressions in this table are performed at the
family-level. All regressions in this table include a control for the age of the group.
The first dependent variable we consider is the number of firms in the group (as
of 1996). Column (1) of Table 8 documents a positive and statistically significant
correlation across families between the number of firms in the group and the number of
sons in the family but not a significant relationship with the total number of family
members. In column (2) we focus only on the families where the founder is dead and find
that this positive relationship between the number of group firms and the number of sons
is entirely driven by the those families where the founder is dead. Interestingly, neither
family size not the number of sons is correlated with group size in families where the
founder is still alive (column 3). In column (4)-(6), we repeat the previous regression but
use the total assets as a dependent variable. We find that larger families are associated
with larger total group assets; however, the effect is economically much smaller.
Moreover, we do not find any relationship with the number of sons in the group. These
combined results suggest that the average size of the firms within a group declines with
the number of male family members. In other words the assets of the group tend to be
divided into more separate firms with the number of sons in the family once the founder
is gone.
In columns (7)-(9), we also use the Herfindahl concentration index at the (Thai
equivalent of) 2-digit SIC level as a dependent variable. We find that the industry
concentration of a group declines when there are more sons in the family but only when
the founder is gone. This result can be seen as a corollary to the previous result on the
number of firms in a group, since a group can become more diversified when there are
more firms within the group.

16

d. Firm Performance and Excess Control
In a final step, we want to investigate whether there is a direct relationship
between the performance of the group firms and the level of excess control by family
members. If the poor performance of family firms after the founder’s departure is in part
explained by the deteriorating governance due to the many sons that are vying for the
group’s assets, we would expect that there should be a direct relationship between excess
control and firm performance. Of course we need to be careful not to make any inference
about the direction of causality from this analysis, since we showed above that both
performance and governance are related to family structure.
To investigate this question, in Panel A of Table 9 we first regress firm-level
(residual) ROA on total family ownership in the firm and a dummy variable for excess
family control (i.e., total family control is larger than total family ownership).13 We use a
control for the year the firm was established in all the regressions. Moreover we include
family fixed effects in all regressions to control for fixed differences in the use of control
between families. Across all groups, in column (1) we find a robust strong negative
correlation between total family ownership and firm performance. Increased family
involvement in ownership has a negative correlation with performance. This is in line
with our prior findings in Table 7 that groups with larger families perform less well. We
also find that higher excess control for the family overall is negatively correlated with
residual ROA in the full sample, but the effect is not significant. When we repeat this
regression for the groups where the founder is dead (column 3) and those where the
founder is still around (column 5), we see that there is a significant negative relationship
between family ownership and residual ROA once the founder is dead, but no such
relationship when the founder is still alive. We also see that the coefficient on the excess
family control is negative (but insignificant) when the founder is dead but positive when
he is still alive.
We now break out total family control and ownership into individual-specific
measures of excess control. Specifically, we contrast the excess control in the hands of
the sons with excess control of other family members. In column (2) we find a strong
negative correlation between residual ROA and the measure of excess control of the sons,
but no effect for the other family members. Then we divide families into those where the
founder is gone (column 4 of Panel A) versus those where the founder is still involved
(column 6 of Panel A). We find a large and significant negative correlation between
residual ROA and the measure of excess control between the sons when the founder is
gone but no effect on the other family members. In contrast for those groups where the
founder is still involved there is no significantly negative relationship between residual
ROA and excess control of the sons. We find parallel results when we use the number of
sons with excess control rather than the difference between the sons (not reported) but the
coefficient estimates are not significant at traditional levels.

13

For the precise construction of the measure please see Appendix A. If there is excess control at
the individual level, there is excess control at the family level.

17

One possible interpretation for the asymmetry we observe between sons and other
family members is that it reflects on the differences in ownership stakes between sons
and other family members. It might be that the gap between control and ownership of any
shareholder (not only sons) reduced profitability but only when the degree of control is
sufficiently large for this shareholder to be relevant. We checked this possibility (results
not reported) by creating a dummy variable that equals to 1 when sons’ ownership is
more than 25% (0 otherwise) and another dummy variable that equals to 1 when other
family members’ ownership is more than 25% (0 otherwise). We then interacted these
dummy variables with sons’ excess control and others’ excess control, respectively. The
results confirm that even when others own more than 25%, their excess control still does
not matter for profitability. On the contrary, sons’ excess control matters both when their
ownership is less than 25% and when their ownership is more than 25%.14 Hence, it does
appear that sons’ excess control differentially impact profitability than other family
members’ excess control, even when these other family members also are relevant
shareholders.
These results are very striking. They indicate that excess control in the hands of
sons is strongly negatively associated with firm performance but excess control in the
hands of other family members does not have the same effect. This might suggest that
potential governance abuses within family are not merely a function of the excess control
rights a family member holds, but it is also determined by the person’s position within the
family. A son of the founder might have greater freedom to use any excess control rights
he holds to his benefit than other family members, even if they are in a similar position.
This might give us an insight into the internal dynamics of the family and could suggest
that there is a layer of governance or power structure within the family itself that affects
the way family members can exercise their ownership and control rights within the
family firms.
Finally, in Panel B of Table 9 we run the same set of regressions we did in Panel
A but now divide the sample into public and private firms. We find that the negative
relationship between performance and excess control by sons is entirely driven by the
private firms (contrast column 11 with column 13). For the public firms the relationship
between firm performance and excess control by sons is actually positive and significant.
If the public firms within the family group are important for the image of the family or
even as a way for the sons to achieve liquidity of their ownership stakes, then the
observed positive relationship for the public firms could be suggestive of the propping of
public firms where sons hold excess control. Overall these findings reinforce a
governance interpretation for our findings as we expect tunneling to be more prominent
in the opaque private firms and propping in the more visible public firms.15

14

We do find though that the negative effect of sons’ excess control on performance is stronger when their
ownership is higher.
15
At first glance, one could view these findings as inconsistent with the findings in Table 7, where we find
a stronger relationship between excess control and number of sons in public firms than private firms.
However, it is important to stress again that the analysis in Table 7 only captures tunneling incentives, and
not tunneling opportunities or actual tunneling. A given level of incentives for tunneling in public firms

18

Overall, these findings suggest that not all family members may have the power
or inclination to take advantage of their excess control position at group firms. Only
excess control in the hands of sons appears to significantly hurt performance, and this is
predominantly concentrated at private firms. In addition, the contrast between groups
where the founder is no longer present and those where the founder is still alive suggests
that the founder may have a disciplining effect on the sons' behavior. The fact that
performance is negatively related to the number of sons with excess control suggests that
the amount of distortion might be driven by competition between the sons over a given
company's resources.
7. Conclusion
Families run a large fraction of firms around the world. Families themselves,
however, are not monolithic entities but are composed of individual members, who may
have different stakes and objectives in the family businesses. The current paper takes a
first step in going beyond the case-study evidence to ask whether constraints imposed by
family structure affect the corporate structure and ultimate performance of these familyrun firms.
We show that the larger the family, in particular the more sons the founder has,
the more positions within family firms are held by family members instead of outside
managers and board members. We find, however, that the number of the sons of the
founder a pivotal. Groups that are run by larger families (especially more sons) tend to
have lower performance. All of these effects are especially pronounced in groups where
the founder is no longer active and ultimate control has been passed on to an heir.
Most interestingly, we analyze how the pyramidal ownership structure of group
firms affects the performance of the firms. Firms where many sons of the founder
indirectly own a fraction of the ownership show lower performance. This finding is
consistent with an interpretation that having several sons with excess control can lead to a
race to the bottom, where each son is trying to tunnel resources out of the company
before his brother do the same.
Overall, these findings provide novel evidence that wider family involvement in
business groups alters business decisions and the performance of family-run firms. One
hypothesis that emerges from our analysis is that the decay of family-run groups over
time may be due in part to increased incentives between family members to tunnel
resources out of the firm as control becomes more diluted among different family
members. A slightly different interpretation is that outright in-fighting for group
resources leads to inefficient decision making. Conflicts between different parts of the
family might lead to distortions in the governance structure and internal operations of

may not translate in as much opportunities for tunneling in these firms given the stronger external
monitoring public firms are subject to.

19

these groups. These conflicts seem to be especially important once the founder has
retired.
One deeper question in this context is why families do not separate the control
rights (i.e. management) more effectively from the ownership structure of the firm by
placing management control in the hand of professionals but retaining ownership control
within the family. Arrangements like this are widely used in many European countries
where family firms are still prevalent, such as Italy or Germany. This would allow family
members to fight over the cash flow streams, without distorting the efficiency of the
business decisions within the firms. We conjecture that a potential answer to this question
lies in the limited enforcement of contracts and market for governance in a country like
Thailand. It could be that cash flow rights de facto can only be guaranteed in conjunction
with control rights. Therefore, family members may have to stay directly involved in the
operations of the business if they want to protect their cash flow rights. Our analysis
suggests that individual family members may not only have to be concerned about
expropriation by outsiders, but also expropriation by other (more powerful) family
members. For example, the fact that weaker family members, such as daughters of the
founder, are less likely to hold positions in firms where sons of the founder are also on
board is quite suggestive in this regard. Similarly, our findings that larger families and
larger family involvement are associated with a break down group assets into a larger set
of (smaller) firms may also indicate that access to cash flow for a given family member
requires control rights for that family member.

20

References
Akira, Suehiro, (1997) Capital Accumulation in Thailand 1855-1985. Chiang
Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Anderson, Ronald C. and David M. Reeb, 2003, Founding-Family ownership and Firm
Performance: Evidence from the S&P 500, The Journal of Finance, Vol 63, 1301-1328.
Bennedson, Morten, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-González, and Daniel
Wolfenzon, 2007, Inside the family firm: The role of families in succession decisions and
performance, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming
Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2002, Ferreting out
Tunneling: An Application to Indian Business Groups, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2002, 117(1), pp. 121-48.
Bhattacharya, Utpal and B. Ravikumar, 2003, Capital Markets and the Evolution of
Family Businesses, Journal of Business, Vol 74, 187-220.
Brooker Group, 2003, Thai Business Groups: A Unique Guide to Who Owns What.
Burkart, Mike, Fausto Panunzi and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Family firms, Journal of
Finance, October.
Caselli, Francisco and Nicola Gennaioli, 2005, Dynastic Management, revised working
paper, London School of Economics, December (earlier version was NBER Working
Paper No 9442.)
Chun, Chi-Nien, 2001, Markets, Culture and Institutions: The Emergence of Large
Business Groups in Taiwan, Journal of Management Studies, Vol 38, 720-745.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Joseph P. H. Fan and Larry H. P. Lang, 2002,
Disentangling the Incentive and Entrenchment Effects of Large Shareholders, The
Journal of Finance, Vol 62, 2741-2771.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov and Larry H. P. Lang, 2000, The separation of
ownership and control in East Asian Corporation, The Journal of Financial Economics,
Vol 58, 81-112.
Cronqvist, Henrik and Mattias Nilsson, 2003, Agency Costs of Controlling Minority
Shareholder, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol 38, 695-719.
Gomes, Armando and Walter Novaes, 2006, Sharing of Control versus Monitoring as
Corporate Governance Mechanisms, Working paper.
Jones, G. and M. B. Rose, 1993, Family Capitalism, Business History, Vol 35, 1-16.

21

Gugler, Klaus, 2001, Corporate Governance and Economic Performance, European
Corporate Governance Network, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu, 2000, Is Group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging
Markets? An Analysis of Diversified Indian Business Groups, The Journal of Finance,
Vol 55, 867-891.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate
Ownership Around the World, The Journal of Finance, Vol 54, 471-518.
Limligan, V.S. (1986) The Overseas Chinese in ASEAN: Business Strategies and
Management Practices. Manila: Vita Development Corp.
Marman, Daniel, 2002, The Emergence of Business Groups: Israel and South Korea
Compared, Organization Studies, Vol 23, 737-758.
Morck, Randall, David Stangeland and Bernard Yeung, 2000, Inherited Wealth,
Corporate Control, and Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease, in Concentrated
Corporate Ownership, Randall Morck, editor, NBER conference volume, University of
Chicago Press.
Pérez-González, Francisco 2006, Inherited Control and Firm Performance, American
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Redding, S. G., 1990, The Spirit of Chinese Capitalism. New York: W. de Gryuter.
Sabphaibul, Thanawat. The Legend of 55 Business Families: Book 1. Bangkok:
Nation Publishing, 2001.
Sabphaibul, Thanawat. The Legend of 55 Business Families: Book 2. Bangkok:
Nation Publishing, 2001.
Villalonga, Belen and Raphael Amit, 2006, How do family ownership, management, and
control affect firm value? Journal of Financial Economics, 80, no. 2 (May 2006): 385–
417.
Whyte, M. K., 1996, The Chinese family and economic development: obstacle or
engine?, Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol 45, 1-30.
Wong, Siu-lun, 1997, The Chinese family firm: a model, The British Journal of
Sociology, Vol 16, 58-72.

22

Appendix A: Construction of Excess Control Measures
Individual ownership is calculated by summing a given family member's direct
and indirect ownership over a given firm. Direct ownership is simply the percentage of
shares that a given family member owns. When there is a chain shareholding along the
pyramid, we also compute the indirect ownership along the chain by calculating the
product of shares held by a given individual along the chain. The calculation is more
complicated if there are more than one chain for each firm.
In such case, the total indirect ownership is the sum of the ownership over all
chains that can be traced back to the given family member. For example, Firm X is 30%
owned by Mr. A, and 70% owned by firm Y. Firm Y is 40% owned by Mr. A. We say
that Mr. A directly owns 30% of firm X. He also indirectly owns 40%*70% = 28% over
firm X through firm Y along the pyramid chain. His ownership in firm X is therefore
30+28 = 58%.
Control is based on the voting rights a given family member has. Due to a oneshare-one-vote rule, direct control rights are simply the shares that the family member
holds. However, in case of a chain shareholding, control over the voting rights of a firm
is the weakest link, i.e., the smallest share along each chain. The total indirect control is
defined as a sum of the control over all chains. Finally, ultimate control is the sum of
direct and indirect control for each family member. Using the previous scenario, Mr. A
directly controls 30% voting rights of firm X. He also indirectly controls min{40%, 70%}
= 40% over firm X. His control in firm X is therefore 30+40 = 70%.
Using this approach, we can define a measure of excess control (i.e., extent of control
greater than or in excess of ownership stake) at the individual level. In the example
above, Mr. A has excess control over firm X (by 12%).

23

Table 1 Summary Statistics: Family Characteristics
The unit of observation is a family. All the data are approximately as of 1996. Family size is
the total number of direct descendants of the founder of each business group, including the
founder himself. Specifically, family size does not include spouses, founder's siblings and
descendants of founder's siblings. Number of generations is defined as the number of
generations of the family from the founder (generation 1) to the latest generation that is active
in family business. Number of male family members is the total of number of direct
descendants of the founder, including the founder himself. Number of female family members
is the total number of direct descendants of the founder. Number of sons is the total number
of founder's sons from all wives. Number of daughters is the total number of founder's
daughters from all wives. Multiple wives is a dummy variable with the value of one if the
founder had more than one wives, and zero otherwise. Founder dead is a dummy variable
with the value of one if the founder was dead by 1996 and zero otherwise. The number of
observations in full sample is 93 families, except for multiple wives.

Variable
Family Size
Number of Generations
Number of Male Family Members
Number of Female Family Members
Number of Sons
g
Number of Daughters
Multiple Wives
Founder Dead

Number of
Families
93
93
93
93
93
93
72
93

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

12.94
2.47
9.06
5.88
3.26
2.40
0.24
0.48

17.51
0.72
10.28
8.08
2.57
2.30
0.43
0.50

1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0

122
5
69
51
14
12
1
1

Table 2 Summary Statistics: Firm Characteristics
Panel A: The unit of observation is a firm. All data are as of 1996. Return on assets is the net profit divided by the
total assets at the end of the year. Leverage is group's total liabilities divided by group's total assets. Residual
return on assets is the residual from the OLS regression of return on assets on 1-digit SIC fixed effects and natural
logarithm of firm's total assets across all firms in the full sample, including firms not belonging to the 93 families.
Firm age is as of 1996.
Panel B: The unit of observation is a family business group. All data are as of 1996. Number of firms is the
number of public and private firms in our sample that belonged to families. Log of total assets is the natural
logarithm of group's total assets in thousand baht at the end of the year. Return on assets is the net profit divided by
the total assets at the end of the year. Leverage is group's total liabilities divided by group's total assets. Group age
is defined as the age of the oldest firm for each group in our sample. Group depth is defined as the maxumum
depth of the deepest firm in the group, where firm's maximum depth is the longest chain that vertically traces the
firm to family's ultimate ownership. Number of firms owning a particular firm is the largest number of group firms
that own a particular firm in the same group. Number of firms owned by a particular firm is the largest number of
group firms that are owned by a partucular firm in the same group. The total number of groups in full sample is 93.
When computing group stucture variables, two groups are dropped out due to their complicated structure of
cyclical cross-shareholdings.

Variable

Returns on Assets
Residual Returns on Assets
Leverage
Firm Age

Number of Firms
Number of Public Firms
Number of Private Firms
Log of Total Assets
Returns on Assets
Leverage
Group Age
Group Depth
Number of Firms Owning a Particular Firm
Number of Firms Owned by a Particular Firm

Number of
Firms

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

0.03
0.10
0.71
18.06

0.07
7.25
0.25
13.57

-0.11
-19.86
0.21
0

0.21
19.71
1.10
114

Panel B: Group Level
93
6.56
93
1.90
93
4.66
93
16.43
93
0.03
93
0.69
93
32.10
91
1.64
91
1.57
91
2.33

9.21
2.58
7.81
1.77
0.04
0.18
16.98
1.55
1.67
3.94

1
0
0
12.54
-0.11
0.29
7
0
0
0

58
19
53
21.22
0.21
1.10
114
7
7
23

Panel A: Firm Level
586
586
586
586

Table 3: Summary Statistics of Family Involvements
The unit of observation is a family business group. For each observation, the variables are computed as the arithmetic
average across firms in the group. The data are as of 1996. The number of observations in full sample is 93 groups
(families) except for those for fraction of family board positions because some families do not hold any board
positions in some family-owned firms.
Family ownership is the total percentage of ultimate ownership directly or indirectly held by family members in a
particular firm. Number of family members with ownership is the number of family members that directly or
indirectly own a particular firm. Sons' ownership is the total percentage of ultimate ownership directly or indirectly
held by all founder's sons. Daughters' ownership is the total percentage of ultimate ownership directly or indirectly
held by all founder's daughters. Number of sons with ownership is the number of founder's sons that directly or
indirectly own a particular firm. Number of daughters with ownership is the number of founder's daughters that
directly or indirectly own a particular firm. Fraction of family ownership held by sons is computed as sons'
ownership divided by family ownership. Fraction of family ownership held by daughters is computed as daughters'
ownership divided by family ownership. Fraction of family ownership held by others is the fraction of family
ownership not held by founder's sons or daughters.
Number of family member with board position is the number of family member with board position in at least one of
the group firms. Number of sons with board position is the number of founder's sons with board position in at least
one of the group firms. Number of daughters with board position is the number of founder's daughters with board
position in at least one of the group firms. Fraction of board positions held by sons is computed as the number of
founder's sons on board divided by the number of all family members on board for a particular firm. Fraction of
board positions held by daughters is computed as the number of founder's daughters on board divided by the number
of all family members on board for a particular firm. Fraction of board positions held by others is computed as the
number of family board positions not held by founder's sons or daughters divided by the number of board positions
h ld by
held
b any family
f il members
b for
f a particular
i l firm.
fi
Variable

Number of
Mean
Families
Panel A: Involvement in Ownership

Family Ownership (%)
Number of Family Members with Ownership
Sons' Ownership (%)
Daughters' Ownership (%)
Number of Sons with Ownership
Number of Daughters with Ownership
Fraction of Family Ownership Held by Sons
Fraction of Family Ownership Held by Daughters
Fraction of Family Ownership Held by Others

93
93
93
93
93
93
93
93
93

45.17
6.23
12.61
5.49
1.39
0.81
0.28
0.10
0.62

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

25.37
4.82
15.52
10.14
1.38
1.11
0.28
0.16
0.33

3.64
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

100.00
36.57
63.08
45.50
6
5
1
1
1

0.87
0.65
0.25
0.39
0.22
0.41

0
0
0
0
0
0

5
4
1
1
1
1

Panel B: Involvement in Board Positions
Number of Family Members with Board Position
Number of Sons with Board Position
Number of Daughters with Board Position
Fraction of Family Board Positions Held by Sons
Fraction of Family Board Positions Held by Daughters
Fraction of Family Board Positions Held by Others

93
93
93
85
85
85

1.24
0.51
0.10
0.40
0.08
0.52

Table 4 Family Involvement in Business Ownership
The unit of observation is a firm. Number of family members with ownership is the number of family members that directly or indirectly own a particular firm.
Fraction of family ownership held by sons is computed as sons' ownership divided by family ownership. Fraction of family ownership held by daughters is
computed as daughters' ownership divided by family ownership. Fraction of family ownership held by others is the fraction of family ownership not held by
founder, his sons or his daughters. Family size is the total number of direct descendants of the founder of each business group, including the founder himself.
Founder dead is a dummy variable with the value of one if the founder was dead by 1996 and zero otherwise. Number of sons is the total number of founder's
sons from all wives. Number of daughters is the total number of founder's daughters from all wives. Number of others is family size minus number of sons and
number of daughters. Firm age is as of 1996. All regressions are estimated using OLS and controlled for number of generations fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at family-group level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * represents coefficients significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; and *** significant at
1%.

Family Size
Founder Dead? (Yes=1)

Number of Family Members
with Ownership
(1)
(2)
0.241
0.243
(0.086)***
(0.087)***
(0 086)***
(0 087)***
-0.605
(1.285)

Number of Sons

(3)

2.651
(1.390)*

Number of Daughters

Fraction of Family Ownership (x 100) Held by:
Daughters
(5)
(6)
(7)
-0.371
(0.196)*
(0 196)*
20.372
20.499
-0.043
(8.437)**
(8.182)**
(8.241)
2.140
3.542
(1.398)
(1.437)**
0.369
0.370
(0.629)
(0.601)
Sons
(4)

(8)
0.020
(0.085)
(0 085)
-0.454
(8.514)
0.268
(0.857)
0.174
(0.793)

Number of Others
Firm Age
Number of Generations F.E.
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Number of Families

0.034
(0.024)
Yes
1.498
(1.704)
521
0.55
93

0.036
(0.025)
Yes
1.787
(1.597)
521
0.55
93

0.044
(0.107)
Yes
20.258
(8.626)**
521
0.39
93

-0.006
(0.098)
Yes
11.388
(7.423)
521
0.42
93

-0.003
(0.096)
Yes
13.191
(7.543)*
521
0.43
93

0.133
(0.067)*
Yes
4.091
(2.978)
521
0.08
93

0.133
(0.066)**
Yes
4.111
(5.826)
521
0.08
93

0.134
(0.067)**
Yes
3.438
(6.070)
521
0.08
93

Others
(9)

-20.359
(10.652)*
-3.751
(1.407)***
1.066
(1.617)
0.291
(0.231)
-0.119
(0.119)
Yes
82.220
(9.506)***
521
0.41
93

Table 5 Family Involvement in Board Positions
The unit of observation is a firm. Number of family member with board position is the number of family member with board position in a given firm. Fraction of
board positions held by sons is computed as the number of founder's sons on board divided by the number of all family members on board for a particular firm.
Fraction of board positions held by daughters is computed as the number of founder's daughters on board divided by the number of all family members on board
for a particular firm. Fraction of board positions held by others is computed as the number of family board positions not held by founder, his sons or his daughters
divided by the number of board positions held by any family members for a particular firm. Family size is the total number of direct descendants of the founder of
each business group, including the founder himself. Founder dead is a dummy variable with the value of one if the founder was dead by 1996 and zero otherwise.
Number of sons is the total number of founder's sons from all wives. Number of daughters is the total number of founder's daughters from all wives. Number of
others is family size minus number of sons and number of daughters. Firm age is as of 1996. All regressions are estimated using OLS and controlled for number
of generations fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at family-group level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * represents coefficients significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; and *** significant at 1%.

Family Size
Founder Dead? (Yes=1)

Number of Family Members
with Board Position
(1)
(2)
0.013
0.014
(0.003)***
(0.003)***
-0.174
(0.237)

Number of Sons

(3)

3.821
(1.278)***

Number of Daughters

Fraction of Family's Board Positions (x 100) Held by:
Daughters
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.746
-0.145
(0.242)***
(0.077)*
3.474
4.778
2.026
2.655
(9.438)
(8.698)
(6.045)
(5.947)
3.753
6.551
(1.303)*** (1.494)***
1.026
1.003
1.521
(0.359)***
(0.369)***
(0.511)***
Sons
(4)

Others
(9)

0.058
(0.113)
Yes
22.634
(8.163)***
323
0.21
93

-6.636
(10.384)
-7.011
(1.287)***
1.993
(1.245)
0.702
(0.255)***
-0.064
(0.118)
Yes
71.414
(8.977)***
323
0.29
93

Number of Others
Firm Age
Number of Generations F.E.
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Number of Families

0.020
(0.004)***
Yes
0.424
(0.155)***
580
0.08
93

0.020
(0.004)***
Yes
0.507
(0.231)**
580
0.08
93

0.062
(0.114)
Yes
24.394
(6.646)***
323
0.20
93

0.049
(0.123)
Yes
26.607
(7.516)***
323
0.24
93

0.038
(0.064)
Yes
1.545
(1.980)
323
0.06
93

0.036
(0.059)
Yes
0.415
(4.603)
323
0.06
93

0.036
(0.059)
Yes
1.713
(4.632)
323
0.07
93

Table 6 Firm Performance and Family Stucture
The unit of observation is a firm. Residual return on assets is the residual from the OLS regression of return on assets on 1-digit SIC fixed effects and natural logarithm of
firm's total assets across all firms in the full sample, including firms not belonging to the 93 families. Number of sons is the total number of founder's sons from all wives.
Sons from different wives is a dummy variable with value of one if there are founder's sons from different founder's wives, and zero otherwise. Number of daughters is
the total number of founder's daughters from all wives. Firm age is as of 1996. All regressions are estimated using OLS and controlled for number of generations fixed
effect. Contants are included but not reported here. Standard errors are clustered at family-group level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * represents coefficients
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; and *** significant at 1%.
Dependent Variable: Residual ROA (x 100)
Founder Dead
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.014
0.016
0.023
0.017
(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.021)
-0.473
-0.284
-0.483
-0.334
(0.132)***
(0.160)*
(0.114)***
(0.151)**
-0.386
-0.402
(0.802)
(0.681)
-0.216
-0.145
(0.108)**
(0.085)*
0.036
0.022
0.049
0.048
(0.020)*
(0.020)
(0.021)**
(0.021)**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
507
586
309
337
0.05
0.04
0.08
0.07
93
93
37
45

All Firms
Family Size

(1)
-0.043
(0.032)

(2)
0.000
(0.025)
-0.340
(0.156)**

0.026
(0.020)
Yes
586
0.03
93

0.024
(0.020)
Yes
586
0.04
93

Number of Sons
Sons from Different Wives
Number of Daughters
Firm Age
Number of Generations F.E.
Observations
R-squared
Number of Families

Family Size
Number of Sons
Sons from Different Wives
Number of Dauthers
Firm Age
Number of Generations F.E.
Observations
R-squared
Number of Families

Public
(9)
(10)
0.068
0.068
(0.021)***
(0.023)***
-0.393
-0.279
(0.166)**
(0.225)
-1.711
(1.303)
-0.129
(0.200)
0.022
0.013
(0.029)
(0.031)
Yes
Yes
151
169
0.05
0.04
52
62

Founder Alive
(7)
(8)
-0.530
-0.136
(0.425)
(0.791)
0.348
0.117
(0.797)
(0.948)
4.649
(2.828)
-0.291
(0.821)
0.001
-0.052
(0.063)
(0.060)
Yes
Yes
198
249
0.04
0.02
33
48
Private
(11)
-0.025
(0.035)
-0.427
(0.180)**
0.376
(1.138)

0.032
(0.031)
Yes
356
0.06
55

(12)
-0.023
(0.037)
-0.231
(0.195)

-0.191
(0.150)
0.019
(0.028)
Yes
417
0.05
75

Table 7 Excess Control and Family Structure
The unit of observation is a firm. "Family Control > Family Ownership" is a dummy variable with the value of one if family has voting rights more than
its cash flow rights. See text for detail. "Number of Sons with Control > Ownership" is the number of founder's sons whose voting rights greater than cash
flow rights. Difference in sons' control and ownership is the average difference between voting rights and control rights across founder's sons. Number of
sons is the total number of founder's sons from all wives. Number of daughters is the total number of founder's daughters from all wives. All regressions
are estimated using OLS and controlled for number of generations fixed effect. Contants are included but not reported here. Standard errors are in
parentheses. * represents coefficients significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; and *** significant at 1%.

Panel A: Dependent Variable = Family Control > Family Ownership? (Yes=1)
Founder Dead
Founder Alive
Public
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.021
0.027
-0.057
-0.057
0.026
0.025
(0.007)*** (0.009)*** (0.018)*** (0.018)***
(0.013)*
(0.015)*
-0.010
0.003
0.002
(0.009)
(0.017)
(0.015)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
337
337
249
249
169
169
0.04
0.04
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.10
45
45
48
48
62
62

Private
(9)
(10)
0.010
0.006
(0.008)
(0.010)
0.006
(0.010)
Yes
Yes
417
417
0.02
0.03
75
75

All Firms
(11)
(12)
Number of Sons
0.264
0.326
(0.025)*** (0.030)***
Number of Daughters
-0.116
(0.029)***
Number of Generations F.E.
Yes
Yes
Observations
586
586
R-squared
0.31
0.33
Number of Families
93
93

Panel B: Dependent Variable = Number of Sons with Control > Ownership
Founder Alive
Public
Founder Dead
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
0.259
0.342
0.126
0.147
0.398
0.458
(0.033)*** (0.040)*** (0.040)*** (0.039)*** (0.046)*** (0.051)***
-0.143
-0.135
-0.133
(0.040)***
(0.037)***
(0.052)**
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
337
337
249
249
169
169
0.28
0.31
0.05
0.10
0.51
0.53
45
45
48
48
62
62

Private
(19)
(20)
0.223
0.264
(0.030)*** (0.035)***
-0.074
(0.035)**
Yes
Yes
417
417
0.26
0.27
75
75

All Firms
(21)
(22)
Number of Sons
0.501
0.895
(0.119)*** (0.137)***
Number of Daughters
-0.741
(0.135)***
Number of Generations F.E.
Yes
Yes
Observations
586
586
R-squared
0.12
0.16
Number of Families
93
93

Panel C: Dependent Variable = Difference in Sons' Control and Ownership
Founder Dead
Founder Alive
Public
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
0.348
0.834
0.764
0.865
0.981
1.306
(0.159)** (0.191)*** (0.168)*** (0.164)*** (0.210)*** (0.230)***
-0.836
-0.649
-0.727
(0.190)***
(0.156)***
(0.232)***
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
337
337
249
249
169
169
0.09
0.14
0.09
0.15
0.27
0.31
45
45
48
48
62
62

Private
(29)
(30)
0.347
0.711
(0.143)** (0.169)***
-0.655
(0.169)***
Yes
Yes
417
417
0.09
0.12
75
75

Number of Sons
Number of Daughters
Number of Generations F.E.
Observations
R-squared
Number of Families

All Firms
(1)
(2)
0.013
0.012
(0.007)*
(0.008)
0.003
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
586
586
0.02
0.02
93
93

Table 8 Group Size, Industry Concentration, Organization Structure and Family Size
The unit of observation is a family business group. Number of firms is the number of public and private firms in our sample that belonged to a given family. Total
asset is group's total assets in million baht. Industry concentration is computed as the squareroot of the summation of the squares of the fraction of group's assets
in each industry to total group's assets in all industries. Specifically, the concentration index equals to one if the group is concentrated in only on industry.
Industries are classified approximately at 2-digit SIC. Family size is the total number of direct descendants of the founder of each business group, including the
founder himself. Number of sons is the number of founder's sons. Group age is defined as the age of the oldest firm for each group in our sample. All regressions
are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are in parentheses. * represents coefficients significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; and *** significant at 1%. The total
number of groups in full sample is 91. Two groups are dropped out due to their complicated structure of cyclical cross-shareholdings.

Family Size
Number of Sons
Group
Age
G
A
Constant
Number of Observations
R-squared

Number of Firms
All Firms Founder Dead Founder Alive
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.079
0.056
0.007
(0.050)
(0.068)
(0.194)
0.548
1.336
-0.408
(0.314)*
(0.523)**
(0.414)
0.096
0.086
0.084
0 096
0 086
0 084
(0.047)**
(0.073)
(0.047)*
0.121
-1.610
3.212
(1.717)
(3.194)
(1.440)**
91
44
47
0.20
0.27
0.12

Total Assets (Millions Baht)
All Firms Founder Dead Founder Alive
(4)
(5)
(6)
2.469
2.212
-1.989
(1.324)*
(1.995)
(3.325)
2.403
7.475
3.216
(8.369)
(15.443)
(7.094)
2.113
2.279
1.150
2 113
2 279
1 150
(1.266)*
(2.144)
(0.806)
-45.623
-59.297
2.291
(45.748)
(94.322)
(24.672)
91
44
47
0.13
0.12
0.05

Industry Concentration (2-Digit SIC)
All Firms Founder Dead Founder Alive
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.001
0.000
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.014)
-0.002
-0.031
0.040
(0.012)
(0.015)**
(0.030)
-0.004
-0.004
-0.004
0 004
0 004
0 004
(0.002)**
(0.002)*
(0.003)
0.849
0.929
0.747
(0.065)*** (0.093)***
(0.104)***
91
44
47
0.08
0.20
0.13

Table 9 Firm Performance, Family Ownership and Excess Control
The unit of observation is a firm. Residual return on assets is the residual from the OLS regression of return on assets on 1-digit SIC fixed effects and natural logarithm
of firm's total assets across all firms in the full sample, including firms not belonging to the 93 families. Family ownership is the total percentage of ultimate ownership
directly or indirectly held by family members in a particular firm. "Family Control > Family Ownership" is a dummy variable with the value of one if family has voting
rights more than its cash flow rights. See text for detail. Difference in sons' control and ownership is the average difference between voting rights and control rights
across founder's sons. Difference in others' control and ownership is the average difference between voting rights and control rights across family members except for
founder's sons. All regressions are estimated using OLS and controlled for family fixed effect. Contants are included but not reported here. Standard errors are
clustered at family-group level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * represents coefficients significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; and *** significant at 1%.

All Firms

Dependent Variable: Residual ROA (x 100)
Family Ownership
Family Control > Family Ownership? (Yes=1)

(1)
-0.036
(0.016)**
-1.059
(1.148)

Difference in Sons' Control and Ownership
Difference in Others
Others' Control and Ownership
Famiy F.E.
Observations
R-squared
Number of Families

Yes
586
0.26
93

(2)
-0.036
(0.015)**

-0.168
(0.049)***
0 023
0.023
(0.051)
Yes
586
0.27
93

Founder Dead
(3)
(4)
-0.050
-0.045
(0.018)***
(0.018)**
-2.308
(1.496)
-0.167
(0.052)***
0 026
0.026
(0.096)
Yes
Yes
337
337
0.20
0.21
45
45

Dependent Variable: Residual ROA (x 100)
Family Ownership
Family Control > Family Ownership ?

Public
(7)
-0.044
(0.051)
-1.245
(2.772)

Difference in Sons' Control and Ownership
Difference in Others' Control and Ownership
Famiy F.E.
Observations
R-squared
Number of Families

Founder Alive
(5)
(6)
-0.011
-0.020
(0.030)
(0.026)
1.134
(1.533)
-0.344
(0.265)
0 035
0.035
(0.073)
Yes
Yes
249
249
0.36
0.36
48
48

Yes
169
0.51
62

Private
(8)
-0.028
(0.045)

0.203
(0.078)**
-0.255
(0.142)*
Yes
169
0.53
62

(9)
-0.029
(0.020)
-1.091
(1.497)

Yes
417
0.26
75

(10)
-0.030
(0.018)*

-0.202
(0.060)***
0.047
(0.055)
Yes
417
0.28
75

Table A1 Family Characteristics
The unit of observation is a family. Family numbers are ranked by number of generations, family size and number of sons, respectively. All the data
are approximately as of 1996. Family size is the total number of direct descendants of the founder of each business group, including the founder
himself. Specifically, family size does not include spouses, founder's siblings and descendants of founder's siblings. Number of generations is defined
as the number of generations of the family from the founder (generation 1) to the latest generation that is active in family business. Number of sons is
the total number of founder's sons from all wives. Number of daughters is the total number of founder's daughters from all wives. Multiple wives is a
dummy variable with the value of one if the founder had more than one wives, and zero otherwise. Founder dead is a dummy variable with the value
of one if the founder was dead by 1996 and zero otherwise.

Family
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47

Number of Family
Generations Size
5
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

122
99
34
33
27
25
21
20
59
38
34
29
25
23
21
19
17
16
16
15
15
15
14
13
12
12
12
11
11
11
11
11
10
8
7
6
5
20
16
13
12
11
11
10
9
8
8

Number of
Sons Daughters
3
6
6
5
4
1
5
3
14
8
8
5
5
10
8
4
7
6
2
6
6
3
2
2
5
2
1
4
3
2
1
0
4
2
3
3
1
8
9
10
4
4
4
4
4
4
2

2
6
1
2
2
2
5
0
12
2
4
4
3
0
8
8
4
1
1
6
5
0
3
2
4
2
6
0
1
4
0
2
3
4
2
0
0
10
5
2
7
1
3
2
4
3
5

Multiple Founder
Wives? Dead?
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
n.a.
0
1
1
0
0
n.a.
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
n.a.
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
n.a.
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

Family
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93

Number of Family
Generations Size
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1

7
7
7
7
7
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

Number of
Sons Daughters
4
4
4
2
2
5
4
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
0
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
0
2
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0

2
2
2
4
4
0
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
5
0
0
1
1
1
0
2
2
3
3
3
0
0
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Multiple Founder
Wives? Dead?
0
n.a.
0
0
0
n.a.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.
n.a.
0
0
0
0
n.a.
0
0
n.a.
0
n.a.
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
n.a.
0
0
n.a.
0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0

Table A2 Group Characteristics
The unit of observation is a family business group. All data are as of 1996. Family numbers correspond to those assigned in Table A1. Number of firms is the number of public and private firms in our sample
that belonged to families. Log of total assets is the natural logarithm of group's total assets in thousand baht at the end of the year. Return on assets is the net profit divided by the total assets at the end of the
year. Leverage is group's total liabilities divided by group's total assets. Group age is defined as the age of the oldest firm for each group in our sample. Group depth is defined as the maxumum depth of the
deepest firm in the group, where firm's maximum depth is the longest chain that vertically traces the firm to family's ultimate ownership. Number of firms owning a particular firm is the largest number of
group firms that own a particular firm in the same group. Number of firms owned by a particular firm is the largest number of group firms that are owned by a partucular firm in the same group.

Number of Firms
Family
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47

All Public Private
8
14
18
25
22
2
4
5
31
35
4
1
9
1
4
46
11
8
4
4
2
3
7
3
2
4
2
8
2
2
1
4
7
3
17
3
4
3
1
4
2
4
2
2
1
3
1

4
7
7
1
6
1
1
0
6
19
0
1
1
0
0
7
1
0
4
0
2
3
1
2
2
1
0
0
2
0
1
0
1
2
3
1
0
2
0
2
0
2
1
0
0
0
0

4
7
11
24
16
1
3
5
25
16
4
0
8
1
4
39
10
8
0
4
0
0
6
1
0
3
2
8
0
2
0
4
6
1
14
2
4
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
3
1

Log
ROA
Group Group
Total
Leverage
(x 100)
Age Depth
Assets
18.25
1.03
0.90
63
4
20.34
2.00
0.89
64
4
21.22
1.43
0.74
52
5
18.23
7.34
0.65
44
3
17.90
3.79
0.65
114
3
15.42
2.69
0.57
66
0
17.76
-0.01
0.92
49
3
17.12
9.10
0.65
63
1
18.43
1.56
0.69
39
4
17.90
3.75
0.52
44
7
16.21
-0.71
0.96
31
2
15.11
8.54
0.53
27
0
16.48
2.11
0.68
38
3
15.63
0.10
1.05
46
0
15.02
0.44
0.93
54
1
19.19
0.78
0.60
29
5
17.90
5.71
0.73
29
4
16.34
0.83
0.90
20
1
17.16
0.97
0.83
29
2
15.73
7.74
0.54
33
1
18.16
1.38
0.57
28
1
17.05
-1.27
0.75
8
0
17.46
3.95
0.61
41
5
15.51
6.33
0.59
26
1
15.46
-4.25
0.72
16
1
16.13
5.87
0.60
32
3
15.72
9.28
0.39
35
1
16.22
5.77
0.67
24
2
16.50
3.44
0.68
23
0
13.53
0.58
0.69
48
2
12.92
4.45
0.40
18
0
15.85
-3.51
1.00
22
1
16.16
20.86
0.30
29
1
16.75 -11.11
0.90
24
3
17.48
1.66
0.59
43
4
16.17
7.69
0.58
44
0
17.12
4.84
0.56
34
17.25
0.48
0.80
37
1
13.52
0.89
0.96
7
0
18.70
1.31
0.91
57
2
14.92
0.01
0.83
18
0
16.12
4.74
0.58
17
2
15.81
5.87
0.69
32
1
13.47
0.51
0.47
10
1
15.69
0.73
0.43
21
0
17.47
-0.16
0.97
54
2
15.66
0.60
0.95
16
0

Number of
Owning Owned
3
4
6
3
2
0
1
1
2
5
6
0
3
0
1
7
2
1
1
1
1
0
2
1
1
2
1
2
0
1
0
1
1
2
4
0

3
7
11
11
8
0
1
3
6
23
2
0
4
0
0
21
6
1
1
0
0
0
3
0
1
1
0
3
0
1
0
2
3
2
1
0

1
0
4
0
1
2
1
0
4
0

1
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
1
0

Number of Firms
Family
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93

All Public Private
8
2
5
1
9
1
13
10
1
2
4
3
58
7
6
1
3
6
6
2
3
7
2
1
13
1
4
2
4
2
3
2
5
1
8
2
4
16
1
4
3
5
1
7
7
1

4
0
0
0
4
0
6
1
1
1
3
2
5
2
2
1
0
5
2
0
1
0
1
0
3
1
2
0
4
0
1
2
4
0
4
0
2
4
1
4
3
1
0
3
2
1

4
2
5
1
5
1
7
9
0
1
1
1
53
5
4
0
3
1
4
2
2
7
1
1
10
0
2
2
0
2
2
0
1
1
4
2
2
12
0
0
0
4
1
4
5
0

Log
Total
Assets
19.05
14.44
18.60
14.74
19.95
15.68
16.87
19.75
14.50
15.11
16.56
14.41
20.28
16.55
16.13
15.70
13.70
17.88
18.30
14.59
14.27
15.70
15.25
13.58
17.99
15.27
15.34
14.31
16.38
15.39
16.60
15.15
16.86
13.22
17.84
15.73
17.48
17.47
18.60
16.69
17.76
17.39
13.69
17.32
16.81
12.54

ROA
Group Group
Leverage
(x 100)
Age Depth
2.99
10.62
-0.27
4.88
1.73
-0.13
4.71
-0.32
-1.37
12.03
4.63
4.54
1.14
7.33
2.42
1.13
-0.25
3.60
5.80
-0.05
8.15
-1.07
0.40
1.09
-1.68
3.30
11.84
6.41
0.48
-1.62
8.20
-5.22
2.69
0.63
11.99
2.38
0.88
1.03
0.91
-1.35
0.07
0.25
1.71
4.80
0.55
-11.20

0.71
0.68
0.33
1.10
0.89
0.87
0.41
0.29
0.66
0.49
0.55
0.58
0.91
0.64
0.62
0.79
0.89
0.61
0.58
0.74
0.53
0.78
0.46
0.69
0.81
0.49
0.51
0.59
0.62
0.87
0.72
0.48
0.40
0.77
0.43
0.72
0.91
0.73
0.90
0.69
0.82
0.90
0.69
0.60
0.83
1.10

67
7
55
18
51
28
27
27
27
23
11
26
62
31
26
23
27
31
16
30
8
33
32
27
33
25
15
17
34
19
13
23
26
17
13
22
24
35
47
43
26
47
23
23
38
11

Number of
Owning Owned

3
2
2
0
6
0
3
4
0
1
2
0

3
1
3
0
7
0
4
4
0
1
1
0

3
0
3
0
6
0
12
6
0
1
3
0

2
2
0
1
1
4
1
1
1
2
0
2
0
2
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
2
1
1
3
0
1
2
2
0
2
2
0

1
5
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
0
2
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
4
0
1
1
1
3
0
1
2
2
0
2
2
0

2
2
0
0
3
3
1
1
0
1
0
4
0
1
0
3
1
0
0
1
0
4
1
3
8
0
2
1
1
0
3
1
0

Bertrand, Johnson, Samphantharak and Schoar (2007)
Data Appendix
A. Firm Data
A.1 Data Sources
Our firm-level data are from Thailand. Each registered firm in Thailand has to submit annual
financial statements, audited by an authorized auditor, to the Ministry of Commerce. Registered
firms include registered partnerships, privately held limited companies, and publicly traded
companies. The database is physically assembled and maintained by the Ministry’s Department
of Business Development.1 We access this database in several ways
(1) Direct request made to the Department of Business Development The Department
makes the database available to general public upon request. The database contains all the
information each firm submits to the Ministry. For each firm, the information include the
registration number, registration date, address, name of the firm, notes on change of status or
change of names, types of business, the report of the shareholder meetings, financial statements,
list of shareholders (names, nationality, profession, number of shares, date of acquire or
purchase), and list of the directors. The coverage is all registered firms in Thailand for all
available years. The data is not digitalized and must be requested on firm-by-firm basis based
only on the registration number. The request must be made in person. Fees are charged based on
the number of firms, the number of years and the type of the requested data.
(2) Thailand Company Information (TCI) The Department of Business Development
gives a right to Advanced Research Group Co., Ltd. to publish the financial statements of
approximately top 2,000 registered firms in a series of books called Thailand Company
Information (TCI). The books are released annually since 1987. The TCI database contains
financial, ownership and board composition information at the firm-level. For all firms, the
financial information includes total assets, total liabilities, total revenues and net profits.
Ownership data report the names of the shareholders and the percentage of company shares
directly held by each shareholder. The database includes information of the names of directors on
the firm’s board. For publicly traded firms, specific positions on the board a particular person
holds are also reported. The database provides information on industry classification similar to 1digit and 2-digit SIC codes, and founding year for each firm. All data in TCI are translated into
English.
(3) Business Online (BOL) The Department of Business Development also cooperates
with Business Online Public Co., Ltd. to digitalize the basic information of over 600,000
registered companied in Thailand. The information includes company’s name, registration
number, address, financial statement, list of shareholders and directors. As BOL was established
in 1996, the database contains only information in recent years. (At the time of working on our
project, the BOL financial data goes back to 1993 while the shareholder and director information
is back only to 1997.) The data is available for purchase in digital format. The price is based on
the number of firms, the number of years and type of the data. Most of the data are in English,
except for shareholder and director information, which is mostly in Thai.
1

The Department of Business Development was previously known as the Department of Commercial
Registration until the government reorganization that became effective in October 2002.

1

(4) Listed Company Info (SET) In addition to submitting the annual report to the Ministry
of Commerce, all the listed firms must summit the same report and additional data to the Stock
Exchange of Thailand (SET). The data that SET makes available to the investors and generally
public include company profile, quarterly consolidated and unconsolidated financial statements,
daily trading information, announcement and news, among others. The data was digital and came
in a series of CD-ROMs. Recently, the Stock Exchange of Thailand changed the format of

the data from CD-ROM to online access. Unfortunately, the online access contains only
the data for the past 5 years. All the data is in English.
A.2 Construction of Firm Dataset
We construct our dataset from several sources listed above. We start by taking the list of firms
directly from Thailand Company Information 1997-1998, which publishes the financial data for
the end of 1996. The criteria that TCI used in selecting the firms to be included is that the firm
must either (1) have annual revenues of at least 200 million Baht (approximately eight million US
dollars), (2) are listed on the Stock Exchange of Thailand, or (3) are one of the leading companies
in its industry. In total, there are 2,153 firms included in TCI’s 1996 list. All of these firms form
our sample for 1996. Our 1996 sample therefore includes all publicly traded firms and the largest
privately held firms in Thailand. For all firms, we get the general firm’s profiles (registration
number, name, type of business and founding year) from TCI 1997-1998 books.
The 1996 information on shareholders, board of directors and financial statements come
from two sources. For non-listed firms, we rely on the TCI books for all of these data as it was the
only source available except for the direct request from the Department of Business
Development. However, for listed firms, we get the data from SET’s Listed Company Info CDROMs because the data is digitalized and it distinguishes between consolidated and
unconsolidated financial statements. We use unconsolidated financial statements in our analysis.

B. Family Data
B.1 Data Sources
Our objective is to construct family trees for the family groups in our sample that are as accurate
and comprehensive as possible. For that purpose we rely on a number of sources. We start with
information from a publication by the Brooker Group entitled Thai Business Groups: A Unique
Guide to Who Owns What. This book identifies the 150 leading business groups in Thailand and
covers the history of each of these groups since the time the first business was founded until
today. The next step is constructing family trees of these business families listed in the Brooker
book. Specifically, for each of the family business groups, we identify its founder and try to trace
all of his direct descendants to the youngest active generation. To make the definition on family
size consistent across families, we do not count the siblings and their descendants as a part of the
family when we compute the family size because this set of information is incomplete for many
families. However, the information is useful when we analyze the involvement of family
members in family business so we still collect the information on the founder’s siblings and their
descendents whenever possible. We also ignore family members that are younger than 15 in the

2

late 1990s by including in our family tree only individuals with Mr., Mrs., Miss, Lady
(Thanpuying and Khunying), Dr., or military titles.2
Although the Booker book helps us identify the prominent business family and construct
some family trees, it does not provide systematic information on the full family trees of all the
families. We therefore gather more detailed descriptions of the business families from several
alternative sources. The most useful source is from various biography books written on several
Thai millionaires. For example, Sapphaibul (2001a, b) provide impressive information on 55 of
the most famous business families. In addition, it is customary in Thailand when a public person
dies that the descendants compile a funeral book that contains information about the person's life
and his or her family relationships. When available, we also collect the family tree information
from the funeral books published and distributed for the group founders or other family members.
Next, we supplement the information from books with articles from various local Magazine and
newspapers. These articles are usually either a story about a famous family or an interview with a
group founder or his descendants. The full list of the biography and funeral books as well as
articles is at the end of this appendix. We also collect a number of small news clips from social
columns in several daily newspapers. Most of these news clips are on engagement announcement,
wedding, divorce, death, funeral arrangement, obituary, and anniversary celebration. Finally, we
conducted informal interviews with family members of a few business families to verify the
accuracy of our data.
B.2 Construction of Family Dataset
With the descriptive information we gather from several sources, we code the
information systematically. We include in our family trees all of the family members we identify,
whether or not they are involved in the family business. The founder generation is coded as
generation one, his children are generation two, and so on. For each family member, we collect
information on their specific position in the family tree (defined as the relationship to the
founder), gender, birth order (defined as the rank order of children within a specific marriage),
and biological vs. adopted status. With less coverage and accuracy, we also code the information
on individual education, working experiences, and involvement in family business. We also relied
on these sources to identify which specific family members, if any, had been designated as “heir"
of the family business. Note that we cannot systematically track whether a given family member
in our family tree is still alive or not. However, we do know for all families whether the founder
is still alive or not as of 1996.
Finally, for each family member, we collect the information on the name of the spouse(s)
whenever possible. This information will be especially interesting for the founders, since several
of them have multiple wives and also children from multiple wives. We do not, however, count
spouses as part of the family when we construct measures of family size. We carefully keep track
of changes in last names, especially for married female family members and her descendants.
(More details below.) We also gather the information on relationships across families through
marriages.
As a whole, we construct family trees for 93 business families. Ninety four of them are
among the Brooker’s list; three of them are additional. By alphabetical order, the families
included in our data are Asadathorn, Asavabhokin, Assakul, Bencharongkul, Bhirom Bhakdi,
Bodiratnangkura, Boondicharern, Boonnamsap, Boonsoong, Bulakul, Bulsook, Chaiyawan,
2

In Thailand, a person drops his or her junior title and starts using Mr. or Miss when he or she turns 15.

3

Chansiri, Chansrichwala, Charnvirakul, Chearavanont, Chirathivat, Chokwatana, Chotitawan,
Darakananda, Dumnernchanvanit, Hetrakul, Horrungruang, Jantaranukul, Jungrungruangkit,
Kanathanavanich, Karnasuta, Karnchanachari, Karnchanapas, Kiangsiri, Kitiparaporn,
Krisdathanont, Kunanantakul, Kuvanant, Lailert/YipInTsoi/Chutrakul, Lamsam, Laohathai, LeeIssaranukul, Leelaprachakul, Leelasithorn, Leenutaphong, Leeswadtrakul, Leophairatana,
Lertsumitrkul, Mahadumrongkul, Mahagitsiri, Maleenont, Nakornsri, Narongdej, Nithivasin,
Osathanugrah, Phaoenchoke, Phatraprasit, Phenjati, Phodhivorakhun, Phongsathorn,
Phornprapha,
Piyaoui,
Poolvoralaks,
Prasarttong-Osot,
Raiva/Sila-on,
Ratanarak,
Sermsirimongkol, Shinawatra, Sirivadhanabhakdi, Sophonpanich, Srifuengfung, Sriorathaikul,
Srivikorn, Sukosol, Supsakorn, Suriyasat, Tangkaravakoon, Tangmatitham, Tantipipatpong,
Tantipong-anant, Techaruvichit, Tejapaibul, Tejavibul, Tuchinda, Uahwatanasakul, Umpujh,
Vacharaphol, Vanich, Vilailuck, Viraporn, Viriyabhan, Viriyaprapaikit, Vongvanij, Wanglee,
Wattanavekin, Wongkusolkit, and Yoovidhaya. The main characteristics of each family are
shown in Table A1.

B.3 Matching Family Data with Firm Data
The next task is putting the firm data and the family data together. First, we match the
names listed as shareholders and directors to the names listed in our constructed family
trees. It is very common that a Thai name is translated into different versions of English
spelling so we pay a significant attention when we match the names.
Next, for the firms belonging to our 93 families, we identify firms that belong to
each of our 93 business families. The criterion is that the family as a whole has the
highest percentage of ultimate ownership in that company. Ultimate ownership is defines
as the cash-flow rights derived from holding shares in the firm directly or indirectly
through pyramids or cross-shareholdings. The main characteristics of each family business
group are shown in Table A2.

Note that we are very careful in matching female family members by looking at
both their current last name and their maiden name. Specifically, to alleviate the concern
that a female family member may change her last name after marriage, we match the
female names in two steps:
First Step: Starting with the family trees, we match the records where both the first name
and the last name are perfectly identical (after correcting for various ways of spelling the same
Thai names in English). Out of 4,408 records of ownership, 3,269 individual names and last
names (74.16%) were matched in this first stage. Note that we considered both the original last
name of the individual and the last name of her husband. Out of 232 daughters in our family trees,
102 have husband's last name. Obviously, we may miss some of the last names, but it is also
likely that some of those daughters without husband's last name were indeed not married, and
when they got married the last name in the firm database at the Ministry of Commerce may not
get updated. We address this concern in the second step.

4

Second Step: For each of the names in the family tree that were not matched in the first
step, we check whether it could have been due to the change in last name. Specifically, we
perform a match between family tree and firm records just based on first names. We can
confidently apply this strategy since it is extremely rare in the Thai culture to give the same first
name to more than one person within the same family. This is done for each of the families. There
is only one case where we found the same first name in the family tree and firm records, but
different last names. For this particular one case, we do not consider this person as a family
member.
Given the very small number (e.g. one) of cases we identify under step 2, we are quite
confident that our name matching covers most of the family members listed in our family trees
and there is no systematic bias between male and female family members in the matching
process.
References for Family Information
I. Books
In English
Akira, Suehiro. Capital Accumulation in Thailand: 1855-1985. Chiangmai, Thailand: Silk Worm
Books, 1996.
Brooker Group, The. Thai Business Groups 2001: A Unique Guide to Who Owns What, 4th
edition. Bangkok, 2001.
Brooker Group, The. Thai Business Groups: A Unique Guide to Who Owns What, 5th edition.
Bangkok, 2003.
In Thai
Chantimathorn, Sathien. Chin Sophonpanich: The King of Finance. Bangkok: Matichon
Publishing, 1988.
Jaiyen, Boonchai. Lives of Thai Millionaires: Their Family and Their Business. Bangkok,
undated.
Jaiyen, Boonchai. Heirs of Thai Millionaires: Their Family and Their Business. Bangkok,
undated.
Jaiyen, Boonchai. The Riches Man in Thailand: Charoen Sirivadhanabhakdi. Bangkok: Dokya
Group Publishing, 2003.
Kongnirandornsuk, Supranee. Studying Crisis for New Opportunities, Manager Classic No.1,
Bangkok: Se-Education, 2002.
Limthongkul, Sonti. Mafia (Chao Por), Manager Classic No.5, Bangkok: Se-Education, 2002.
Limthongkul, Sonti. New Comer, Manager Classic No.3, Bangkok: Se-Education, 2002.
Maneenoi, Chupong. Lives of 25 Millionaires (Set 2). Bangkok: Finance and Banking Publishing,
1986.
Sabphaibul, Athiwat. The Great Four Warriors. Bangkok: Vanasarn Publishing, 2003.
Sabphaibul, Thanawat. 25 Business Millionaires. Bangkok: Pim Kam Publisher, 2003.
Sabphaibul, Thanawat. Life of the Lamsam Millionaire, 2nd edition. Bangkok: Bangkok Biz News
Publisher, 2000.

5

Sabphaibul, Thanawat. The Legend of 55 Business Families: Book 1. Bangkok: Nation
Publishing, 2001.
Sabphaibul, Thanawat. The Legend of 55 Business Families: Book 2. Bangkok: Nation
Publishing, 2001.
Saengthongkam, Wirat, and Kongnirandornsuk, Supranee, eds. The Player, Manager Classic
No.7, Bangkok: Se-Education, 2002.
Saengthongkam, Wirat; Thangsriwong, Pandop; and Damrongsunthornchai, Somsak. 70-Year
Chirathivat: Central, Manager Classic No.7, Bangkok: Se-Education, 2002.
Yipphan. Yesterday Millionaires: The Merchants. Bangkok: Nation Publishing, 2003.
Yipphan. Yesterday Millionaires: The Bankers. Bangkok: Nation Publishing, 2003.
Young Blood, Business Interest, Special Issue, 1993.
II. Funeral Books (All are in Thai)
Attaphorn Leenutphong, 2001.
Bancha Lamsam, August 1992.
Boonkrong Bulakul, February 1980.
Nongyao Kanchanacharee, November 1996.
Samrit Chirathivat, November, 1992.
Shin Sophonpanich, April 1987.
Thanpuying Niramol Suriyasat, 2003.
Tiam Chokwatana, August 1991.
Tan Sew Ting Wanglee, November 1985.
III. Magazine and Newspaper Articles (All are in Thai)
“108 Years of British Dispensary (L.P.),” Manager Magazine, June 2000.
“24 Key Men of Laemthong Bank,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, February 1996, pp.3248.
“6 Heirs of Maleenont Family,” Manager Magazine, June 1999.
“After Tiam: Profits Rather Than Growth,” Manager Magazine, September 1991, pp.192-200.
“Anan Asavabhokin and ‘Land And House’,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, May 1995,
pp.14-41.
“Angubokul Family,” Praew, July 2004, pp.160-162.
“Anuphong Asavabhokin: Waiting to Prove Himself,” Manager Magazine, May 2003.
“Apirak Vanich: Following Akapoj,” Manager Magazine, July 1992, pp.80-81.
“Asavabhokin Family: The Owner of Land & House,” Boss Magazine, July 1998, pp.78-81.
“Assakul Family: The Owner of Ocean Insurance,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.182-185.
“Assakul: Quiet and Deep Business,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.87-94.
“Attaporn Leenutphong: The Legend of Yontrakit,” Manager Magazine, March 2001.
“Banthoon Lamsam – Somkid Jatusripitak,” Manager Magazine, September 2003.
“Before Nailing the Coffin of Chanut Piyaoui,” Manager Magazine, undated, pp.146-155.
“Bencharongkul Family: The Owner of UCOM Group” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.106-109.
“Bhirom Bhakdi and the Legend of Thai Beer,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.20-30.
“Bhirom Bhakdi Family: The Owner of Singha Beer” Boss Magazine, August 1997, pp.174-177.

6

“Boonnam Boonnamsap: A Chinese in Japanese Body,” Manager Magazine, December 1990,
pp.103-127.
“Boonrawd Diversifying to Yacht Market,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, October 1996,
pp.50-81.
“Boonsithi Chokwatana ‘Saha Group Will Be Ten Times Bigger’,” Who’s Who in Business &
Finance, March 1996, pp.14-26.
“Bulakul Family, Part 1” Praew, No.1, April 2005, pp.366-368.
“Bulakul Family, Part 2” Praew, No.2, April 2005, pp.376-378.
“Bulakul Family: The Owner of Maboonkrong Building” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.174-177.
“Bulsook Family: The Owner of Thai Pepsi,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.158-161.
“Central Group: The Change of Generations,” Manager Magazine, April 2003.
“Central to the 3rd Generation: Maybe Not Chirathivat’s? Manager Magazine, October 1986.
“Chai Chaiyawan: The 2nd Generation of the Family,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance
Magazine, January 1996, pp.23-28.
“Chai Sophonpanich ‘I Cannot Retire’,” Manager Magazine, June 2003.
“Chaiyudh Srivikorn: Heir of the Family,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, February 1995,
pp.64-67.
“Chanut Piyaoui,” Manager Magazine, February 2000.
“Chanut Piyaoui: Dividing the Wealth,” Manager Magazine, February 2001.
“Chansrichawala Family: The Owner of Siam Vidhaya Group” Boss Magazine, Special Edition
1996, pp.122-125.
“Charoen Sirivadhanabhakdi: Transferring the Army to His Children,” Manager Magazine,
March 2003, pp.34-54.
“Chatikavanich Family: The Owner of Loxley,” Boss Magazine, July 1997, pp.190-193.
“Charn Issara: Ready to Retire?” Manager Magazine, 1988, pp.6-33.
“Chearavanont Family: The Owner of CP Group” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.5457.
“Cherdchu Sophonpanich: Who Is He? Manager Magazine, October 2003.
“Chirathivat Family: King of Thai Department Stores, Part 1” Praew, No.1, March 2005, pp.326328.
“Chirathivat Family: King of Thai Department Stores, Part 2” Praew, No.2, March 2005, pp.350352.
“Chirathivat Family: The Owner of Central Department Store” Boss Magazine, October 1997,
pp.168-171.
“Chirathivat: Family Council,” Manager Magazine, October 2000.
“Chokwatana Conquering Consumer Product Empire,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.6273.
“Chokwattana Family: King of Thai Customer Products, Part 1” Praew, No.1, September 2004,
pp.384-386.
“Chokwattana Family: King of Thai Customer Products, Part 2” Praew, No.2, September 2004,
pp.272-274.
“Chokwatana Family: The Owner of Sahapattanaphibul” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.102-105.
“Chokwattana’s Third Generation: Thammarat Chokwattana and Theerada Amphanwong,”
Manager Magazine, March 2003.
“Cholvicharn Family: The Owner of Union Bank” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.7477.
“Chuan Tangmatitham: Grow and Split,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.137-140.
“Critical Period of Samart Group,” Manager Magazine, February 1992, pp.150-162.

7

“Darakananda Family: The Owner of Saha-Union” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.210213.
“Doctor Boon Vanasin,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance Magazine, January 1990, pp.125129.
“Dr.Chaiyudh Kanasutra,” Manager Magazine, undated, pp.25-47.
“Exclusive Chatree Sphonpanich,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, December 1994, pp.1426.
“Heir of Chatree,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, December 1994, pp.36-37.
“Hetrakul Family: The Owner of Daily News” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.110-113.
“Issara Family: The Owner of Charn Issara Tower,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.126-129.
“Jakkapak Family: The Owner of Finance One” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.130133.
“Kamron Tejapaibul and Mahanakorn Bank,”undated, pp.35-38.
“Kanasutra Family: The Owner of Ital-Thai Group” Boss Magazine, April 1996, pp.86-89.
“Kanasutra General Assembly: Exciting till the End,” Manager Magazine, January 1987, pp.7687.
“Karnchanachari Family: The Owner of Seaw-National” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.190-193.
“Karnchanapas Family: The Owner of Muangthong Thani” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.66-69.
“Karnchanapas Family: The Road to Real-Estate Tycoon, Part 1” Praew, No.2, November 2004,
pp.-362364.
“Karnchanapas Family: The Road to Real-Estate Tycoon, Part 2” Praew, No.1, December 2004,
pp.422-424.
“Karnchanapas Family: The Road to Real-Estate Tycoon, Part 3” Praew, No.2, December 2004,
pp.328-330.
“Keeree Kanchanapas,” Manager Magazine, April 2003.
“Keeree Karnchanapas: The Great Dragon,” Manager Magazine, April 1991, pp.138-152.
“Khunying Sasima Srivikorn,” Manager Magazine, October/November 1987, pp.146-155.
“Kiet Srifuengfung,” Manager Magazine, October/November 1987, pp.117-129.
“Krisdathanont Family: The Owner of Krisda Mahanakorn,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition
1996, pp.206-209.
“Lamsam: The Great Family,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.36-47.
“Land And House: How Long It Will Last?” Manager Magazine, September 1993, pp.102-122.
“Leenutaphong Family: From Scraps to Automobile Empire,” Praew, No.1, October 2004,
pp.402-404.
“Leenutphong Family: The Owner of Yontrakit” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.170173.
“Leeswadtrakul Family: The Owner of Anoma Hotel” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.194-197.
“Lenso: To the Telecommunication Business,” Manager Magazine, April 1994, pp.110-118.
“Luanchai Vongvanich’s Vision,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, February 1996, pp.22-30.

8

“M. Thai Group,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, January 1995, pp.55-58.
“Maboonkrong: A Memorial for Sirichai Bulakul,” undated, pp.82-96.
“Mahadamrongkul Family: The Owner of Nakornluang Thai Bank” Boss Magazine, Special
Edition 1996, pp.30-33.
“Mahadamrongkul: Setting Time, Finding Future,” Manager Magazine, December 1993, pp.144156.
“Maleenont Family: The Founder of Channel 3,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.125128.
“Mazda Took over Sukosol,” Manager Magazine, May 1999.
“Narin Naruela and Tower Records,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, January 1997, pp.5155.
“New Blood,” Manager Magazine, May 2003.
“Osathanugrah Family: The Owner of Osotspa” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.50-53.
“Osotspa 2000,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, April 1995, pp.15-43.
“Osotspa: Osathanugrah’s Monopoly,” Manager Magazine, undated, pp.89-99.
“Pathra Sila-on: The Oldest Sister of S&P,” Manager Magazine, September 2001.
“Phenjati Family: The Owner of Phenjati Tower,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.198201.
“Phornprapa Family: The Owner of Siam Motor” Boss Magazine, November 1997, pp.176-179.
“Phornprapa: Toward Thai Automobile Empire,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.74-85.
“Piyaoui Family: The Owner of Disit Thani Hotel” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.178181.
“Pong Sarasin on the Political Road,” Manager Magazine, December 1990, pp.169-170.
“Poolvoralaks Family: King of Thai Movie Theaters, Part 1” Praew, No.1, January 2005, pp.298300.
“Poolvoralaks Family: King of Thai Movie Theaters, Part 2” Praew, No.2, January 2005, pp.294296.
“Poolvoraluks Family: The Owner of RGV Theaters” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.142-145.
“Pornsanong Tuchinda: The Last Heir of Thai Dhanu Bank?” Manager Magazine, November
1999.
“Prachai Leophairatana: Local Hero,” Manager Magazine, May 2000.
“Prapa Viriyaprapaikit: Difficult to Read,” Manager Magazine, undated, pp.156-159.
“Sahakol Air: Will Prasert Prasarttong-Osot Fail?” Manager Magazine, January 1987, pp.88-95.
“Sarasin Family: The Owner of Thai Coca-Cola” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.86-89.
“Sasima Srivikorn: Reaching to the Star,” Manager Magazine, March 1999.
“Sawas Horrungruang: Dead Man Walking,” Manager Magazine, January 2003.
“Shinnawatra Family: The Owner of Shin Group” Boss Magazine, August 1998, pp.98-101.
“Siam Motor: How Pornthip-Kasem Keep It?” Manager Magazine, undated, pp.38-84.
“Siam Motor: The End of Thavorn or Phornprapa?” Manager Magazine, November 1986, pp.6197.
“Singha Beer: Reorganization,” Manager Magazine, August 2003.
“Sirivadhanabhakdi Family: The Owner of Mekong Brandy” Boss Magazine, Special Edition
1996, pp.46-49.
“Sophonpanich: From Bank to Business,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.22-34.
“Sophonpanich: Managing the Business Bequest,” Manager Magazine, undated, pp.39-64.

9

“Srifuengfung Family: The Owner of Thai-Asahi Glass” Boss Magazine, December 1997,
pp.170-173.
“Srifuengfung Is Thai-Asahi Glass,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.106-113.
“Srivikorn Family: From Landlord to Tycoon,” Praew, June 2004, pp.110-112.
“Srivikorn Family: The Owner of President Hotel” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.134137.
“Subaru Music Award,” Businessman Magazine, undate, pp.51-55.
“Sunrise at Channel 3: The Golden Era of Maleenont’s Second Generation,” Manager Magazine,
June 1999.
“Supachai Chearavanont: Crisis Coming with Opportunities,” Manager Magazine, September
1999.
“Supachai Umpujh: From Stock-Checking Boy to Owner of the Mall Group,” Manager
Magazine, August 1987, pp.115-124.
“Supaluck Umpujh,” Manager Magazine, April 2003.
“Surang Dumnernchanvanit (1932-2002),” Manager Magazine, February 2003.
“Surangrat Chirathivat: Central Iron Lady,” Manager Magazine, October 1990, pp.8-9.
“Suriyon Raiva: The First Tycoon,” Manager Magazine, October/November 1987.
“Suthichart Chirathivat: The Leader of Generation 3,” Manager Magazine, March 2003.
“Suvit Wanglee on His Heir,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, January 1995, pp.35-54.
“Suvit Wanglee: The Gentleman of Nakornthon Bank,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.2429.
“Syberia: Internet Café,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, January 1997, pp.29-32.
“Tangkaravakoon Family, Part 1,” Praew, No.2, October 2004, pp.370-372.
“Tangkaravakoon Family, Part 2” Praew, No.1, November 2004, pp.376-378.
“Tangmatitham Family: The Owner of Mankong Kehakarn” Boss Magazine, Special Edition
1996, pp.186-189.
“Tejapaibul Family: The Legend, Part 1” Praew, No.1, February 2005, pp.318-320.
“Tejapaibul Family: The Legend, Part 2” Praew, No.2, February 2005, pp.302-304.
“Tejapaibul Family: The Owner of Srinakorn Bank” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.62
-65.
“Tejapaibul: The Greatness of Udane,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.48-56.
“Thai Banks before the Fall (1962-1997),” Manager Magazine, February 2000.
“Thai Dhanu Bank and Its Challenge,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, March 1996, pp.2747.
“Thai-Asahi Glass,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.47-51.
“The 60 Hotels in the Hand of an Iron Lady, Khunying Chanut Piyaoui,” Who’s Who in Business
& Finance, July 1995, pp.16-35.
“The Doctor Who Cure Wongkusolkit,” Manager Magazine, February 1991, pp.42-44.
“The End of Euchukiet-Pathraprasit Legend of Bank of Asia 1998,” Manager Magazine, August
1998.
“The End of Srinakorn Bank: Not Surprising,” Manager Magazine, June 2003.
“The Fighting of the Machine Mogul,” Manager Magazine, December 1990, pp.128-151.
“The Future of British Dispensary in the Hands of Anurut and Luenchai Vongvanich,” Who’s
Who in Business & Finance, February 1996, pp.15-21.
“The Greatness of Soon Hua Seng,” Manager Magazine, pp.140-159.
“The Heavy Loads on Srivikorn Family,” Manager Magazine, March 1999.
“The Last Paper of Dr. Chaiyud Kanasutra,” Manager Magazine, February 1999.
“The Latest Situation of Wanglee Family,” Manager Magazine, August 1999.
“The Man Behind…,” Manager Magazine, July 2003.
“The Man in front of Bancha Lamsam,” Manager Magazine, February 1992.

10

“The New Leader of Central,” Manager Magazine, May 1992.
“The Thai Rungrueng Empire,” Manager Magazine, December 1987, pp.113-132.
“Theerada Amphanwong (Chokwattana),” Manager Magazine, May 1999.
“Theeraphong Chansiri: The man behind TUF,” Manager Magazine, October 1998.
“Time to Prove: Suthipong Chirathivat,” Manager Magazine, June 1998.
“To the Future with Petrochemicals,” Manager Magazine, May 2000.
“Tracking Sophonpanich’s Wealth Abroad,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance, December 1994,
pp.31-35.
“Trouble on Central-Chirathivat,” Manager Magazine, February 2003.
“Tuchinda Family: The Owner of Thai Dhanu Bank” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.150-153.
“Two Roles, Two Leaders in Sahaphat,” Manager Magazine, May 1999.
“Umpujh Family: The Owner of The Mall” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.138-141.
“Unveiling 7,000 Million Empire of Prapad Phodhivorakhun,” April 1996, pp.14-32.
“Unveiling the Heirs of Business Empires,” Thairath, July 28, 2004.
“Unveiling the Management Team of Nakornthon Bank,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance,
December 1995, pp.28-38.
“Unveiling the Management Team of Union Bank of Bangkok,” Who’s Who in Business &
Finance, July 1995, 36-64.
“Vacharaphol Family: The Owner of Thairath Newspaper,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition
1996, pp.82-85.
“Vanasin Family: The Owner of Thonburi Hospital,” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.202-205.
“Vanich Family,” Manager Magazine, December 1999.
“Vanich-Chai Chaiyawan and the Future of Thai Insurance,” Who’s Who in Business & Finance,
January 1996, pp.15-22.
“Vichai Poolvoralaks: High-Tech Movie Theaters?” Manager Magazine, January 1998.
“Viriyaprapaikit Family: The Owner of Sahaviriya Group” Boss Magazine, September 1997,
pp.168-171.
“Viriyaprapaikit: Growth fromVision,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.114-118.
“Vongvanich Family: The Owner of British Dispensary” Boss Magazine, March 1997, pp.183186.
“Wanglee Family: The Owner of Nakornthon Bank” Boss Magazine, August 1998, pp.84-87.
“Wanglee: Slow but Sure,” Businessman Magazine, undated, pp.57-61.
“Wanglee’s Family Saga,” undated, pp.104-122.
“Wattanavekin Family: The Owner of Kiatnakin Finance” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996,
pp.166-169.
“Wisut Poolvoralaks: A Man Who Makes Thais Love Thai Movies,” Manager Magazine, January
2000.
“Yoovidhaya Family: The Owner of Red Bulls” Boss Magazine, Special Edition 1996, pp.70-73.

11

