NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE, PRODUCTION SHARING, AND THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION
OF BUSINESS CYCLES
Ariel Burstein
Christopher Kurz
Linda Tesar
Working Paper 13731
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13731

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

¸˛We thank Jon Faust, Patrick Kehoe, Ayhan Kose, Virgiliu Midrigan, Kei-Mu Yi, Fabrizio Perri,
Jing Zhang, and an anonymous referee for very useful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Ariel Burstein, Christopher Kurz, and Linda Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade, Production Sharing, and the International Transmission of Business Cycles
Ariel Burstein, Christopher Kurz, and Linda Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 13731
January 2008
JEL No. F4,F41
ABSTRACT
Countries that are more engaged in production sharing exhibit higher bilateral manufacturing output
correlations. We use data on trade flows between US multinationals and their affiliates as well as trade
between the United States and Mexican maquiladoras to measure production-sharing trade and its
link with the business cycle. We then develop a quantitative model of international business cycles
that generates a positive link between the extent of vertically integrated production-sharing trade and
internationally synchronized business cycles. A key assumption in the model is a relatively low elasticity
of substitution between home and foreign inputs in the production of the vertically integrated good.

Ariel Burstein
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365
Box 951477
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu

Linda Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu

Christopher Kurz
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th and C Streets NW
Mail Stop 82
Washington, DC 20551
Christopher.J.Kurz@frb.gov

1. Introduction
The importance of trade in the propagation of business cycles has received considerable attention in international macroeconomics, dating back to the writings of Kindleberger (1962)
and Meltzer (1976). Recent empirical studies have found evidence of a positive link between
the bilateral volume of trade and business cycle synchronization (see, for example, Frankel
and Rose 1998, Clark and van Wincoop 2001, and Kose and Yi 2006). Various theoretical
mechanisms have been examined that generate, under certain conditions, a positive link
between international trade and international business cycle comovement, including dependence on foreign inputs, common external shocks such as changes in oil prices, aggregate
demand shocks, and other aggregate shocks whose cross-country correlation is related to the
extent of international trade (see, for example, Backus, Kydland and Kehoe 1995, Baxter
1995, Stockman and Tesar 1995, Backus and Crucini 2000, Kose and Yi 2006). In this paper,
we examine an alternative mechanism. We argue that pairs of countries that are more engaged in production sharing also exhibit higher comovements of business cycles. We measure
this positive link in the data and quantify its importance in a model of international business
cycles.
Production sharing is defined as trade in intermediate goods that are part of vertically
integrated production networks that cross international borders. Communications and transportation technology has evolved to the point that firms find it both feasible and profitable
to slice up the production chain into separate parts or stages that can be performed in different locations according to region- or country-specific comparative advantage. Hummels,
Ishii and Yi (2001) and Yi (2003) describe this phenomenon in detail.1
Such vertical integration creates close interdependencies between diﬀerent parts of the
firm located across national borders. For example, following the attacks on 9/11, border
crossings between the United States and Canada were closed and many of the "big three"
auto plants stood idle waiting for parts shipments from Canada.2 The outbreak of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) virus in Asia raised widespread concerns about a
possible interruption in the production of power supplies for laptop computers. According to
1

This division of production processes into separate stages is also referred to as vertical specialization,
desintegration or fragmentation of production, and oﬀ-shoring. Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001) argue that
production sharing accounts for more than one-third of world export growth between 1970 and 1995.
2
The eﬀects of 9/11 on US-Canada trade are discussed in a 2002 Council of Foreign Relations report,
"America still unprepared - America still in danger," headed by Congressmen Hart and Rudman.

2

industry analysts, a quarantine of China would have meant "nuclear winter to the semiconductor and electronics industry."3 Similarly, production of the new Boeing 787 Dreamliner
involves a supply chain of 50 suppliers on four continents, with final manufacture taking
place at Boeing plants in Everett, Washington. Foreign suppliers account for roughly 70
percent of the parts needed to manufacture the airplane. Boeing makes foreign suppliers
aware that failure to deliver a particular component can, and has, resulted in a shutdown of
the production line.4
Despite these illustrations of global production sharing and cross-border interdependencies, it is diﬃcult to systematically measure the extent of production sharing activities at
business cycle frequencies. In this paper, we measure production sharing using trade flows
between US multinationals and their foreign aﬃliates, as well as trade flows between the
United States and Mexico through maquiladoras. These imperfect, yet informative, measures
of production sharing have been used by other researchers, including Chen, Kondratowicz,
and Yi (2005) and Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2005). We summarize the data on the
extent of production sharing and its connection to the business cycle as follows. First, trade
flows associated with production sharing are more correlated with US manufacturing output
than are trade flows that are not associated with production sharing. Second, for a large
cross-section of countries that host US aﬃliates, those with larger production-sharing trade
links with the US also have higher manufacturing output correlations with the US. Third, for
these countries we find that the share of production sharing in trade is at least as important
as the total volume of trade in accounting for bilateral manufacturing output correlations.
We then develop a model of international business cycles to quantify the role of vertically
integrated production sharing links in the transmission of the business cycle. Our model
extends the framework of Backus, Kydland and Kehoe (1995)—henceforth BKK—to allow for
these links in production. A key assumption in the model is that the elasticity of substitution
between home and foreign intermediate goods is relatively lower if there is a productionsharing arrangement between locations. In particular, we assume that the location of plants
and assembly lines are unresponsive to shocks at business cycle frequencies, creating a tight
dependence of the production chain on inputs from a particular source. This complementarity
3

See “Analysis: Asia casts shadow over supply chain,” EE Times, April 1, 2003.
For
a
graphic
illustration
of
the
global
supply
chain
for
the
787,
see
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/boeingaerospace.
For an account of Boeing’s relation with
its suppliers, see “Supplier visits strengthen Boeing 737 program,” http://www.sme.org/cgi-bin/getnewsletter.pl?LEAN&20060815&5&
4

3

in the production of the vertically integrated final good mutes substitution eﬀects stemming
from aggregate shocks to relative costs across countries.5 Consistent with our data, the
model generates a higher comovement between production-sharing trade flows and output in
the source country relative to non-production-sharing trade flows. The model also produces
a positive link between the share of production sharing in total trade and output correlations
in manufacturing. This link, however, is lower than the positive link generated by the model
between overall trade volumes and output correlations in manufacturing industries, with the
extent of the diﬀerence depending on how production-sharing trade flows are accounted for
in measures of trade flows.
Our work is related to a large literature on business cycles and international trade. It
diﬀers from Frankel and Rose (1998) and other empirical work that studies the positive
link between the share of trade in GDP and output correlations by focusing on the relation
between the production-sharing intensity of trade and output correlations in manufacturing.
Kose and Yi (2001 and 2006) show that in a standard model of international business cycles,
trade has a very small eﬀect on overall cross-country GDP correlations given the small
shares of trade in GDP for most countries. We focus on manufacturing industries, which
have higher trade shares, and show in our model that increasing the share of trade has a
bigger impact on GDP correlations in the presence of production-sharing trade. Our work
also relates to studies of international business cycles that examine the impact of diﬀering
degrees of substitutability in traded intermediate inputs on business cycles (see, for example,
BKK, Ambler, Cardia and Zimmerman 2002, and Heathcote and Perri 2002).6 Our paper
motivates diﬀerences in the degree of substitution between inputs based on the extent of
production sharing in bilateral trade flows. Other related work that studies macroeconomic
models of vertical integration and trade include Yi (2003), focusing on the increase in trade
volumes over time, and Bergin, Feenstra, and Hanson (2007), focusing on the higher volatility
of production-sharing industries in host, relative to source, economies.7
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents some evidence on the link between
the extent of production sharing, trade volumes, and business cycle comovement. Section 3
5

These substitution eﬀects can imply that an increase in international trade leads to lower international
business cycle correlations (see for example Heathcote and Perri 2002 and Kose and Yi 2006).
6
Drozd and Nosal (2007) study the trade-comovement relation using an alternative framework based on
search and matching frictions.
7
There is also a literature that develops rich models of oﬀshoring and international trade, that abstract
from business cycle considerations. See, for example, Antras and Helpman (2004), Grossman and Helpman
(2005), Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006), and references therein.

4

describes the model. Section 4 examines the model’s quantitative implications for the link
between the volume of international trade, the extent of production sharing, and international business cycles. Section 5 concludes.

2. Some evidence on production sharing, trade and business cycle
fluctuations.
This section documents the importance of production sharing in international trade flows
and the relation between production sharing and international business cycles. We examine
trade flows between US multinational companies and their aﬃliates and trade flows between
the US and Mexican maquiladoras. Trade flows associated with production sharing are
more synchronized with output in the US relative to trade flows that are not associated with
production sharing. We then examine the link between the volume of bilateral productionsharing trade flows (as a fraction of output and trade) and bilateral output correlations in
manufacturing. We find a positive relationship between the share of production sharing
and bilateral manufacturing output correlations. When accounting for this positive link, the
intensity of production sharing in trade is at least as important as the total volume of trade
in output.8
Trade between multinationals and their foreign aﬃliates
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) reports data on intermediate inputs shipped
from US parents to majority-owned aﬃliates, as well as sales of US aﬃliates back to the US.
This data provides only an imperfect measure of production sharing as not all trade flows
from aﬃliates to parents have US input or process content and, similarly, some trade flows
from the parent to the aﬃliate are final goods without further content added by the aﬃliate.9
Moreover, this data captures only intra-firm trade and omits arms-length production-sharing
activities. However, the BEA data has been extensively used in the literature as a way of
measuring of production sharing. See, for example, Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter (2005),
and Chen, Kondratowicz and Yi (2005).
8

More details on the data used in this section can be found in the Appendix and in the notes of the
individual tables and charts.
9
This is an important consideration for US-Europe trade, as US-owned aﬃliates regularly ship final
products that are not intensive in US processes or inputs (for example, exports of cars from Sweden, or
pharmaceuticals from Ireland).

5

Panel A of Table 1 shows the sales of US aﬃliates located in Canada, Mexico, Europe and
Japan to the US, as a share of total aﬃliate sales. By 2003, a significant fraction (30 − 35%)
of the sales of aﬃliates in the NAFTA region are sales back to the US, suggesting that
aﬃliates are part of a vertically integrated production chain, and the goods are ultimately
shipped back to the US. In contrast, less than 10% of the sales of European and Japanese
aﬃliates are sales to the US, evidence that the activity of those aﬃliates is quite diﬀerent
from aﬃliates in Canada and Mexico.10
Panel B shows the ratio of exports from US parents to their aﬃliates as a fraction of
the total sales of aﬃliates. Again, there is an apparent diﬀerence between the activities of
aﬃliates in Canada and Mexico relative to Europe and Japan. Exports of intermediate goods
to aﬃliates account for roughly 20 − 45% of the total sales volume of aﬃliates in the NAFTA

region, but less than 10% of the sales volume for the aggregate of Europe and Japan. This

suggests that much more of the production by US aﬃliates in Europe and Asia is done where
the aﬃliate is located, with less dependence on intermediate inputs from the US parent.
Finally, Panel C provides a measure of the production-sharing intensity of trade by calculating for each country or region the ratio of aﬃliate sales of manufactured goods to the
US parent as a share of total manufacturing exports to the US. The figures suggest that
the production-sharing intensity of trade is higher within NAFTA (roughly 50% for Canada,
25% for Mexico), than for Japan (roughly 2%) and Europe (roughly 15%).11

12

Maquiladora trade
Data on manufacturing and trade of Mexican maquiladoras provides information on the
extent of production sharing between the US and Mexico at business cycle frequencies. The
Maquiladora Program was established in 1965 to help relieve high unemployment in the
northern region of Mexico. Foreign-owned firms were granted the right to set up production
10

This pattern is also documented in Ekholm et. al. (2007), who distinguishing export-platform FDI (i.e.
aﬃliate sales to the host or third countries) from vertical integration motivated FDI.
11
Table 1 focuses on production-sharing relationships between US parent firms and their foreign aﬃliates.
European firms engage in similar production sharing arrangements with their aﬃliates in Eastern Europe (see
Tesar 2006). Data based on Austrian and German firms with foreign aﬃliates in a subset of East European
countries (Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia) suggests production sharing figures comparable
to those in Table 1 Panel C, ranging from 0.42 to 0.55 for Austria and from 0.15 to 0.65 for Germany.
12
Results in Table 1 are consistent with the information in USITC (various issues), which reports the share
of domestic content in US imports based on tax-exemption data from Harmonized Tariﬀ Schedule 9802. The
coverage of this data has declined recently, with the reduction in tariﬀ barriers lowering the incentive to
report domestic content of imports.

6

in the region and to import materials and equipment duty-free under the proviso that the
goods would be re-exported. Not all maquiladoras are majority owned by US corporations,
so this data complements the information in Table 1 based on US multinational data only.
The maquiladoras are an important source of employment and export-oriented growth for
Mexico, with their exports accounting for half of all non-oil exports from Mexico and onethird of manufacturing employment.13 The US is the predominant trading partner with
maquiladoras, accounting for roughly 90% of total maquiladora exports in 1998 (Bendesky
et. al. 2003).
Table 1 shows that including maquiladoras trade significantly increases the measures of
production sharing between US and Mexico described above. For example, in Panel C we
observe that the production sharing intensity of trade increases from roughly 25% to 55%
when maquiladoras are included.14
To quantify the operations of maquiladoras, Panel A in Figure 1 displays the ratio of
imports by maquiladoras as a fraction of their exports, for the period 1993 − 2005. The

average value of the ratio is roughly 0.75. This suggests that for every 75 cents of imported
intermediate inputs, 25 cents of Mexican value is added to the product, and one dollar is
re-exported.
Time variation in the import/export ratio provides some information on the elasticity
of substitution between imported intermediate inputs and Mexican value added contributed
by maquiladoras. In particular, we can compare changes in the import/export ratio to
changes in the relative price of imported inputs to Mexican value added. If the elasticity of
substitution between imported inputs and exports is equal to one, then the import/export
ratio should be unresponsive to changes in the relative price, as the share of imported inputs
in gross output remains constant. If the elasticity of substitution is less (greater) than one,
then an increase in the relative price of imported intermediate inputs relative to Mexican
value added should lead to an increase (decrease) in the import/export ratio, as the share
of imported inputs in gross output increases.
We approximate the relative price of imported inputs to Mexican value added using the
producer-price-index-based US-Mexico real exchange rate (PPI-based RER), constructed as
the ratio of the Mexican to US producer price index for manufactured goods, both expressed
13

Sources: Bank of Mexico and OECD
In 2002, 52.5 percent of maquiladoras were owned by US corporations. In generating the shares in Table
1, we assume that 47.5 percent of maquiladora output reflects vertical integration with the US that is not
captured in the BEA multinational data. Source: InfoMex.
14

7

in the same currency. Our choice of bilateral RER is motivated by the fact that the US
accounts for 90% of trade with maquiladoras. The PPI-based RER is displayed in Panel C,
Figure 1. Panels A and C reveal a positive comovement between the import/export ratio
of maquiladoras and the PPI-based RER. For example, the large real depreciation of the
Mexican peso in 1995 (an increase in the PPI-based RER) is accompanied by an increase in
the import/export ratio. The correlation between the log of the import/export ratio and the
PPI-based RER (deviations from a quarterly HP trend) is 0.77. This is consistent with an
elasticity of substitution (at high frequencies of the data) lower than one between imported
inputs and value added in the production sharing sectors.
For comparison purposes, Panel B reports the import/export ratio for non-maquiladora
manufacturing. Note that this ratio does not have a simple interpretation based on imported
inputs/ gross output (as it did for the maquiladoras), given that goods exported and imported
by Mexico can be very diﬀerent within non-maquiladora industries. Panels B and C reveal a
negative relation between this ratio and the PPI-based RER. For example, in 1995, the real
depreciation of the Mexican peso is associated with a large decline in the import/export ratio.
The correlation between the log of the import/export ratio and the PPI-based RER is −0.72,

which is significantly less than the correlation using the maquiladora data. We interpret

the diﬀerence between these two correlations as evidence that firms engaged in production
sharing (in this case maquiladoras) exhibit a lower elasticity of substitution between home
and foreign inputs relative to other firms.15
Production sharing and international business cycles
We now provide some evidence that trade flows associated with production sharing are
more closely related to the economic activity in the source country relative to trade flows
not associated with production sharing. We also document a positive link between the
share of production sharing in bilateral trade flows, and bilateral manufacturing output
correlations. Our analysis is based on the measures of production sharing discussed above
(US multinational trade with aﬃliates and trade with Mexican maquiladoras).
The two panels of Table 2 examine the relationship between US manufacturing output, as measured by real manufacturing value added from the BEA, with both aﬃliate and
15

The higher inferred elasiticity of substitution in non-maquiladoras could also reflect diﬀerences in consumption cyclicality of US and Mexico imports, especially during the 1995 Mexican crisis. In our model we
abstract from these considerations.

8

maquiladora trade flows. Table 2a focuses on the relationship between annual US manufacturing output and trade flows with 39 countries over the 1983-2003 period.16 We estimate
the relationship between US manufacturing output, total aﬃliate sales to the US from country j, and total exports from country j excluding aﬃliate sales to the US. For both annual
HP-filtered and first-diﬀerenced series, sales of US aﬃliates back to the US (our measure of
production sharing) are more strongly related to US manufacturing output than are exports
net of US aﬃliate sales back to the US. Aﬃliate sales to the US for our sample of countries
has a correlation with US manufacturing output of roughly 0.15 (significant at the 1 percent
level), while the correlation with exports net of US aﬃliate sales back to the US is roughly
0.05 (and insignificant). The data reject the hypothesis that the coeﬃcient on aﬃliate sales
is less than the coeﬃcient on non-aﬃliate exports to the US (columns 3 and 4 of the table).
These results are roughly unchanged if we use current dollar values instead of real dollar
values, and if we use alternative measures of US output, such as total GDP and measures of
industrial production. The results are robust to the use of country fixed eﬀects.
We next examine the relationship between US manufacturing output and maquiladora
and non-maquiladora manufacturing exports. Table 2b reports the correlation of each form
of exports with real US manufacturing value added, using annual HP-filtered and firstdiﬀerenced series. The results support the view that US manufacturing output is more
tightly correlated with maquiladora exports from Mexico (correlation of 0.8) than with non—
maquiladora exports (correlation of about 0.5); the two estimates are also statistically different from each other. The maquiladora correlations with US manufacturing output complement the aﬃliates-based results in panel A. The results are roughly unchanged if we use
current dollar values or quarterly data.17
Bilateral output correlations are a common measure of the degree of business cycle comovement. Frankel and Rose (1998) and Kose and Yi (2006) find a positive relationship
between trade flows and bilateral output correlations. We extend their analysis by asking
whether production sharing also contributes to the comovement of business cycles. To do
this, we examine the link between bilateral output correlations and measures of the share
of production sharing in trade and the share of trade in output. Since production sharing
16

In Table 2a we use total aﬃliates trade due to the large number of missing values in the manufacturing
aﬄiates data during the 1980s.
17
The Bank of Mexico only provides maquiladora data for total exports and not by destination. The results
in Table 2b are robust to the substitution of non-maquiladora exports with US manufacturing imports from
Mexico less maquiladora exports.

9

is more concentrated in manufacturing industries, we focus on output and trade in manufactured goods. The set of countries includes US trading partners with production sharing
data. The figures we present also include countries engaged in intra-European production
sharing based on survey data reported in Marin (2005).18 The output correlations between
the United States and its trading partners are calculated using annual measures of real manufacturing value added over the period 1983-2005 (the correlations with Eastern European
countries are limited to the period 1995-2003, due to data availability).
Figure 2a shows the relationship between manufacturing bilateral output correlations and
the extent of production sharing, here measured as the ratio of current dollar sales of foreign
aﬃliates back to the source country as a share of current dollar manufacturing output in the
host country. The figure suggests a positive relationship between bilateral manufacturing
output correlations and the ratio of aﬃliate sales to host country output.19 Table 3 quantifies
this relationship for the US and its trade partners. The second column in Table 3a displays
a slope coeﬃcient of 0.94 that is significant at the five percent level.20
We now investigate whether this relationship is mostly accounted for by the total volume
of exports, or by production sharing per se. To do this we decompose aﬃliate sales from
host country j to source country i relative to host country output as follows:
¶µ
¶
µ
aff ilsalesij
mftgEXPij
aff ilsalesij
,
=
mftgV Aj
mftgEXPij
mftgV Aj

(2.1)

where mf tgV Aj denotes manufacturing value added in country j , and mf tgEXPij denotes
manufacturing exports from country j to country i.
The first component on the right hand side of equation (1) represents aﬃliate sales to
the source country as a share of manufacturing exports to the source country (in the model,
this will be referred to as sP2 ). Seen earlier in Table 1, this metric captures the intensity of
production-sharing trade in total bilateral trade flows. The second component is the share
of manufacturing exports to the source country in host-country manufacturing output (in
18

Specifically, Figure 2 and Table 3 consider trade flows between the US and 15 Western European countries, a EU 15 aggregate, Argentina, Austrialia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, India, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Phillippines, Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, Thailand, and Venezuela. Figure 2 also includes trade flows between Germany, Austria, and four
Eastern-European countries (Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia).
19
Given the sensitivity of Mexico-US output correlations to the inclusion of the 1994-1995 Mexican crisis,
we report two values for this correlation. One is based on data over the period 1983-2003, and the other is
based on data over the period 1996-2003.
20
The results in Table 3 are roughly unchanged if we include intra-Europe pairs of countries, and if we
exclude either of the two Mexico observations.

10

the model, this will be referred to as sX
2 ). This captures the importance of trade relative
to manufacturing economic activity in the host country. This decomposition allows us to
separate the eﬀect of production sharing on bilateral output correlations from the eﬀect of
the volume of trade.
Figure 2b shows a positive relationship between bilateral manufacturing output correlations and the production sharing intensity of trade. The corresponding OLS coeﬃcient from
Table 3a column 3 is 0.85, significant at the 5 percent level. Figure 2c shows the relationship
between bilateral correlations and the second term in the decomposition, the volume of trade.
The point estimate for the relationship between output correlations and the volume of trade
is equal to 0.29, which is lower than the estimate for the aﬃliate share of manufacturing
exports. Table 3b includes both terms of the decomposition in the same regression. The
coeﬃcient on the production sharing intensity of trade is larger than the coeﬃcient on the
volume of trade, which is insignificant. The hypothesis that the two coeﬃcients are identical
is rejected and the results are robust to the exclusion of outliers.
Frankel and Rose (1998), Kose and Yi (2006), and others perform a regression similar
to that in Table 3a to estimate the relationship between bilateral correlations and trade
volumes. While both our regressions and theirs find a positive coeﬃcient on trade volumes,
our coeﬃcients are smaller. Our regressions diﬀer in two respects. First, because we are not
attempting to identify a causal relationship between openness and business cycles, but rather
to describe moments in the data, we do not follow Frankel and Rose (1998) and Kose and Yi
(2006) in utilizing instrumental variables to proxy for the bilateral trade relationship. Second,
our measures of trade openness diﬀer. While they define the trade openness measure as the
ratio of the sum of bilateral exports and imports over the sum of the two countries’ GDP for
all industries (not solely manufacturing), we measure openness as the ratio of exports from
country j to the US over manufacturing GDP (or value added) of country j. Our definition
leads to higher ratios (placing total US GDP in the denominator significantly reduces these
ratios), and implies smaller regression coeﬃcients on sX
2 relative to those reported in Frankel
and Rose (1998) and Kose and Yi (2006).21
We conclude this section by summarizing our main findings. First, the degree of production sharing diﬀers significantly across US trading partners. Second, trade flows associated
with production sharing are more correlated with US output than trade flows not associated
21
For our data and set of countries, we can roughly reproduce the results in Kose and Yi (2006) if we use
their measures of openness.

11

with production sharing. Third, the fraction of exports associated with production sharing
is at least as important as the total volume of trade in accounting for a positive synchronization of manufacturing output across countries. Our results are based on imperfect measures
of the extent of production sharing at business cycle frequencies. Future work will have to
resolve how robust these conclusions are to alternative measures of production sharing.
We next turn to a simple quantitative model to study the eﬀects of trade composition on
international business cycles.

3. Model of Production Sharing and Business Cycles
In this section, we construct a two-country model to study the role of production sharing
in the transmission of business cycles across countries. In our model we assume that each
country specializes in the production of an intermediate good. These intermediate inputs
are then combined to produce two composite manufactured goods, a vertically integrated
good (the production-sharing good) and a horizontally diﬀerentiated good. Both countries
consume the diﬀerentiated composite good, but only country 1 consumes the vertically integrated composite good. One can think of the model as describing the production and trade
linkages between the US and Mexico. Both the US and Mexico consume the horizontally
diﬀerentiated goods, while the production-sharing good is produced jointly by the US and
Mexico but it is ultimately sold to consumers in the US.
The production technology for the two manufactured composites diﬀer in the elasticity
of substitution between local and foreign inputs. We assume that there is a relatively high
elasticity of substitution between home and foreign inputs in the production of the horizontally diﬀerentiated good (e.g. home and foreign auto parts that are readily substitutable).
On the other hand, the vertically integrated composite is assembled under a relatively low
substitution elasticity between local and foreign intermediate goods, and can be understood
as a production sharing arrangement with low short-run substitution between inputs or
processes. One stage of production is carried out in country 1, and another stage in country 2. The model is designed to capture, in a very simple way, the essence of production
sharing at business cycle frequencies, with little substitution in processes across countries.
We abstract from interesting long-run issues such as the location of the vertical production
chain and substitution between alternative oﬀshore locations.22 The model nests the “stan22

Ruhl (2004) and Ramanarayanan (2006) study rich models of trade with heterogeneous firms where the

12

dard” model of international business cycles in BKK when the production sharing sector is
made arbitrarily small - in this case the model depicts standard trade flows in horizontally
diﬀerentiated varieties.
This model allows us to vary the importance of production sharing and examine its implications for business cycle transmission. We show that, consistent with our empirical findings,
exports used in the production of the vertically integrated good are more tightly linked to
aggregate fluctuations in country 1, in comparison with exports used in the production of
the horizontally diﬀerentiated good. Conversely, horizontally diﬀerentiated exports are more
closely tied to aggregate fluctuations in country 2 than vertically integrated exports. It
then follows that business cycles are more synchronized between pairs of countries with a
higher share of international trade in inputs utilized in the production of vertically integrated
goods, than between pairs of countries where trade is dominated by inputs used to produce
horizontally diﬀerentiated goods.
We first describe the details of the model, and then explore in a calibrated version of
the model the quantitative importance of trade and production sharing in the international
transmission of business cycles.
We measure time in discrete periods and index each period by t = 1, 2, 3, ...∞. Countries are indexed by i = 1, 2 and have a population of Li individuals. Preferences of the
representative agent in country i are characterized by an expected utility function of the
form
Ui = max E0

∞
X
t=0

β t u (cit , 1 − nit ) ,

(3.1)

where ci and ni are per capita consumption and employment in country i, and
u (c, 1 − n) =

£ μ
¤1−σ
1
.
c (1 − n)1−μ
(1 − σ)

Each country specializes in the production of one intermediate good. Per capita output of
the intermediate good zi requires inputs of domestic labor ni , and capital ki , and is aﬀected
by country-specific aggregate productivity (its average is Ai ), which changes stochastically
over time. The production function of the intermediate good is given by
zit = Ai esit (nit )α (kit )(1−α) .

(3.2)

presence of fixed costs and irreversibilities lead to low trade elasticities at business cycle frequencies and high
trade elasticities in response to permanent trade reforms.

13

The parameter α denotes the share of labor in value added. The vector of aggregate productivity shocks st = (s1t , s2t ) follows the process st+1 = P st + εt+1 , where P is a symmetric
2x2 matrix characterized by the parameters P11 and P12 , and εt is distributed normally and
independently over time, with mean 0 and variance Σ.
We assume that all trade occurs at the level of intermediate goods. Local and imported
intermediate goods are combined in each country to create two types of manufactured composites: the horizontally diﬀerentiated composite, denoted by x, and the vertically integrated
composite, denoted by v.
Production of composite xi combines local and imported intermediate goods according
to the following Armington aggregator:
£
¤1
xit = θ1−ρ
(xiit )ρ + (1 − θi )1−ρ (xijt )ρ ρ , i = 1, 2, j 6= i
i

(3.3)

The first subscript in xijt denotes the country where the input is used to assemble x, and
the second subscript denotes the source country where this intermediate input is originally
produced. The parameter 1 − θi reflects the importance of imported intermediate goods in
the production of composite xi . We assume that the elasticity of substitution, 1/ (1 − ρ),
between inputs in the production of good x is relatively high.

The vertically integrated composite, v, is only consumed in country 1, and is produced
according to

i1
h
ζ
1−ζ
ζ ζ
1−ζ
v1t = λ (v11t ) + (1 − λ) (v12t )
.

(3.4)

The parameter 1 − λ measures the importance of imported intermediate goods provided by

country 2.

Good v1 can be thought of as the product of a multinational enterprise in conjunction
with its foreign aﬃliate. Alternatively, we can also think of v12 as the inputs provided by
firms in country 2 that are not necessarily under the control of a firm in country 1 (e.g.:
maquiladoras). To capture a key feature of production sharing, we assume that inputs into
the production of good v are complementary, relative to the production of good x. That
is, the elasticity of substitution in the vertically integrated composite, 1/ (1 − ζ), is smaller
than 1/ (1 − ρ).

Two alternative assumptions can be made about the international flow of intermediate

goods required to assemble v1 . Under the first assumption, v11 is initially shipped to country
2, v12 is added to produce v1 , and then v1 is shipped back to country 1. Alternatively, v12 is
14

shipped from country 2 to country 1, and combined with v11 in country 1 to produce v1 . The
trade balance and equilibrium allocations are identical under either specification.23 However,
gross trade flows in the model depend on this assumption and we are interested in how those
flows commove with output and other macro variables. Given the uncertainty regarding the
extent that inputs from the source country v11 are shipped back and forth with its trading
partners, in the quantitative analysis we report results for the two extremes (v11 is excluded,
and v11 is included in the export measures).
Each country produces a final manufactured (or tradeable) good yiT . In country 1 the
final manufactured good yiT combines xi and v according to
T
y1t
= (x1t )ω (v1t )1−ω ,

(3.5)

where ω is the weight of the horizontally diﬀerentiated composite. We assume that country
T
2 does not engage in production sharing with other countries, so y2t
= x2t .

The final manufactured good yiT is combined with a non-tradeable good yiN (these can be
understood as nontraded services) to produce the final good yi which can be either consumed,
or invested. The final good yi is produced according to
¡ ¢γ ¡ N ¢1−γ
yit = yitT
.
yit

(3.6)

The resource constraint for the final good in each country is
yit = cit + iit for i = 1, 2

(3.7)

iit = kit+1 − (1 − δ) kit .

(3.8)

where

The resource constraint for intermediate goods in country 1 is
N
L1 z1t = L1 x11t + L2 x21t + L1 v11t + L1 y1t

(3.9)

Intermediate goods from country 1 are either used locally to produce x1 , v1 , or y1N , or
exported to produce x2 . The resource constraint for intermediate goods in country 2 is
23

To give a concrete example of the two versions of trade flows, imagine the production of a laptop
computer. Under assumption 1, the US ships components to the oﬀshore production location, the laptop
is assembled abroad and is then shipped back to the US for final sale. Under assumption 2, the laptop
is shipped from the oﬀshore production site to the US, but the final stage of the process (e.g. packaging,
installation of software, etc.) occurs in the US before being sold to US consumers. Both types of assembly
are likely to occur in practice, so our assumptions should be viewed as characterizations of extreme cases.

15

N
L2 z2t = L2 x22t + L1 x12t + L1 v12t + L2 y2t
.

(3.10)

Intermediate goods from country 2 are either used locally to produce x2 and y2N , or exported
to produce x1 and v1 .
We define manufacturing output as zitT = zit − yitN . The volume of exports as a frac-

tion of manufacturing output in country i, abstracting from time subscripts, is denoted
¡
¢
X
T
X
by sX
i . In country 1, this share is s1 = (L2 x21 ) / L1 z1 , and in country 2 it is s2 =
¡
¢
L1 (x12 + v12 ) / L2 z2T . The share of country 2 exports accounted for by production sharing is given by sP2 = v12 / (x12 + v12 ). Hence, country 2’s share of production sharing in

manufacturing GDP is sP2 sX
2 .
In defining these measures of trade we have assumed that v11 is not shipped from country
1 to country 2, and thus v11 is not included in export measures. We also consider the case
in which v11 is included in exports (assuming that v11 is shipped back and forth between
X
P
countries) when constructing sX
1 , s2 and s2 .
X
Note that lowering ω, keeping constant the total volumes of trade sX
1 and s2 , raises the

share of production sharing in sP2 . When ω = 1, we have sP2 = 0, and the model reduces to
the standard, two-country, two-good model of BKK.
To isolate the role of international trade in international business cycles, we assume the
availability of complete contingent claims that permit agents to diversify country-specific risk
across states of nature. We exploit the fact that equilibrium allocations are Pareto optimal
and maximize L1 U1 + L2 U2 , subject to the technology and resource constraints described
above. By choosing a suitable set of initial wealth levels, the competitive equilibrium allocations are identical to the ones obtained by solving this planner’s problem. Furthermore,
prices can be computed from marginal rates of substitution across goods. The numeraire is
the price of z1 , and we denote by pt the relative price of z2 .
Using the resource constraints, gross domestic product in country 1 (in terms of intermediate good z1 ) is equal to L1 z1t and the following national accounts identity holds
L1 z1t = P1ty L1 (c1t + i1t ) + T B1t ,

(3.11)

where Pity denotes the price of the final good in country i, and the trade balance T B1 is
T B1t = L2 x21t − L1 pt x12t − L1 pt v12t .
16

(3.12)

Analogously, in country 2 the national accounts identity is
L2 pt z2t = L2 P2ty (c2t + i2t ) + T B2t ,

(3.13)

where the trade balance T B2 is
T B2t = L1 p2t v12t + L1 p2t x12t − L2 x21t .

(3.14)

The price of the final good is given by
h
i γω(ρ−1)
h
i γ(1−ω)(ζ−1)
ρ
ζ
ρ/(ρ−1)
ζ/(ζ−1)
P1ty = κ1 θ1 + (1 − θ1 ) pt
λ + (1 − λ) pt

(3.15)

in country 1, and

h
i γ(ρ−1)
ρ
ρ/(ρ−1)
= κ2 θ2 (pt )
+ (1 − θ2 )
(pt )1−γ
h
i−1
£
¤−1
and κ1 = κ2 ωγω (1 − ω)γ(1−ω) .
in country 2, with κ2 = γ γ (1 − γ)1−γ
P2ty

(3.16)

Sectoral diﬀerences in transmission mechanism

To gain some intuition for the transmission mechanism of trade in our model, it is helpful
to examine the first-order conditions for the allocation of intermediate goods in the two
sectors. Optimality in the use of intermediate goods in country 1 implies
1
1 − θ1 x11t
= pt1−ρ
θ1 x12t

(3.17)

in the assembly of composite x1 , and
1
1 − λ v11t
= pt1−ζ
λ v12t

(3.18)

in the assembly of composite v1 .
A comparison of equations (3.17) and (3.18) makes clear that for a given change in p,
the model produces larger reallocations between x11 and x12 than between v11 and v12 if
ρ > ζ. This is the key mechanism that causes country 2’s exports in the vertically integrated
composite (v12 ) to be more correlated with country 1’s output than country 2’s exports in
the horizontally integrated composite (x12 ). Of course, another key determinant of these
correlations is the comovement between the two composites x1 and v1 , for which we need to
fully solve the model.

17

Note also that optimality in the production of the horizontally diﬀerentiated composite
in country 2 implies:
1
θ2 x21t
= pt1−ρ
(3.19)
1 − θ2 x22t
If prices are more volatile when production sharing accounts for a higher fraction of trade,

then substitution between domestic (x22 ) and imported (x21 ) intermediate goods in country
2 partly oﬀsets the positive cross-country comovement in total manufacturing outputs.
To assess the quantitative importance of this form of business cycle transmission, we turn
to a parametrized version of our model that is solved numerically.

4. Quantitative Analysis
Parameter values
We first discuss the choice of standard parameters in models of international business
cycles: β, μ , σ , δ , and α. We follow BKK in setting the period length to one quarter, and
choosing β = 0.99, σ = 2, μ = 0.36, α = 1/3, and δ = 0.025. We set γ = 0.2 so that the share
of tradeable output in GDP is roughly equal to that observed for manufacturing industries in
OECD countries between 1990 and 2006. We set the elasticity of substitution between home
and foreign intermediate inputs in the production of the diﬀerentiated manufactured good x,
[1/ (1 − ρ)], equal to the standard value of 2. To isolate the pure eﬀect of international trade
on international business cycle synchronization, we abstract from international spillovers
of aggregate productivity (P12 = 0) and assume that shocks to aggregate productivity are
uncorrelated across countries (σ 12 = 0).24 We follow BKK and set the persistence of the
shocks P11 equal to 0.91. We normalize, without loss of generality under our strategy of
targeting bilateral export shares discussed below, A1 = L1 = L2 = 1. We choose A2 so that
in steady-state p = 1.
The remaining parameters are {ζ, λ, θ1 , θ2 , ω}, which are not conventional from the point

of view of standard models of international business cycles.

We first discuss our choice of parameters λ and ζ in the production function of the
vertically integrated composite. We set λ = 0.75, so that the share of country 1’s intermediate
input (v11 ) in the vertically integrated composite (v) coincides with the average share of US
imports in Mexican maquiladora gross output over the period 1993-2006 (as described in
24

Our model can generate a non-zero cross-country correlation of measured total factor productivity, if
input variation is undermeasured at business cycle frequencies.

18

Section 2). In our benchmark calibration we choose ζ so that the the elasticity of substitution
between home and foreign intermediate inputs in the vertically integrated good is equal to
0.05. Given the obvious importance of this parameter, we also evaluate the model assuming
a higher elasticity of substitution in the production of the vertically integrated composite.
Finally, we choose θ1 , θ2 , and ω to generate diﬀerent combinations of steady-state values
X
for the volume of trade as a fraction of manufacturing output in each country (sX
1 and s2 ),

and the fraction of exports of country 2 accounted for by production sharing (sP2 ). We do not
calibrate our model to replicate features of each individual country in Section 2 because we
do not have direct evidence on the extent to which source country inputs v11 are included in
X
bilateral trade flows. Instead, we consider all possible combinations of values of sX
1 , s2 , and
X
sP2 in the following grids: sX
1 ∈ {0.01,0.05,0.15}, s2 ∈ {0.01,0.05,0.15, 0.30, 0.45, 0.60} and

an evenly-spread 7-point grid for sP between 0.05 and 0.9.25 We can then examine how the

transmission of international business cycles changes across this range of parameter values.
In our benchmark experiments, we assume that v11 is not shipped between countries,
and hence is not included in the measures of exports and imports of both countries when
constructing these shares. We also consider the other extreme that v11 is shipped between
countries – recall that this alternative procedure does not have an impact on the equilibrium
allocations, but only on the measures of trade.
For each set of parameter values, we solve the model via a standard log-linearization
method. We then randomly draw 150 periods of the productivity shock vector εt , feed them
into the model, and compute several moments of interest from the artificially generated data.
We repeat this procedure 1500 times, and finally average the statistics across simulations to
produce the numbers we report in the tables.
Results
In this section we study the model’s implications for business cycle synchronization.
To quantify the degree of business cycle synchronization, we focus on the cross-country
correlation of quarterly HP-filtered fluctuations in output in the tradeable sector zitT , which
we denote as corrzT . We focus on correlations for tradeable sectors because our model
is designed to study the role of trade in business cycle synchronization and abstracts from
25

In a steady-state with balanced trade and p = 1, we can back out the values of θ1 , θ2 and ω that
X
P
are consistent with the assumed trade shares sX
1 , s2 , and s2 , using the three following expressions: (i)
X
X
P X
s1 = ω (1 − θ1 ) + (1 − ω) (1 − λ), (ii) s2 = 1 − θ2 , and (iii) s2 s1 = (1 − ω) (1 − λ).

19

considerations that are important for understanding correlations of total GDP, such as crosscountry and cross-sector comovement of aggregate shocks. We examine, for our range of
parameter values, how corrzT varies with the share of trade in country 2’s tradeable output
P
sX
2 , and with the share of production sharing in country 2’s exports, s2 . We first fix the
X
P
share of trade in country 1’s tradeable output (sX
1 ) at 5%, and vary s2 and s2 separately.

We then consider regressions of the form discussed in Section 2 using artificial data generated
X
P
by the model where we jointly vary sX
1 , s2 , and s2 at the levels of the grids defined above.
X
P
Result 1: Fixing sP2 , corrzT is increasing in sX
2 and fixing s2 , corrz T is increasing in s2 .

Figure 3, panel A, displays the relation between sX
2 (x-axis) and corrz T (y-axis) for
diﬀerent values of sP2 . Each vertical cluster of dots represents the range of corrzT for various
levels of sP2 , holding the overall level of trade in country 2 (sX
2 ) constant. We focus first
on the impact of trade volume on bilateral correlations. The plot shows that for any level
of sP2 there is a positive relationship between the correlation and the volume of trade. For
example, for sP2 = 5% (represented by the lowest dot in each vertical cluster), an increase in
sX
2 from 1% to 30% (moving along the x-axis) raises corrz T from 0.03 to 0.1.
To understand how an increase in trade volume, all else constant, leads to higher output
correlations, consider a positive productivity shock in country 1. For simplicity, here we
abstract from the vertically integrated composite by assuming ω = 1. Firms in country 1
produce more final output, which requires imports from country 2, x12 . This increase in the
demand for country 2 output is partly oﬀset by the increase in its relative price, p, inducing
a substitution in country 2 from x22 to x21 . Overall, the increase in demand from country 1
T
T
dominates the substitution eﬀect in country 2, so z1t
and z2t
are positively correlated, and

the correlation increases as we raise the volume of trade.26
Figure 3, panel B, illustrates the impact of an increase in production sharing on bilateral
correlations. Each vertical cluster of dots represents the range of corrzT for various levels
X
P
of sX
2 . For each level of s2 , the plot reveals a positive relation between s2 and corrz T . For
P
example, fixing sX
2 = 30% (the fourth lowest set of dots in the figure for each level of s2 ) an

increase in sP2 from 5% to 60% raises corrzT from 0.1 to 0.16. The relatively lower elasticity
of substitution in the production of the vertically integrated composite plays an important
26

Note that as p increases there is also substitution away from nontradeable goods in country 2, y2N , which
leads to an overall decline of output in country 2, and a negative cross-country correlation between total
GDPs z1 and z2 .

20

role in this positive link between sP2 and corrzT . If we assume instead that the elasticity of
substitution is equal for the vertically integrated and horizontally diﬀerentiated composites,
(ζ = ρ = 0.5), an increase in sP2 from 5% to 60% leaves corrzT roughly unchanged.
To flesh out the intuition for the importance of production sharing in generating positive
cross-country correlations in output, consider again an increase in aggregate productivity in
country 1. This generates an increase in the supply of both the horizontally diﬀerentiated
and the vertically integrated composites in country 1. This raises the demand for imports x12
and v12 from country 2, as well as the relative price of country 2. This increase in p leads to
a lower substitution eﬀect in the vertically integrated composite when ζ < ρ, so v12 increases
more than x12 – see (3.17) and (3.18). A higher value of sP2 raises the steady state level of
v12 relative to x12 , and leads to a larger increase of z2T in response to the aggregate shock.
Note that as we increase sP2 , the positive transmission of the aggregate shock is partly oﬀset
by the fact that p rises more (i.e.: lower elasticities of substitution lead to larger movements
in relative prices), and hence the substitution eﬀects on x22 and x12 away from z2T are larger.
An increase in sP2 has a similar impact on international business cycle comovements as
a reduction in the elasticity of substitution between the home and the foreign good in a
standard two- good model such as BKK. For example, if we assume sP2 = 0, sX
1 = 5%,
and sX
2 = 15%, then corrz T falls from 0.21 to 0.06 as we raise the elasticity of substitution
1/ (1 − ρ) from 1/10 to 2. In our model, we generate variation in this elasticity of substitution
through variation in the importance of production sharing in bilateral trade flows.

Note that the model also has implications for the comovement between country 2’s exports to country 1 and country 1’s manufacturing output. When ζ < ρ, the correlation
between fluctuations in production sharing exports from country 2 to country 1 (v12 ) and
fluctuations in z1T is roughly 1. The correlation between exports of the horizontally diﬀerentiated composite (x12 ) and country 1 output is smaller, equal to 0.4. The fact that exports
associated with production sharing are more tightly linked to economic activity in country
1 than exports not associated with production sharing, is consistent with the observations
in the data discussed in Section 2.
P
Result 2: a) The positive relation between sX
2 and corrz T is increasing in s2 . Similarly,

b) the positive relation between sP2 and corrzT is increasing in sX
2 .
To understand b), note that in Figure 3, panel B, the slope between sP2 and corrzT is
higher for higher levels of sX
2 . The higher is the share of exports in output, the more
21

important is the role of production sharing in shaping corrzT . A similar logic applies for
P
a). The slope between sX
2 and corrz T is higher for higher levels of s2 . A higher share of

production sharing in trade leads to stronger complementarities, so an increase in trade
induces higher comovements in business cycles. Hence, to understand the link between the
volumes of trade and business cycle synchronization, it is important to distinguish between
trade in vertically integrated inputs and trade in horizontally diﬀerentiated inputs.
X
P
From results 1 and 2, it becomes apparent that we need to jointly vary sX
1 , s2 and s2 in
P
order to quantify the role of sX
2 and s2 in shaping corrz T . To do this, we generate artificial
©
ª
X P
data from the model under all the possible combinations of sX
,
s
,
s
as defined by the
1
2
2

grids above. We then consider the following univariate regressions:

P
X
P
corrzT = α + β i X i + e12i , for X i = sX
2 s2 , s2 , and s2 .
X

(4.1)

P

s2
P
Note that, due to the independence of sX
and β s2 are identical to those obtained
2 and s2 , β
P
in a bivariate regression in which sX
2 and s2 are simultaneously included as right hand side

variables.
Table 4 reports the results from these regressions. The first three columns are calculated
under the assumption that v11 is not included in the measure of exports when constructing
P
sX
2 and s2 . The last three columns are calculated under the assumption that v11 is shipped

back and forth between countries, and hence is included in exports in both countries when
P
constructing sX
2 and s2 . Row 1 displays the results under the benchmark parameterization.

The remaining rows on the tables performs sensitivity analysis with respect to key model
parameters.
P
Result 3: The regression coeﬃcients on sX
2 and s2 are both positive, with the former

being larger than the latter.
X

p

Row 1 in Table 4 shows that in the baseline model, β s2 = 0.43 and β s2 = 0.13 when
v11 is excluded from the export measures.27 This positive relation between the volume of
trade, the production-sharing intensity of trade, and tradeable output correlations, results
in a strong positive relation between the latter and the share of production-sharing exports
X P

in tradeable output (β s2 s2 = 0.69).
27

If instead of focusing on tradeable output cross-country correlations corrz T , we examine cross-country
correlations
of the employment used to produce this tradeable output, we obtain
regression
coeﬃcients
p
p
x
x
β s2 and β s2 that are roughly three times larger. The relative magnitudes of β s2 and β s2 remain roughly
unchanged.

22

Note that, as discussed under our Result 2, the extent of production sharing shapes the
positive link between the volume of trade and bilateral correlations. In the context of our
X
current regression, if we set sP2 = 0.05 and vary sX
1 and s2 according to the grids defined
X

X

above, we obtain β s2 = 0.3. In contrast, if we set sP2 = 0.9, we obtain β s2 = 0.6. By varying
X

sP2 between 0.05 and 0.9 we obtain β s2 = 0.43 in our baseline regression.
If country 1’s production sharing inputs v11 flow back and forth between countries and are
X

P

thus included in the export measures, then the model implies β s2 = 0.17, and β s2 = 0.13.
X

The lower coeﬃcient on β s2 in this case can be understood as follows. If v11 is included in the
measures of exports, then increasing the weight of the vertically integrated composite also
increases the share of exports in GDP (even though sX
2 exclusive of v11 remains constant).
This results in more variation in sX
2 , for the same GDP correlations (recall that these do
not vary as we change the measurement of exports), which implies a lower coeﬃcient on sX
2 .
Note that the positive link between the production sharing intensity of trade and tradeable
P

GDP correlations β s2 is quite insensitive to the inclusion of v11 in the export measures.
In the second row, we set ζ = ρ = 0.5, making the production of both composites equally
elastic in the home and foreign inputs. Not surprisingly, the coeﬃcient on sP2 is very close
to zero (it is not exactly equal to zero because the composites x1 and v1 are not perfectly
synchronized). This case, which is essentially the BKK model with trade in horizontally
X

s2
diﬀerentiated varieties, produces a positive regression coeﬃcient on sX
= 0.33,
2 , with β

when v11 is excluded from the export measures. In this case the output correlation is driven
entirely by the volume of trade.28
We conclude that the benchmark model generates a positive link between the share
of production sharing in trade and cross-country tradeable output correlations, which is
smaller than the positive link between the overall share of trade and cross-country output
correlations, with the diﬀerence in magnitudes depending on the extent that production
sharing inputs from country 1 are shipped back and forth between countries.
Sensitivity Analysis
Rows 3 through 6 examine a variety of sensitivity analyses to changes in the parameter
values in the production function of the vertically integrated composite. Rows 3 through 4
28

If we instead focus on correlations for total output z1 and z2 , then we obtain a small negative regresX
sion coeﬃcient β s2 due to the large substitution eﬀects on nontradeable consumption in the presence of
fluctuations in p.

23

relax the extremely high complementarity between home and foreign inputs in the production
sharing composite, holding the elasticity in the other composite at 2. In particular, we assume
an elasticity of substitution equal to 0.5 and 1, respectively. In both cases the coeﬃcient on
production sharing drops, while the coeﬃcient on the export share increases slightly. Row 5
assumes an elasticity of substitution equal to 1 in the vertically integrated composite, and
an elasticity of substitution equal to 4 in the horizontally diﬀerentiated composite. This
perturbation of the model also lowers slightly the positive coeﬃcient on sP2 . Overall, the
model implies a positive link between sP2 and corrzT if ζ < ρ.
Row 6 shows that the regression results remain roughly unchanged if we increase the
share of country 1 dependence on foreign inputs in the production sharing composite (lower
λ), while simultaneously lowering ω to keep sP2 unchanged.
We also varied the elasticity of substitution between the tradeable and nontradeable final
goods in (3.6), as well as the elasticity of substitution between the horizontally diﬀerentiated
and the vertically integrated composite goods in (3.5) — our benchmark model assumes an
elasticity equal to one in both cases. We find that lower elasticities of substitution lead to
slightly higher regression coeﬃcients on sP2 relative to sX
2 . For example, if we reduce the
X

P

elasticity to 0.5 for both aggregators, then we obtain β s2 = 0.40, β s2 = 0.14 if v11 is excluded
X

P

from the exports measures, and β s2 = 0.25, β s2 = 0.13 if v11 is included.

5. Conclusion
The phenomenon of production sharing appears to be an increasingly important component
of international trade flows. This paper asks whether production sharing has a significant
eﬀect on the transmission of business cycles across national borders. Data on flows between
US multinationals and their foreign aﬃliates, as well as between the United States and
Mexican maquiladoras, suggest that trade related to production sharing has a correlation
with foreign manufacturing output that is higher than for non-production-sharing trade.
The data also suggest that production-sharing intensity is at least as important as trade
volume in accounting for bilateral manufacturing output correlations. An important task for
future research is to assess the robustness of these empirical findings using detailed data on
production sharing, including arms-length transactions, and with more information on the
extent of substitutability between inputs and processes.
We develop a stylized-two-country model to study the relationship between business cy24

cles and trade in vertically integrated goods. A key assumption is that home and foreign
inputs are less substitutable in the production of vertically integrated goods than in horizontally diﬀerentiated goods at business cycle frequencies. The model is consistent with our
empirical findings that exports to a particular country used in the production of the vertically
integrated good are more tightly linked to the aggregate fluctuations of that country than
exports used in the production of the horizontally diﬀerentiated good. Our model generates
business cycles that are more synchronized between pairs of countries with a higher share of
international trade in inputs utilized in the production of vertically integrated goods than
between pairs of countries where trade is dominated by inputs used to produce horizontally
diﬀerentiated goods.
The model is based on a number of simplifying assumptions that deserve further study.
In particular, we abstract from longer run substitutability across countries in the location
of production-sharing plants. One possible direction for further study is to include fixed
costs in the establishment of a production-sharing arrangement. This margin will be operative when shocks are large and persistent (that is, during trade liberalizations, changes in
taxation of foreign corporations, etc.). Under this extension, the model has the potential
of providing insight into the issue of “footloose” multinationals shifting their production
operations across countries at low frequencies, as well as higher-frequency business cycle
synchronization between countries.
The model also abstracts from additional forces that can lead to a stronger link between
production sharing and international business cycles. It is possible that countries that engage
in production sharing are also more likely to experience common shocks, as they specialize
in similar industrial sectors. It may also be the case that technology shocks are more easily
transmitted from one country to another if firms transcend national borders. Finally, if
production sharing tends to be concentrated in sectors that are more aﬀected by cyclical
fluctuations (such as, for example, automobile production), the transmission mechanism will
also be amplified.

References
[1] Ambler, S., E. Cardia and C. Zimmerman, 2002, “International transmission of the
business cycle in a multi-sectoral model”, European Economic Review 46, 273-300.

25

[2] Antras, P., and E. Helpman, 2004, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 112, No. 3, June, pp. 552-580.
[3] Backus, D. K. and M. J. Crucini, 2000, “Oil prices and the terms of trade,” Journal of
International Economics, vol. 50(1), pages 185-213.
[4] Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. Kydland, 1995, “International Business Cycles: Theory vs. Evidence," in T. F. Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton
University Press
[5] Baxter, M., 1995, “International trade and business cycles,” in: G. M. Grossman & K.
Rogoﬀ (ed.), Handbook of International Economics, edition 1, volume 3, chapter 35,
pages 1801-1864.
[6] Bendesky, L, E. Garza, J. Melgoza, and C. Salas, 2003, “La Industria Maquiladora
de Exportacion en Mexico: Mitos y Realidades”, Working Paper, Instituo de Estudios
Laborales.
[7] Bergin, P., R. Feenstra and G. Hanson, 2007, “Outsourcing and volatility,” Working
Paper, UC Davis.
[8] Chen, H., Kondrattwicz, M and K. Yi, 2005, “Vertical Specialization and Three Facts
about U.S. International Trade,” North American Journal of Economics and Finance,
(March), pp. 35-39.
[9] Clark, T. and E. van Wincoop, 2001, “Borders and Business Cycles” Journal of International Economics, Volume 55, Issue 1, Pages 59-85
[10] Drozd L. and J. Nosal, 2007, “Solving the Trade-Comovement Puzzle” working paper
University of Minnesota.
[11] Ekholm K., R. Forslid, and J. Markusen, 2007, “Export-Platform Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 5(4), pages 776-795.
[12] Frankel, J. and A. Rose, 1998, “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criteria,” Economic Journal, 108, 1009-1025.
[13] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman, 2005, “Outsourcing in a Global Economy,” Review of
Economic Studies, vol.72, no.1.
26

[14] Grossman, G. and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2006, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Oﬀshoring” mimeo
[15] Hanson, G., R. Mataloni and M. Slaughter (2005) “Vertical Production Networks in
Multinational Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, November 87: 664-678.
[16] Heathcote, J. and F. Perri, 2002, Financial autarky and international business cycles,
Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 601-27.
[17] Hummels, D., Ishii, and K. Yi (2001), The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization
in World Trade", Journal of International Economics (June 2001), 75-96.
[18] Kindleberger, C.P., 1962, Foreign Trade and the National Economy: Studies in Comparative Economics no 2., New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
[19] Kose, M.A. and K. Yi, 2001, “International trade and business cycles: Is vertical integration the missing link”, American Economic Review 91 (May), 371-75.
[20] Kose, M.A. and K. Yi, 2006, “Can the standard international business cycle model explain the relation between trade and comovement?” Journal of International Economics,
Volume 68, Issue 2, Pages 267-295
[21] Marin, D., 2005, “A new international division of labor in Europe: Outsourcing and
oﬀshoring to Eastern Europe”, University of Munich Working Paper.
[22] Meltzer, A.H., 1976, “Monetary and other explanations of the Great Depression,” Journal of Monetary Economic 2: 456-71.
[23] Ramanarayanan , A., 2006, “International Trade Dynamics with Intermediate Inputs,”
working paper, University of Minnesota.
[24] Ruhl, K., 2004, “Solving the International Elasticity Puzzle,” working paper, University
of Texas at Austin.
[25] Stockman, A. and L. Tesar, 1995, “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model
of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements," American Economic
Review, vol. 85(1), pages 168-85, March

27

[26] Tesar, L., 2006. Production sharing and business cycle synchronization in the accession countries. In: Reichlin, L., West, K. (Eds.), NBER International Seminar on Q4
Macroeconomics,The MIT Press, Cambridge, forthcoming.
[27] United States International Trade Commission (USITC), “Production sharing: Use of
US components and materials in foreign assembly operations,” various issues.
[28] Yi, K., 2003, Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade?, Journal of
Political Economy, 111 (1) , pp. 52-102.
Data Appendix
Both real and nominal US manufacturing value added data source from the BEA. For
years 1980 to 1986 in which no manufacturing value added deflator exists, the deflator is
imputed from the GDP deflator. Manufacturing trade data are from the OECD international
trade in commodities database. The data on aﬃliate sales and trade come from BEA’s
Operations of U.S. Parent Companies Foreign Aﬃliates data. All values are in dollars and
the nominal values for aﬃliates and maquiladoras are deflated with the US CPI. Mexican
PPI, US-Peso exchange rate, and the maquiladora trade data are from the Bank of Mexico.
The data source for the US PPI and CPI is the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

28

Table 1: Extent of Production Sharing by Country or Region
1977

1982

1989

1994

1999

2003

A. Sales by US Affiliates to the US, as a Share of Total Sales of Affiliates (Manufacturing)
Canada
Mexico
inc. Maquiladoras
Europe
Japan

0.26
0.07
0.02
0.03

0.29
0.08
0.19
0.02
0.07

0.35
0.29
0.50
0.05
0.05

0.43
0.32
0.52
0.04
0.05

0.43
0.34
0.56
0.06
0.05

0.34
0.31
0.54
0.06
0.04

B. US Exports from Parents to Affiliates/Total Sales of Affiliates (Manufacturing)
Canada
Mexico
inc. Maquiladoras
Europe
Japan

0.30
0.15

0.31
0.22

0.28
0.40

0.06
0.09

0.06
0.11

0.05
0.10

0.33
0.39
0.50
0.05
0.09

0.23
0.35
0.49
0.04
0.08

0.18
0.29
0.44
0.03
0.07

C. Production Sharing Intensity of Trade, Affiliate Sales to the US/Exports to US (Manufacturing)

Canada
Mexico
inc. Maquiladoras
Europe
Japan

0.65
0.14
0.11
0.00

0.54
0.15
0.43
0.09
0.01

0.54
0.22
0.54
0.17
0.01

0.51
0.26
0.58
0.14
0.02

0.47
0.23
0.56
0.17
0.02

0.47
0.21
0.55
0.17
0.02

Sources: Data on manufacturing exports from OECD, US affiliates data from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis, and Maquiladora Data from Bank of Mexico.

Table 2: Production Sharing, Exports, and Source Country Output

Table 2a: Relationship between US Manufacturing Value Added, Affiliate Sales, and Exports
USmanva t =α+β1(affilsales jt)+β2(nonaff extoUS jt)+εt
where USmanva t denotes US Manufacturing value added, affilsales jt denotes US affiliates' sales from country j to the US,
and extoUS jt denotes total exports of country j to the US net of affiliates trade.

Detrending method:

First-differences
HP filter

Correlations with US
Manu. Value added

p-values corresponding to H 0 : β 1 – β 2 <0

affilsales jt

extoUS jt

No country fixed effects

Country fixed effects

0.142
0.148***

0.050
0.045

0.005
0.005

0.009
0.006

***

*** indicates significance at the 1%, ** at the 5%, and * at 10%

Table 2b: Relationship between US Production, Maquiladora, and Nonmaquiladora Exports
USmanva t=α+β1(maqt)+β2(nmaqt)+εt
where USmanvat denotes US manufacturing value added, maqt denotes manufacturing maquiladora exports , and nonmaqt
denotes non maquiladora manufacturing exports .

Detrending method:

First-differences
HP filter

Correlations with US
Manu. Value added
nmaq t
maq t
0.794***
0.855***

***

0.531
0.538***

p-values corresponding to H 0 : β 1 – β 2 <0
No Time fixed effects

Time fixed effects

0.001
0.001

0.001
0.002

*** indicates significance at the 1%, ** at the 5%, and * at 10%
Sources: The affilate data are annual from 1983-2003, while the maquiladora data from 1980-2005. US manufacturing
value-added and affiliates' sales from BEA; Exports to US from OECD International Trade in Commodities datbase;
maquiladoras trade from Bank of Mexico. All values are in real US dollars deflated with CPI or BEA value added deflator.
The results are roughly unchanged when using nominal values.
The panel in table 2a includes 39 countries: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Singapore, South Korea, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, UK, and Venezuela.

Table 3: Production Sharing, Trade, and International Business Cycles
⎛ affilsalesij
=⎜
⎜ mftgEXPij
mftgVA j
⎝

affilsalesij

⎞⎛ mftgEXPij
⎟⎜
⎟⎜ mftgVA j
⎠⎝

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

where affilsalesij denotes affiliate sales to country i from country j, mftgVA i denotes manufacturing value added
in country i, and mftgEXPij denotes manufacturing exports to country i from j.

Table 3a: Univariate Regressions
MftgVAcorr ij=α+β(tradeij)+εt
where mftgVAcorr ij denotes bilateral manufacturing correlation between countries i and j and trade ij is a measure
of the trading relationship between i and j described below.

tradeij

α
β
R2

⎛ affilsalesij
⎜⎜
⎝ mftgVA j

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

***

⎛ affilsalesij
⎜⎜
⎝ mftgEXPij

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

⎛ mfgEXPij
⎜⎜
⎝ mftgVAj

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

***

0.177
(0.0516)
0.940**
(0.4291)

0.087
(0.0720)
0.850**
(0.3679)

0.170
(0.0616)
0.290*
(0.1529)

0.177

0.247

0.115

*** indicates significance at the 1%, ** at the 5%, and * at 10%

Table 3b: Multivariate Regression
⎛ affilsalesij
mftgVAcorrij = α + β1 ⎜
⎜ mftgEXP
ij
⎝

α

β1

0.069
(0.0755)

0.746
(0.3636)

**

⎞
⎛ mfgEXPij
⎟⎟ + β 2 ⎜⎜
⎠
⎝ mftgVA j

⎞
⎟⎟ + ε ij
⎠

β2

R2

0.140
(0.0901)

0.247

*** indicates significance at the 1%, ** at the 5%, and * at 10%
Sources: Data are annual from 1983-2003; Affilates trade data from BEA; exports to US data from OECD International
Trade in Commodities datbase. Manufacturing value added correlations are computed by hp-filtering real annual
manufacturing value added data from WDI, OECD, and BEA.
The estimates include 33 country pairings with the US: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, UK, and
Venezuela. The results are roughly unchanged if we include the intra-European country pairings and are robust to the exclusion of
outliers.

Table 4: Model-Based Production Sharing Decompostion
corr zt =α+βi(Xi)+ε12i
corr zt denotes cross-country tradeable output correlation, X i is a measure of the trading relationship between countries 1 and 2.
Trade measures and correlations generated from grids defined in Calibration description, each combination of grid is denoted by j

V11 excluded from export measurement
Production sharing / Production share in
Tradeable GDP 2
exports 2

s P2 s X2

s P2

Exports share in
Tradeable GDP 2

s X2

V11 included in export measurement
Production sharing / Production sharing
Tradeable GDP 2
in exports 2

Exports sharing in
Tradeable GDP 2

s P2 s X2

s P2

0.17

0.13

0.17

s X2

Baseline Model

0.69

0.13

0.43

Sensitivity analysis
1/(1-ζ) = 2

0.37

0.01

0.33

0.09

0.01

0.10

1/(1-ζ) = 1

0.50

0.06

0.38

0.13

0.06

0.13

1/(1-ζ) = 0.5

0.59

0.09

0.42

0.15

0.09

0.15

1/(1-ρ) = 4, 1/(1-ζ) = 1

0.43

0.09

0.28

0.11

0.09

0.11

λ = 0.6

0.66

0.14

0.40

0.27

0.13

0.25

Details of calibration and model solution are described in the text.

Figure 1: Real Exchange Rate and Import Content, Mexico

A: Maquiladoras (manufacturing) : Imports / Exports
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

B: Non-Maquiladoras (manufacturing) : Imports / Exports
2.5

2

1.5

1

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

C: PPI-based Real Exchange Rate (US/Mexico), manufactured goods
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20

1994

1996

Source: Banco de Mexico and BLS

1998

2000

2002

2004

Figure 2: Output Correlations and Trade Flows
Figure 2a: Production Sharing and Bilateral Manufacturing Output Correlations
1

Bilateral Manufacturing VA Correlation

US-Canada

US-Mexico (post 1995)

0.8
US-Finland

US-Sweden
US-Singapore

US-UK

Hungary-Germany

0.6
US-Austrailia

US-Costa Rica

Slov-Austria

US-EU15

Slovakia-Germany

0.4
US-Malaysia

US-Mexico

US-Philippines

0.2

US-Ireland
Czech-Germany
0
0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

0.40

0.50

0.60

-0.2
US-Columbia
-0.4

Production sharing index

Figure 2b: Production Sharing Intensity of Trade and Bilateral Manufacturing Output Correlations

Bilateral Manufacturing VA Correlation

1

US-Canada

0.8
Poland-Germany

US-UK

US-Sweden

Hungary-Germany

US-Finland

US-Singapore

0.6
US-Italy

Slovakia-Austria

US-Austrailia

US-Costa

US-EU15

US-India

0.4

US-Mexico (post 1995)

Slovakia-Germany
US-Netherlands
US-Belgium

Czech-Austria

0.2

Poland-Austria

US-Malaysia

US-Mexico

US-Philippines

US-Ireland

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

US-Venezuela

-0.2
US-Columbia

-0.4
Production Sharing Intensity of Trade

Figure 2c: Bilateral Output Correlations and Export Intensity of Manufacturing
1
US-Canada

US-Mexico (post 1995)
0.8

Bilateral Manufacturing VA correlation

US-Finland

US-Sweden

US-Singapore
Hungary-Germany

US-UK
0.6
US-Costa Rica

Slov-Austria
Poland-Germany

US-Dominican Republic

0.4
Slov-Germany

US-EU15

US-Malaysia

US-South Korea

0.2

US-Philippines

US-Mexico

US-Ireland
Czech-Germany

US-Thailand
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

-0.2

US-Spain
-0.4

Export Intensity of Manufacturing Value Added
Notes: Production sharing indices for all observations except for East Europe are based on BEA data on flows between US multinationals and their affiliates. The index is
calculated for 2003. See text for details. The bilateral output correlations for all observations except for those within Eastern Europe are based on correlations between HP filtered
real manufacturing value added from BEA and HP-filtered real manufacturing value added from WDI and OECD for the affiliate host country, over the period 1983-2003

1.6

Figure 3: Model Based Bilateral Correlation Results
Figure 3A
Trade Share and Business Cycle Comovement
0.5
0.45
S2P=.9

0.4
Cross-Country Tradeable Correlations

S2P=.76

0.35

S2P=.62
S2P=.48

0.3

S2P=.33
S2P=.19

0.25

S2P=.05

0.2
S2P=.62

0.15

Each vertical step for the
Export to GDP ratio =0.6
represents a increase of
production sharing's
fraction of trade (S2P)

0.1
S2P=.05

0.05
Note: The points are all plotted for the export GDP ratio
from country 1 to 2 of 0.05

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

X

Volume of Exports as a Fraction of Manufacturing Output (S 2 ) in country 2

Figure 3B
Production Sharing Composition of Trade and Business Cycle Comovement
0.5
Each vertical step for the
Production Sharing Export
ratio =0.19 represents a
increase of the export to
GDP raio for country 2 (S2X)

0.45

Cross-Country Tradeable Correlations

0.4
0.35
0.3

S2X=0.6

0.25
0.2

S2X=0.45

0.15
S2X=0.30

0.1
S2X=0.15
S2X=0.05

0.05

S2X=0.01

Note: The points are all plotted for the export GDP ratio
from country 1 to 2 of 0.05

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6
P

Share of Production Sharing (S 2 ) in country 2

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

