NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL RESOURCE EXTRACTION CONTRACTS UNDER THREAT OF EXPROPRIATION
Eduardo Engel
Ronald Fischer
Working Paper 13742
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13742

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

We thank William Hogan and Federico Struzenegger for proposing this research topic, and Richard
Zeckhauser for an insightful discussion of the first version of this paper, presented at the Populism
and Natural Resource Workshop held at Harvard in November 2007. We also thank William Nordhaus
and workshop participants for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Eduardo Engel and Ronald Fischer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Resource Extraction Contracts Under Threat of Expropriation
Eduardo Engel and Ronald Fischer
NBER Working Paper No. 13742
January 2008
JEL No. H21,H25,Q33,Q34,Q38
ABSTRACT
The government contracts with a foreign firm to extract a natural resource that requires an upfront
investment and which faces price uncertainty. In states where profits are high, there is a likelihood
of expropriation, which generates a social cost that increases with the expropriated value. In this environment,
the planner's optimal contract avoids states with high probability of expropriation. The contract can
be implemented via a competitive auction with reasonable informational requirements. The bidding
variable is a cap on the present value of discounted revenues, and the firm with the lowest bid wins
the contract. The basic framework is extended to incorporate government subsidies, unenforceable
investment effort and political moral hazard, and the general thrust of the results described above is
preserved.

Eduardo Engel
Yale University
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
eduardo.engel@yale.edu
Ronald Fischer
Centro de Economia Aplicada (CEA)
Departamento de Ingenieria Industrial
Universidad de Chile
Republica 701 Santiago CHILE
rfischer@dii.uchile.cl

We have nationalized copper by unanimous decision of Parliament,
where the parties supporting the government are in the minority. We
want the whole world to understand that we have not confiscated the
large foreign mining companies. In keeping with a constitutional
amendment, we have redressed an historical iniquity by subtracting
from the compensation due to the firms, the profits accrued since
1956 that are in excess of a 12% annual rate.
The profits of some of the nationalized firms were so outrageous that
when applying the reasonable annual profit rate of 12%, their
compensations were subject to substantial deductions.
Salvador Allende: Speech to the United Nations, December 4th, 1972.

1 Introduction
Natural resource rich countries are prone to expropriating investors in those sectors in good
times, when prices of resources are considerably above the long run average price. The temptation for governments is large, because in the future prices will be lower, and thus any punishment by investors in terms of reduced future investment is low relative to the immediate gains
of expropriation. Moreover, the short time frame of democratic governments also leads to high
discounting of future losses of investment. Apart from these considerations, profits under a bonanza may be so high that populist pressures for redistribution can compel governments to act.
Hence in recent years, high commodity prices have led to outright expropriation or to sectoral
tax increases, which also amount to a form of expropriation.2
This type of behavior is specially common in industries with large sunk investments, such
as oil and mining. These plants normally operate at capacity, except when prices are so low
that they shut down. Therefore, it is specially galling for the public when profits rise substantially, without change in output, solely because of higher international prices. If the investors
are foreign, and have little political support, it seems to the public that they are exploiting the
generous conditions offered them.3 In addition, the investments are sunk, so it appears to be a
case of there being little or no cost to the government from expropriation.
We therefore observe a cycle in which, when prices are high, investors receive less than the
amounts stipulated in their contracts, and when prices are low, they are offered specially favorable conditions to induce them to invest. These special conditions are not credible, since
2

“Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa has signed a decree giving the state a greater share of profits from foreign
oil companies working in his country. He said the 50% of windfall oil profits stipulated in a law passed last year was
not enough, and the state should now receive 99%.”, BBC News, October 5th, 2007. “Algeria is to levy a windfall tax
on the profits of oil companies, as it tries to retain more of the economic benefits of its recent energy boom.[. . . ]
From early 2007, profits accrued by firms when prices are above $30 a barrel will be taxed at between 5% and 50%
depending on total output.”, BBC News, October 15th, 2006.
3
See epigraph, corresponding to a previous cycle of high prices and expropriation.

1

investors realize that they will be expropriated –or at least receive smaller profits than would
have obtained under the original contracts– when times are good again. The resulting policies
lead to lower investment than under certainty, and of a stop-go variety, which is inefficient.4
The current boom in natural resources is an example: Venezuela, Ecuador and Bolivia have
expropriated investors, Peru imposed “voluntary contributions” worth US$757 million, and
Chile (before the rise in prices) imposed a small royalty. Even developed countries have used
windfall taxes (the US imposed an oil windfall tax post-1973) or increasing royalties (Australia,
Canada and the UK) after perceived increases in profits in the natural resource sector.
The standard mining contract does not provide for the possibility of expropriation. From
the point of view of the foreign investor, it is an additional risk of investment. Attempts have
been made to introduce profit sharing mechanisms to reduce the temptation to expropriate,
but in practice they are often abused by transfer pricing, creating a negative effect on public
opinion, which in turn increases the probability of expropriation.
Hence it appears that the appropriate contracts for this type of environment are different
from those currently in use. It is possible to describe hypothetical scenarios where all parties,
including the foreign investor, are better off if the contract is such that taxes paid by the firm are
highly progressive, since this may lower the probability of expropriation in high price scenarios
(by reducing the gains from expropriation), while increasing the expected profits of the firm,
due to the reduced risk of expropriation. And even if firm’s rents are dissipated through some
competitive mechanism, the deadweight loss associated with expropriations may be reduced
through such a contract.
The object of this paper is to present a family of models that formalizes this intuition by
proposing an environment in which expropriations cannot be ruled out, due to ex post political
pressures. We derive general conditions that characterize the optimal ex ante contract, in the
sense that the government maximizes social welfare under the threat of expropriation. We also
show how the optimal contract can be implemented using a competitive auction.
In our model, the government has a natural resource project that requires upfront sunk investment, as in the case of a mining or oil extraction project. Since the problem of expropriation
usually arises with foreign investment, profits are not included (or have a lower weight) in the
welfare function of the planner, and as the good is not consumed at home but exported, the
government only cares about the revenues it can obtain from the project.
4

“Zambia, meanwhile, plans to cash in on the stratospheric price of copper by renegotiating the generous terms
it gave to foreign firms when it privatised its copper mines in 2000. Then the price was low. Although these investors rescued an industry close to collapse, Zambia now wants to increase royalties and other taxes. [. . . ] Governments intent on reworking contracts or imposing new taxes clearly feel that they have the upper hand at the
moment. When prices were depressed and profits scarce, foreign firms had to be lured with generous terms that
now rankle.” The Economist, Oct 4th 2007.

2

The present value of raw profits of the project (i.e., if we disregard the possibility of expropriation) depends on the price, which is random, so profits are described by a probability density.5 In a dynamic model, governments are replaced by newer governments that do not necessarily respect the commitments of previous governments, or they may be subject to political
pressures that make them renege on previous agreements to not expropriate, or to renegotiate
natural resource contracts. We deal with these sources of dynamic inconsistency in our model
via a reduced form: we assume that there is a predefined function, known to all parties, of the
probability of expropriation, which depends on the firm’s present discounted profits.6
We assume that the expected value of profits in each state (i.e., given the possibility of expropriation) increases with raw profits, but at a decreasing rate. Furthermore, we assume that
expropriations cause a deadweight loss that is proportional to the firm’s loss, i.e. to the difference between contractual and effective profits. This deadweight loss can be interpreted as
a measure of the country’s respect of property and contract law. In a country in which contracts are broken continually, there is little trust in them and firms cannot impose a large cost
on government when they are expropriated. On the other hand, countries where contract and
property rights are respected are those where firms can impose a large cost on the government
when they are expropriated.
The question for the planner is to determine a contractual profit schedule for the firm that
depends on the present value of raw profits and the expropriation function, subject to a participation constraint: given the known expropriation probability, the investor must at least break
even on its investment. Initially, we assume that there is no unobservable effort the firm can
exert to increase profits (i.e., there is no moral hazard in effort), or to reduce the probability of
expropriation (no political moral hazard).
In the simple setup without moral hazard, we show that a contract that eliminates all risk for
the firm, while granting it no rents, is optimal in the case in which operating profits cover investment costs in all states of demand in finite time (high demand scenario). The optimal contract
then entails no expropriation. On the other hand, if the project cannot be financed using a
transfer schedule that avoids expropriations, a case which we refer to as an intermediate demand scenario, the optimal contract is characterized by a cap on the firm’s present discounted
revenues. This cap is not binding in low demand states, and the firm collects all revenue in
those states. By contrast, in high demand states all revenues above the cap accrue to the government. The threshold is chosen so that ex-ante expected profits, net of expropriation, are
5

Though profits are unobservable in general, we denote by operating profits the difference between the revenues of the firm and costs that are based on observable variables. These are the profits that are pre-specified in
the initial contract.
6
In general terms, this probability should depend on institutional aspects of the country such as the degree of
belief in the sanctity of contracts, the impact of public pressure on governments, etc.

3

zero.7 In an ordinary natural resource contract, the firm would receive all of the upside in the
good states, making it prone to expropriation. In the optimal contract, there is an upper bound
to the operating profits of the firm, and this reduces, by the optimal amount, the probability of
expropriation in high demand states. Note that this is equivalent to a windfall tax, because in
the good states, the residual revenues go to the government.8 Both in the high and intermediate
demand cases the optimal contract can be implemented via an auction where firms bid on the
maximum present value of operating profits they would obtain in the good states of the world,
and the minimum bid wins the auction. The planner does not need to know the expropriation
probability nor the firm’s sunk investment cost in order to implement this auction.9
We extend the model in several directions. First we consider the possibility that the government provides subsidies in the bad states of the world. Second, we extend the model to the case
of moral hazard in effort, i.e., when the firm can exert costly effort that increases the probability
of the good states of the world (the price distribution mentioned above now becomes a distribution of net revenue where marginal costs depend on effort exerted by the investor up front).
Finally, we consider the possibility that the firm can exert effort to reduce the probability of expropriation (by lobbying, targeted social expenditures, etc) and consider the optimal contract
in that case.10
Subsidies in bad states are not unusual in countries characterized by a probability of expropriation in the good states of the world. These subsidies usually cost society more than they
benefit the firm, as in the case in which they involve relaxing environmental or labor regulations in bad states of the world.11 We find that the optimal contract with distortionary subsidies
involves a minimum operating profit guarantee coupled to a maximum bound to profits: the
government subsidizes the firm in the worst states (in which there is no expropriation), sets
a maximum value to operating profits in the good states of the world, and has an intermediate range of states where the firm receives all the revenue generated by the project, but is not
subsidized.
In the case of moral hazard in effort, effort impacts the results of the project, by reducing
marginal costs throughout the life of the project. In a mining project, for example, as the grade
7

We do not analyze the possibility of a project that does not break even in expected value, i.e., one that impoverishes the country.
8
This may lead to procyclical government income, which should be addressed via a countercyclical spending
rule.
9
This auction is similar to the present-value-of-revenue auction analyzed in Engel, Fischer and Galetovic (2001).
10
The study of this case was suggested by our discussant in the Natural Resources and Populism Conference,
Richard Zeckhauser.
11
Since the revenue collected by the government from the project can be used to reduce distortionary taxation
elsewhere in the economy, the deadweight loss associated with subsidies for the firm financed via taxes does not
provide a rationale for the result that follows. For a formal derivation of this insight, see the Irrelevance Result in
Engel, Fischer and Galetovic (2007).

4

of the ore declines, marginal costs tend to increase until they become higher than operating
costs, and the mine closes down. By reducing marginal costs, the amount of minerals extracted
before the mine has to close down is higher, and this is more valuable when prices are high.
In this case the optimal contract does not set a fixed cap on the operating profits of the firm,
since that would lead to insufficient effort. Nevertheless, as in the benchmark model, the optimal contract lowers the firm’s profits, as compared to the standard contract in high demand
scenarios. In this case it does so by imposing a schedule similar to progressive taxation when
operating profits exceed predetermined values. Thus, the government trades off the the deadweight cost associated to expropriation in high revenue scenarios, while providing incentives
that increase their likelihood.12
We also consider the case in which the firm faces political moral hazard, and can exert costly
effort to reduce the probability of expropriation. The optimal contract is similar to that in the
simpler case with no political moral hazard. It stipulates that in bad states the firm operates
the franchise forever, while in better states the contract lasts until a fixed amount of operating
profits, common to all these states, is collected. The reason that, in contrast to the case of moral
hazard in effort, here effort affects the probability of expropriation across states, but does not
increase the probability of higher income states. Hence there is no conflict between reducing
the probability of expropriation by limiting contracted profits and providing incentives in order
to increase the probability of higher states.
Finally, we come to the issue of implementation. It would be politically unfeasible to have a
contract in which the government collects nothing while accumulated profits are lower than the
limiting amount of profits, and receives all the residual afterwards, with all the attendant complications for the government of operating the mine. Consider then the following schematic
proposal to determine the windfall tax in a given period. Each period, an independent agency
makes the best estimate of future discounted profits given current information. This estimate
plus the profits accrued and taxes already paid leads to an estimate of the present value of taxes
that needs to be paid in the future so as to comply with the contract. The firm then pays a tax
proportional to this amount, for example, the fraction that, if paid indefinitely, would lead, in
expectation, to paying the windfall tax stipulated in the contract. In the absence of uncertainty
about future profits, this tax rate leads to a tax burden that remains constant over time. Given
the existence of uncertainty, it may be desirable to have a lower tax rate, set so that the probability of the firm earning less than the contracted amount is a predetermined and small value.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, which can be skipped
without loss of continuity, we relate this paper to the literature. Section 3 describes the basic
12

If the moral hazard effect dominates the expropriation effect, the standard contract which provides full residual
rights to the private firm, is again optimal.

5

model and derives the main results, including how to implement the optimal contract with a
competitive auction with realistic informational assumptions. Section 4 considers various extensions. The last section concludes.

2 Relation to the literature
There is an extensive literature on optimal taxation of exhaustible natural resources to which
this paper is related (see Heaps and Helliwell (1985), Gillis (1982) and Boadway and Flatters
(1993) for classical references).13 Also related to this paper is Bohn and Deacon (2000), which
study both theoretically and empirically the effects of insecure ownership on investment and
natural resource use. They show that investment falls with insecure ownership and therefore
the net effect on depletion of natural resources is ambiguous. Finally, Fraser and Kingwell
(1997) compares the performance of resource rent taxes and ad valorem royalties on investment levels, but the effects the authors describe are due to risk aversion, whereas in our case
the investors are risk neutral.
There are two justifications to tax resource rents over and above the levies that are implicit
in general income taxes. One is the efficiency based argument that resource-rents are not distorting (but note that this argument requires positive ex ante and not ex post rents). The other
reason is an equity based argument that suggests that natural resource rents should accrue to
the population at large, not to a few private individuals. We assume that the private firm is
paid no rent at all when solving the planner’s problem (i.e., rents receive no weight in the social
welfare function), which is consistent with the assumption that the firm is foreign. However,
the characteristics of the optimal contract remain unchanged when the planner weighs firm’s
profits in the objective function, as long as this weight is not too large (see Result 3 for a formal
statement).
Our contribution to this literature is to incorporate, in admittedly reduced reform, the probability of expropriation and the deadweight loss associated with this event into the planner’s
objective function. Also, in contrast to most of that literature, the taxes that are implicit in our
contract are on the present value of firm’s profits, and not on flow profits, i.e., we assume away
the dynamic issues. This simplifies our analysis considerably and explains why we can implement the planner’s optimal contract via a competitive auction with realistic informational
13

There also is an extensive literature, going back to Hotelling (1931), that derives the price of an exhaustible
natural resource as an equilibrium outcome resulting from optimal extraction (see, for example, Devarajan and
Fisher (1981), Salant (1995) and the references cited therein). We depart from this literature by assuming exogenously given demand uncertainty, i.e. a small country assumption, as well as by omitting the dynamic issue of
optimal resource extraction. Moreover, we search for the optimal contract when expropriation is possible and
depends on the price realization.

6

requirements.
As noted by Boadway and Flatters (1993), there are three ‘ideal’ approaches for government
to divert rents to the public sector. One approach is a fully fledged cash flow tax, which implies
that tax liabilities will be negative at initial stages of exploitation of the natural resource, making
governments reluctant to adopt this option. A second approach is that the government takes a
share of equity in the firm. The third approach is for governments to capture rents by having
firms bid for the rights to exploit the resource. The winning firm provides an upfront payment
in exchange for the perpetual right to extract the resource. This option is not credible, precisely
due to the time inconsistency in government policy: i.e., due to ex post expropriation. The policy proposals that emerge from this paper lie within this third group, even though the bidding
variable that implements the planner’s optimal contract is the firm’s present discounted profit.
This has the advantage that no upfront payments by the firm to the government are needed, but
motivates extending our model to incorporate moral hazard, since the firm’s incentives to extract the resource efficiently are reduced by the fact that under our contract it is not the residual
claimant of revenues generated by the contract.14
The planner’s problem considered in this paper has much in common with the problem facing the planner who designs the optimal public-private partnership contract in Engel, Fischer
and Galetovic (2007), and therefore the results we obtain share the flavor of the results obtained
in that paper as well. Interestingly, we do not need to assume a risk averse firm here, since the
possibility of expropriation combined with a deadweight loss associated with expropriations
leads the planner to view a risk neutral firm’s behavior as if it were risk averse, at least for high
demand realizations.

3 The main model
A natural resource project (‘mining project’ in what follows) requires a fixed amount of upfront
investment I common across firms. The present value of operational profits generated by the
project are described by a probability density f (v), with support [v min , v max ] and c.d.f. F (v).
Operational profits are equal to revenue minus operating costs minus standard income taxes, in
what follows we refer indistinctly to revenues and operational profits. The density f summarizes
exogenous price uncertainty, i.e., the project sells its product in a large world market over which
it has no influence.15
14

Osmundsen (1998) considers the case of optimal dynamic taxation with adverse selection in the firm’s cost
structure. By contrast, we assume identical firms.
15
The case where f responds to actions taken by the firm is considered when studying moral hazard in Section
4.

7

A contract is characterized by a schedule R c (v) that defines the firm’s present discounted
remuneration as a function of discounted revenues generated by the project, v; the subscript c
emphasizes that this is the remuneration stipulated in the contract, thereby ignoring the possibility that the contract will be cut short by expropriation and realized revenues may be lower.
The only source of remuneration for the firm are revenues generated by the project, therefore
0 ≤ R c (v) ≤ v. The government is the residual claimant of revenues generated by the project, so
that, according to the contract, in state v it receives v − R c (v).16
At the time of contracting, expropriations are random events, both as to when they happen
and as to the amount expropriated. Because of this, in state v, the firm may end up receiving
present discounted profits that can lie anywhere between −I (when the government expropriates all its revenue) and R c (v) − I (when no expropriation takes place). Since the government
and the firm are risk neutral, all we need to know about expropriations is expected profits that
accrue to the firm in state v after expropriation. We denote this function by Πe (R c (v) − I ), and
refer to it as the effective profit function. In general, Πe (x) denotes the present value of the
firm’s expected ex-post discounted profits, when the contract entitles it to profits equal to x.
This function summarizes, admittedly in reduced form, all the (common) knowledge available
to the planner and the firm about future expropriation scenarios when signing the resource
extraction contract. Will the next president be market friendly or a die hard nationalist? And
if she turns out to be a die hard nationalist, will the firm be successful bribing the upcoming
administration to avoid expropriation?
In this section Πe is determined exogenously, that is, the current planner and firm’s actions
have no effect on this function.17 We make the following assumptions regarding this function:
Assumption 1 (Effective profit functions) The effective profit function, Πe (x), has a continuous
second derivative, and there exists an x E ≥ 0, referred to as the expropriation threshold, that
satisfies:
1. Πe (x) = x for x ≤ x E .
2. Π0e (x) > 0 and Π00e (x) < 0, for all x > x E .
The first property says that there exists a threshold for effective profits below which expropriation cannot take place: expropriations are possible only when discounted profits are positive,
larger than x E .18 The second property implies that, beyond this threshold, the firm’s effective
16

In Section 3.3 we discuss alternative options for how the government actually collects its share.
We relax this assumption in Section 4.
18
Many of the results we derive are simpler if we assume Πe (x) strictly concave for all x, that is, when expropriations are possible for all realizations of v. In this case the planner’s problem is analogous to the one considered in
Engel et al. (2007).
17

8

profit increases with the discounted profits it is entitled to according to the contract, albeit at a
decreasing rate.
The above properties assume that expropriation depends on the profit rate, that is, on (R c (v)−
I )/I , which is linear in R c (v). The quote at the beginning of this paper, from Salvador Allende’s
1972 speech at United Nations, is consistent with this assumption. If the firm earns 5 times its
investment, so that its profit rate is 400%, it expects to loose a much larger fraction of its profit
because of expropriation than if its profit rate is only 20%. This is captured by the first assumption. Furthermore, if the firm expects to loose one half of every additional dollar generated by
the project when the profit rate increases from 200 to 210% due to expropriation, then the second assumption implies that it will grab more than half of every additional dollar of profit when
the profit rate goes from 210 to 220%.
Our final assumption relates to the cost of expropriations. We assume that when a mining project is expropriated, the firm challenges the decision in (possibly international) court,
thereby imposing a cost on the government of defending itself. This deadweight loss is a fraction µ of the expropriated value of the project, where 0 < µ < 1.19

3.1 Planner’s problem
In the benchmark model there is no moral hazard, and therefore no need to provide incentives
for performance. In order for firms to be willing participants in the project, the contract offered
by the planner must satisfy the firm’s participation constraint:
Z

Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v ≥ 0.

Since the government is the residual claimant of revenues generated by the mining project, in
state v its expected revenue is the difference between net (of investment) revenues generated
by the project, v − I , and profits accrued to the firm, Πe (R c (v) − I ):
Expected government revenue = v − I − Πe (R c (v) − I ),
while the average loss to the firm due to expropriation is the difference between profits it was
entitled to in the contract and actual profits:
Revenue loss for the firm due to expropriation = R c (v) − I − Πe (R c (v) − I ).
19

Alternatively, the value of the revenue stream is reduced because the new management is less efficient, or
because experienced personnel leaves. Finally, there could be a cost due to an increase in the perceived riskiness
in the country for foreign investment.

9

Because of the deadweight loss mentioned above, only a fraction (1 − µ) of the revenue lost by
the firm due to expropriation is received by the government, hence the planner maximizes
Z

[v − I − Πe (R c (v) − I ) − µ {R c (v) − I − Πe (R c (v) − I )}] f (v)d v.

R
And as the term (v − I ) f (v)d v is independent of the actions of the government, the planner’s
problem is equivalent to solving:
Z
Z
min (1 − µ) Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v + µ R c (v) f (v)d v,
R c (v)
Z
s.t.
Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v ≥ 0,

(1a)
(1b)

0 ≤ R c (v) ≤ v.

(1c)

As mentioned above, the effective profit function, Πe , is exogenous, while the firm’s contractual
revenue function, R c , is the planner’s decision variable.
It follows from (1a) that the government’s objective is to minimize a weighted average of
the operating profits effectively received by the firm and those profits it had contracted to pay
according to the original contract. The former enters for obvious reasons, since less money for
the firm means more money for the government. The latter is more interesting, and reflects the
fact that, other things equal, a contract that promises higher returns to the firm leads to larger
losses when the firm is expropriated and therefore larger losses for the government as well.
Note that there is another interpretation, mentioned in the introduction: the higher the cost
the firm can impose on the government by challenging the expropriation decision (via a higher
µ), the more weight the government gives to the terms of the original contract in the objective
function, i.e., to R c (v). In other words, the more secure the property rights of the foreign firm,
the more the government concentrates on reducing the contractual profits, while if property
rights are insecure (small µ), the government is willing to offer more generous terms in the
original contract, since it knows that the costs of expropriation are lower.

3.2 Optimal Contract
We first consider projects that can be financed with operating profits below the expropriation
threshold (so that, if desired, they could be financed avoiding any risk of expropriation) and
show that the optimal contract indeed considers no expropriation. When the firm’s participation constraint can be satisfied without incurring in expropriation risk, any contract that avoids
expropriation altogether and for which the firm’s participation constraint is satisfied with equality is optimal (these are the high demand projects we referred to in the introduction). Expropri10

ation should be avoided when it can be avoided.
Result 1 (Projects where expropriation can be avoided) Denote by x E the expropriation threshold defined in Assumption 1 above and assume that
xE

Z
0

v f (v)d v + x E (1 − F (x E )) ≥ I .

(2)

Then any contract that satisfies the firm’s participation constraint with equality and for which
R c (v) ≤ I + x E for all v, is optimal. In particular, the contract with R c (v) ≡ I is optimal.
Proof

The following string of equalities and inequalities shows that the planner’s objective

function is bounded from below by µI for any schedule R c (v) that satisfies the firm’s participation constraint:
Z

Z
R c (v) f (v)d v = I +

[R c (v) − I ] f (v)d v
Z

Π−1
e (Πe (R c (v) − I )) f (v)d v
¶
µZ
−1
Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v
≥ I + Πe
= I+

≥ I + Π−1
e (0)
= I.
The first and second equalities are trivial. The first inequality follows from Jensen’s inequality
(Assumption 1 implies that Π−1
e is convex) while the second inequality is justified by the firm’s
participation constraint. Finally, the last equality follows from the assumption that Πe (0) = 0
(which follows from Assumption 1).
Next note that any schedule with R c (v) ≤ I + x E that satisfies the firm’s participation constraint with equality attains a value of µI for the planner’s objective function (1a) and therefore
is optimal.
Finally note that the first inequality is strict unless the function Πe (x) is linear in the range
of values taken by R c (v) ≤ I + x E . Thus the set of optimal policies derived above is the set of all
optimal policies.

The intuition for this result is the following: When the planner can design a contract that
avoids expropriations and satisfies the firm’s participation constraint with equality, this contract is optimal, since it avoids the deadweight loss associated with expropriations altogether.
11

Even though the firm is indifferent between this and a wide variety of contracts where its expected profits, net of expropriation risk, are zero, the planner prefers the contract without expropriations.
The next result analyzes the case in which the expropriation risk is unavoidable (intermediate demand projects according to the introduction). It confirms the intuition that the planner
wants this risk to be as small as possible.
Result 2 (Projects with unavoidable expropriation) Assume that there exists no contract that
avoids expropriation risk altogether, that is:
xE

Z
0

v f (v)d v + x E (1 − F (x E )) < I .

(3)

Also assume that the firm’s participation constraint can be satisfied:
Z
0

Then M defined via

Z

∞

Πe (v − I ) f (v)d v > 0.

Πe (min(M , v) − I ) f (v)d v = 0,

(4)

is finite and larger than x E . More important, R c (v) = min(v, M ) characterizes the optimal contract (see Figure 1). That is, operational profits of the firm in the optimal contract are limited to a
cap M defined in (4).

R c (v) − I

Πe (v − I )
R c (v) − I
M −I
Πe (M − I )

xE − I

0

I

xE

M

v

−I

Figure 1: The optimal contract in the case where expropriation is unavoidable

12

Proof Even though a proof based on the problem’s Lagrangian and complementary slackness
conditions is straightforward, we believe the following informal argument provides more insight.
It is obvious that the firm’s participation constraint will hold with equality in the optimal
contract. Also, increasing by one dollar the firm’s revenues stipulated in the contract in state
v increases the firm’s expected revenue by Π0e (R c (v) − I ) f (v) while it increases the objective
function the planner wishes to minimize by [(1−µ)Π0e (R c (v)− I )+µ] f (v). It follows that the rate
at which the objective function increases with the money being collected by the firm is
ρ(v, R c (v)) ≡ (1 − µ) +

µ

.
Π0e (R c (v) − I )

(5)

The smallest value ρ(v, R c (v)) can take is one, and it takes this value if and only if R c (v) ≤ x E
(and R c (v) is feasible, that is, 0 ≤ R c (v) ≤ v). The planner first uses up socially cheaper dollars
to satisfy the firm’s participation constraint, that is, dollars with ρ(v, R c (v)) = 1. If the firm’s
participation constraint can be satisfied this way, the optimal contract belongs to the family
described in the previous proposition.
In the case we are considering here however, the planner falls short of satisfying the firm’s
participation constraint after exhausting all transfers from schedules with ρ(v, R c (v)) = 1, and
must resort to socially more expensive revenues with ρ(v, R c (v)) > 1. Since Assumption 1 implies that ρ(v, R c (v)) is increasing in R c (v) for given v, it follows that in the optimal contract

ρ(v, R c (v)) =




 ρ0,

if ρ(v, v) ≥ ρ 0 ,



 (1 − µ) + µ , if ρ(v, v) < ρ ,
0
Π0 (v−I )
e

where ρ 0 is chosen to satisfy the firm’s participation constraint with equality. The optimal contract now follows immediately, with M defined via: ρ 0 = (1 − µ) + µ/Π0e (M − I ).

The optimal contract, depicted in Figure 1, caps the firm’s upside risk. In doing so, the planner minimizes the deadweight loss associated with expropriation. The social cost of transferring an additional dollar to the firm increases with the amount already transferred, hence the
planner has incentives to keep the firm’s profits as low as possible. The planner keeps away
from high values of R c (v) because they entail higher expropriation probabilities, and therefore
larger gaps between expected (under the contract) and realized profits for the firm. Large “disappointments” by the firm are costly, since they imply larger losses for the planner.

13

Two extensions follow immediately for both results above. First, if the planner gives weight
α to the firm’s profits, the optimal contract remains unchanged, as long as α ≤ 1 − µ, for in this
case the planner minimizes
(1 − µ − α)

Z

Z
Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v + µ R c (v) f (v)d v

and the above proofs go through without change as long as 1 − µ − α ≥ 0.
Second, if the firm’s participation constraint requires a predetermined level of rents, so that
Z

Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v ≥ Π0 > 0,

the proofs of both results above continue holding with only minor modifications.
Result 3 (Optimal contract for the main model) The planner gives weight α ≤ 1−µ to the firm’s
profit, the firm’s participation constraint is
Z

Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v ≥ Π0 ,

with Π0 ≥ 0, and the firm’s participation constraint can be satisfied:
Z

Define M via:

Z

Πe (v − I ) f (v)d v ≥ Π0 .

Πe (min(M , v) − I ) f (v)d v = Π0 .

Then the contract R c (v) = min(M , v) solves the planner’s problem and this is the only optimal
contract if M ≥ x E . By contrast, if M < x E , any contract with R c (v) = min(M , v) in states with
Rx
v ≥ x E that collects 0 E Πe (min(M , v) − I ) f (v)d v in states with v ≤ x E is optimal.

3.3 Implementation
We have shown that a threshold contract that specifies a particular cap on discounted profits for
the firm is the optimal contract when expropriation is possible. We show next how this contract
can be implemented via a competitive auction. Following this result, we discuss some practical
implementation issues that are ignored by our framework.
Result 4 (Implementation) There exist many identical firms for which
Z

Πe (v − I ) f (v)d v ≥ Π0 ,
14

(6)

with Π0 , Πe (x), f (v) and Π0 defined earlier.
The following auction then implements the optimal contract: Firms bid on the present value
of revenue they are entitled to by the contract, the firm that bids the lowest value, β, wins. The
contract stipulates that the winning firm collects β if v > β and v otherwise.20 The firm bears
demand (i.e. price) and expropriation risk under the ensuing contract.
The planner does not need to know the ex ante probability density f (v), the expropriation
probabilities (and therefore the effective profit function Πe (x)), the upfront investment I or the
outside option Π0 to implement the optimal contract via a competitive auction. The planner
needs to observe operating profits, since it needs this information to enforce the contract (in high
demand scenarios it must determine when the firm has collected M ). Finally, no firm will bid in
the auction if the project is not privately profitable, that is, if (6) does not hold.
Proof Given a winning bid β, the firm’s profit in state v is β − I if v ≥ β and v − I otherwise.
Thus the winning firm’s expected profits are:
Z

Πe (min(β, v) − I ) f (v)d v.

This expression is continuous, negative for low values of β, positive for large values of β (because of (6)), and strictly increasing in β. Hence there exists a unique β̄ for which
Z

Πe (min(β̄, v) − I ) f (v)d v = Π0 .

This bid wins the auction (in the sense that it defines the Nash equilibrium) and it is trivial to
see that β̄ is equal to the threshold M that characterizes the optimal contract in Results 3 (note
that M = I in the case of a project with avoidable expropriation, as in Result 1).

Working with discounted revenues has provided tractability, at the expense of avoiding dynamic issues. There are many revenue trajectories for the firm and government that will implement the optimal contract, in that they satisfy the condition that their present values are those
stipulated in the contract. This motivates discussing, at least informally, which of this multitude
of trajectories are more attractive in practice.
One possibility is to allow the firm to collect all revenues from the project until their discounted value adds up to M or it is expropriated. There are several problems with this approach.
First, the government collects windfall taxes only late in the contract. Contracts with long ges20

The resulting auction is analogous to the present-value-of-revenue (PVR) auction studied in Engel, Fischer and
Galetovic (2001).

15

tation periods before the government collects any windfall tax, even in high demand scenarios, are likely to lead to a higher expropriation risk, thus lowering the effective profit function,
Πe (v), and therefore are unattractive. Second, the government has to operate the project once
the threshold of firm’s profits is attained, which is not appealing.
An alternative implementation, which we believe to be more attractive, is to define by contract a windfall tax schedule that increases with the firm’s accumulated discounted profits at
the date of taxation and decreases with the amount of windfall taxes paid. We present a simple
example of such a schedule.
Example 1 Production is constant over time (and equal to one), production costs are zero, and
the price of the natural resource follows a random walk:21
P t = P t −1 + ²t ,
where the ²t are i.i.d. with zero mean and variance σ2 . The discount rate is constant over time
and denoted by r .
Unless indicated otherwise, all discounted values are expressed as of time zero. Denoting expected discounted revenues between period s and u by R su , and by Et R su the corresponding expected value conditional on information available in period t (given the random walk assumption, this is equivalent to conditioning on P t ), we have:
Et R t∞ = (1 + r )−t

X

(1 + r )−k Et P t +k = (1 + r )−t

k≥0

X

(1 + r )−k P t =

k≥0

Hence:
Et R 0∞ = R 0t +

1
Pt .
r (1 + r )t −1

1
Pt .
r (1 + r )t −1

Denote by T su discounted windfall taxes paid by the firm between periods s and u and by M the
revenue threshold that characterizes the optimal contract. If σ = 0, that is, if there is no price
uncertainty, we have that the windfall tax schedule in period t dollars defined by:
Tt =

r
[Et R 0∞ − T0t −1 − M ]
1+r

implements the optimal contract with a constant tax payment in all periods.
In general, when σ > 0 and we have uncertainty, defining
Tt =

δr
[Et R 0∞ − T0t −1 − M ],
1+r

21

What follows can be extended easily to the case where the price of the natural resource (or its log) follow a more
general process, e.g., a first-order autorgressive process.

16

with δ ∈ (0, 1], provides a family of plausible windfall tax schedule. The parameter δ should decrease as σ increases, to ensure that the probability that the firm’s discounted payment of windfall
taxes exceeds v − M is small.

The auction that implements the optimal contract differs in important ways from the standard auction considered in the literature to dissipate rents of natural resource projects. While
the standard auction involves an up-front payment to the government by the firm, the auction
derived in this paper does not. In the case of this auction, the firm’s bid is linked to the degree
of progressivity of the windfall tax faced by the firm. More aggressive bids are associated with
higher expected profits and lead to more progressive taxation.

3.4 Welfare Gain
As noted in Section 2, the standard auction proposed in the literature to dissipate rents of an
exhaustible natural resource project, has firms bid for the perpetual right to extract the resource.
Next we compare the welfare implications of this auction (‘standard auction’ in what follows)
with those of the optimal auction under threat of expropriation derived above.
Since both auctions dissipate the firm’s rents (we assume that the firm’s outside option, Π0 ,
does not depend on the auction), in both cases the project’s rents accrue exclusively to the
government. It follows that the auction that is most attractive for the government is the one that
leads to the smallest average deadweight loss from expropriation. With the standard auction,
the deadweight loss is given by
L st = µ

Z

[v − I − Πe (v − I )] f (v)d v,

while for the optimal auction derived in this section the loss is:
L opt = µ

Z

[R c (v) − I − Πe (R c (v) − I )] f (v)d v.

Since R c (v) = min(M , v) for the optimal contract,22 we have:
L opt = µ

M

Z
0

[v − I − Πe (v − I )] f (v)d v + µ

22

Z

∞
M

[M − I − Πe (M − I )] f (v)d v.

The unique optimal contract takes this form when expropriation cannot be avoided (see Result 2) and one of
many optimal contracts takes this form when expropriation can be avoided (see Result 1).

17

Subtracting L opt from L st leads to the following expression for the government’s gain from
using the optimal auction:
Gain = µ

Z

∞
M

[v − I − Πe (v − I ) − {M − I − Πe (M − I )}] f (v)d v.

(7)

Note that the Gain is positive only for states where prices are sufficiently high that revenues
are larger than M . The optimal contract provides no gain in relatively low demand states. Define
the “grab function” G(x) ≡ x − Πe (x).23 We have that G(x) = 0 for x ≤ x E , while G(x) is strictly
increasing for x > x E , with G 0 (x) = 1 − Π0e (x) > 0 in this range. It then follows that
Gain = µ

Z

∞
M

[G(v − I ) −G(M − I )] f (v)d v

and since the integrand is strictly positive, the gain from using the optimal contract is strictly
positive as well.
The intuition for why the contract derived above is better than the standard contract is the
following: The optimal contract avoids, to the extent allowed by the firm’s participation constraint, scenarios where expropriations are more costly, in terms of deadweight loss, thereby
leading to higher welfare than the standard auction. Welfare gains are larger when the threshold M is lower, that is, for example, when the firm’s outside option Π0 is lower.
Even in the case where the distribution of revenue from the project is highly skewed, welfare gains from the optimal auction can be significant. Consider, for example, an exploratory
prospect where the probability of success is π and I corresponds to investment in exploration.
Conditional on successful exploration, the distribution of revenue is described by a probability
density f (w) (with c.d.f. F (w)) that takes values between w m and w M . The revenue threshold
that characterizes the optimal contract, M , then solves:
Z

M
wm

Πe (w − I ) f (w)d w + Πe (M − I )(1 − F (M )) =

(1 − π)
I.
π

(8)

Revenue uncertainty is usually large in such a project, even conditional on successful exploration, which amounts to a a large variance of f (w). It then follows that the threshold M will be
much smaller than w M if the project is highly profitable ex-ante; and welfare gains associated
with moving from the standard to the optimal contract can be expected to be considerable. For
example, if π = 0.1, the r.h.s. of (8) suggests that return on investment will average 900% when
exploration is successful, yet realized profit rates may still vary substantially, say between 500
and 2000%, as is likely to be the case for most natural resource projects. Gains from the optimal
23

The “grab function” terminology was suggested by Richard Zeckhauser.

18

contract are negligible only for a project where the firm’s participation constraint holds for a
value of M close to w M .
The following result summarizes our result on the welfare gain from the optimal contract:
Result 5 Welfare under the optimal auction derived in this section is higher than under the standard auction where firms bid on the right to extract the resource indefinitely. The welfare gain
from the optimal auction is equal to:
Gain = µ

Z

∞
M

[v − I − Πe (v − I ) − {M − I − Πe (M − I )}] f (v)d v > 0.

4 Extensions
In this section we examine two extensions of practical importance. First, we study the case in
which the government provides subsidies to the firm in bad states of the world. In the context of
this paper, subsidies usually translate in laxer application of environmental or labor regulations
and sometimes into direct cash transfers. The second extension incorporates moral hazard, for
example, it could be that by exerting costly effort, the foreign investor can reduce unobservable
costs and increase revenues. The question is how to design a contract that provides optimal
incentives.

4.1 Subsidies
The main problem of subsidies is that they cost governments more than the benefit they provide
to firms. If labor and environmental regulations are meant to correct externalities, the social
cost of the laxer regulations is higher than the private benefit perceived by the foreign investor.
Hence we assume that a subsidy S(v) has a social cost of ζS(v), ζ > 1, so that the objective
function maximized by the planner now is:
Z

[v −I −Πe (R c (v)+S(v)−I )−(ζ−1)S(v)−µ {R c (v) + S(v) − I − Πe (R c (v) + S(v) − I )}] f (v)d v, (9)

where the term (ζ − 1)S(v) captures the social cost of the subsidy, beyond its private value. Two
schedules are available to the planner now to achieve her objective, the revenue schedule R c (v)
and the subsidy schedule S(v).24
24

We assume no transfers from general funds are possible, these could be incorporated following the approach
used in Engel et al. (2007) without affecting the qualitative nature of the results we obtain.

19

The problem facing the planner is equivalent to:
min (1 − µ)

Z

R c (v),S(v)

Z
Z
Πe (R c (v) + S(v) − I ) f (v)d v + µ R c (v) f (v)d v + (µ + ζ − 1) S(v) f (v)d v,
(10a)

Z
s.t.

Πe (R c (v) + S(v) − I ) f (v)d v ≥ 0,

(10b)

0 ≤ R c (v) ≤ v,

(10c)

S(v) ≥ 0.

(10d)

In order to solve this problem, note that as in the proof of result 2, the participation constraint (10b) holds with equality. Hence the problem is similar to that in section 3 of Engel et al.
(2007), with the expropriation function Πe playing the role of the firm’s concave utility function
u.25 The only difference is that Πe (x) is linear in net profits for x ≤ x E while the utility function
considered in Engel et al. (2007) is strictly concave everywhere.
Hence, the results of that paper apply to this case, with slight modifications. For example,
R c (v) < v and S(v) > 0 cannot be optimal, since achieving the firm’s participation constraint via
subsidies has a higher cost for the government than achieving it via the income generated by
the project. Also, demand states can be classified into high, intermediate and low-demand. In
high demand states the optimal contract stipulates R c (v) < v and S(v) = 0. Expropriations is
most likely in these states, the optimal contract assigns the same value of R c (v) to all states in
this group (denote it by M̃ ) and the government collects a windfall tax equal to v − M̃ . Similarly,
R c (v) = v and S(v) > 0 in low demand states. In these states there are no expropriations and no
windfall taxes. Finally, there exist a range of intermediate demand states, where R c (v) = v and
S(v) = 0. There are no windfall taxes in these states, yet expropriations can happen but are less
likely than in high demand states.
Result 6 (Optimal contract with subsidies) Consider the planner’s problem described by (10a)–
(10d). If there exists a finite M that satisfies:
Z

Πe (min(M , v) − I ) f (v)d v = 0,

(11)

and Π0e (M − I ) ≥ µ/(µ + ζ − 1), then the optimal contract is either the one described in Result 1 (if
Π0e (M − I ) = 1) or the one described in Result 2 (if µ/(µ + ζ − 1) < Π0e (M − I ) < 1).
Otherwise, that is either if (11) has no solution or M solving this equation satisfies Π0e (M −I ) <
25

R
The fact that here Πe (R c (v)+S(v)−I ) f (v)d v shows up in the objective function, while the utility function does
not show up in the objective function in Engel et al. (2007) is irrelevant, since the firm’s participation constraint
implies that this term is equal to zero.

20

µ/(µ + ζ − 1), the optimal contract is characterized as follows:
Define M̃ via Π0e (M̃ −I ) = µ/(µ+ζ−1). Clearly M > M̃ > x E . The optimal contract then satisfies
R c (v) = min(M̃ , v) (Figure 2 shows the resulting contract). Furthermore, subsidies are handed out
only in states where v < x E and
Z

xE

0

Z
S(v) f (v)d v = −

Πe (min(M̃ , v) − I ) f (v)d v.

(12)

R c (v) − I

Πe (v − I )
R c (v) − I
M̃ − I
Πe (M̃ − I )

xE − I

0

I

xE

M̃

M

v

m−I
−I

Figure 2: The optimal contract in the case of subsidies
Proof As mentioned above, S(v) > 0 and R c (v) < v cannot be optimal. Hence states can be
classified into three categories: (a) R c (v) < v and S(v) = 0, (b) R c (v) = v and S(v) = 0, and (c)
R c (v) = v and S(v) > 0.
Next we extend the argument used to prove Result 2. The planner’s cost of providing an
additional dollar of revenues to satisfy the firm’s participation constraint, is
ρ R (v, R c (v)) = (1 − µ) +

µ

,
Π0e (R c (v) − I )

where we have used that S(v) = 0 since additional revenue from the project can be provided to
the firm only if R c (v) < v.

21

Similarly, the planner’s per-dollar cost of providing an additional dollar via subsidies is:
ρ S (v, R c (v)) = (1 − µ) +

µ+ζ−1
,
+ S(v) − I )

Π0e (v

where this time we used that R c (v) = v when S(v) > 0. In particular, this cost is lowest (and
equal to ζ) when v ≤ x E .
In the optimal contract the planner resorts to more expensive options to satisfy the firm’s
participation constraint only once cheaper options are exhausted. Since the social cost of financing the firm with subsidies is ζ, and there is no limit to the resources available to finance
the firm with this option, the planner will use revenues as long as their social cost is smaller
than ζ and will then resort to subsidies to complete the amount needed to satisfy the firm’s
participation constraint.
It follows that the planner sets R c (v) = min(M̃ , v) since this assigns to the firm all the revenue
with marginal cost less than or equal to ζ. From the assumptions we know that the income
obtained in this way is not enough to satisfy the firm’s participation constraint, since it adds up
R
to Πe (min(M̃ , v)−I ) f (v)d v < 0. Thus the firm obtains the remaining income needed to satisfy
its participation constraint via subsidies in states where expropriations are impossible.

Implementation
A simple two-threshold auction, analogous to the one derived in Engel et al. (2007), implements the optimal contract in this case.
Result 7 (Implementation with subsidies) The following two-threshold, scoring auction implements the solution to the planner’s problem (10a)–(10d)
• The government announces the probability density of expected discounted profit flow from
the project, f (v), and the parameter ζ that summarizes the social cost of subsidies.
• Firms bid on the minimum revenue guarantee, m, and the cap on their user fee revenue,
M , so that, in case of winning: R c (v) = min(M , v) and S(v) = max(m − v, 0).
• The firm that bids the lowest value of the scoring function
W (m, M ) = µM (1 − F (M )) + µ

Z

M
m

v f (v)d v + (µ + ζ − 1)mF (m) − (ζ − 1)

wins the contract.26
26

Note that M here corresponds to M̃ in Result 6.

22

m

Z

v f (v)d v
0

Proof
We first note that the optimal contract can be implemented via a contract characterized by
the threshold pair (M , m), where M denotes the revenue cap, and m the minimum revenue
guarantee. In the first scenario described in Result 6, M is defined via (11) and m can be any
number less than or equal to v min (recall that the support of f (v) is [v min , v max ]). In the second
scenario in Result 6, M is defined via
Π0e (M − I ) =
and m via:

m

Z
0

Z
(m − v) f (v)d v = −

µ
µ+ζ−1

Πe (min(M , v) − I ) f (v)d v.

(13)

It is easy to see that in a Nash equilibrium the winning bid minimizes the scoring function,
subject to the firm’s participation constraint, among all contracts in the two-threshold family
described above. Since, the scoring function differs from the planners objective function only
in a term proportional to the firm’s expected profits, and this term is equal to zero for the optimal contract, the optimal contract also solves the planner’s problem constrained to the family
of two-threshold contracts described above. The proof concludes by noting that this family
includes the optimal contract.

What is the intuition underlying this result? Note first that the planner’s problem is equivalent to minimizing an objective function that does not require knowledge of I or Πe . The objective function only depends on the probability distribution of the present value of revenue
that the project can generate and the distortions associated with government expenditures, as
summarized by ζ. By awarding the contract to the bidder that maximizes his objective function, and assuming competitive bidding, the planner induces firms to solve society’s problem
without knowing the cost of the project or the expropriation risk.
As before, in the case of a high demand project, that is a project where the firm’s participation constraint can be satisfied without expropriation risk, the two-threshold auction is equivalent to a PVR auction. In this case any bid with M = I and m ≤ I wins the auction, and no
subsidies are paid out.

4.2 Moral hazard in effort
The possibility of expropriations may lead firms to spend less on upfront investments that reduce costs during the exploitation of the natural resource. The framework developed in this pa23

per is not needed to make this point, as it can be made with the simpler, static model discussed
in the Appendix. Yet it is instructive to derive this result within the framework developed in this
paper, and explore the extent to which the results of previous sections continue holding. That
is what we do in this section. We show that, loosely speaking, the optimal contract combines
the two effects: it provides incentives for effort (investment), while lowering the probability of
costly expropriation, i.e., it resembles a progressive tax above a predetermined operating profit
threshold.
4.2.1 The planner’s problem
We embed the benchmark model of section 3 in a simple moral hazard framework. The firm’s
marginal extraction costs are decreasing in the firm’s effort, ², exerted at the time the upfront
investment I is made. This can be summarized by assuming that the probability density describing the firm’s discounted profits is determined by ² ≥ 0, so that we may write f (v|²). The
impact of effort is larger when price turns out to be higher, since optimal production can be
expected to be higher in this case. Thus the monotone likelihood ratio property (MLRP) holds,
so that `(v, ²) ≡

∂f
(v|²)/ f
∂²

(v|²) is increasing in v for all ²; i.e., effort increases the probability of

higher realizations of demand. Effort ² costs the firm k², k > 0, so that its expected profit in state
v, net of expropriation, is Πe (R c (v)−I )−k². Since it is necessary to ensure that the firm provides
effort, we need to introduce an incentive compatibility constraint in the planner’s program.
The planner chooses effort ², and a revenue schedule R c (v) to solve the following program
Z
min

{R c (v),²}

£
¤
µ(R c (v) − I ) + (1 − µ) {Πe (R c (v) − I ) − (v − I )} f (v|²)d v

(14a)

Z

Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v|²)d v ≥ k²,
½Z
¾
0
0
² = arg max
Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v|² )d v − k² ,

(14b)

0 ≤ R c (v) ≤ v.

(14d)

s.t.

²0

(14c)

Comparing program (1a)–(1c) with program (14a)–(14d) it can be seen that the term v − I can
no longer be dropped because effort affects the p.d.f. of revenue (or operating profit). Constraint (14b) is the firm’s participation constraint, and (14c) is the incentive compatibility constraint.
Under standard assumptions,27 we can use the First Order Approach to examine the properties of the solution. The concessionaire’s incentive compatibility constraint then can be re27

E.g., strict concavity of the agent’s utility as a function of ² and the convexity of the distribution function condition, see, e.g., Proposition 5.2 in Laffont and Martimort [2002].

24

placed by

Z

Πe (R c (v) − I )`(v, ²) f (v|²)d v = k.

(15)

Denoting by γ > 0 the multiplier associated with (14b), which will hold with equality, and by
τ > 0 the multiplier associated with (15), we have that the Lagrangian of the problem is:
L=

Z

£
¤
µ(R c (v) − I ) + (1 − µ) {Πe (R c (v) − I ) − (v − I )} f (v|²)d v
·Z
¸
Z
−γ
Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v|²)d v − k² − τ Πe (R c (v) − I )`(v, ²) f (v|²)d v. (16)

The first order condition w.r.t. to ², combined with (15), provides an expression for τ where the
multiplier for the participation constraint does not appear:
¤
R£
µ(R c (v) − I ) + (1 − µ)Πe (R c (v) − I ) − (v − I ) `(v, ²) f (v|²)d v
.
τ=
R
∂2 f
Πe (R c (v) − I ) ∂²2 (v, ²)d v

If 0 < R c (v) < v the first order condition for R c (v) derived from the Lagrangian yields:
Π0e (R c (v) − I ) =

µ
.
(µ + γ − 1) + τ`(v, ²)

(17)

The MLRP then implies that R c (v) is strictly increasing in v. Furthermore, the solution is interior
if and only if the denominator in the right hand side expression is positive (which ensures that
v > 0) and
Π0e (v − I ) <

µ
,
(µ + γ − 1) + τ`(v, ²)

which ensures that R c (v) < v.
Standard arguments used for moral hazard models (as in the proof of Proposition 5.2 in Laffont and Martimort [2002]) can be used to show that µ+γ−1 > 0 and τ > 0. This, combined with
the MLRP, implies that for sufficiently large v the denominator in the right hand side expression
of (17) is positive. It then follows that if Π0e (v −I ) tends to zero faster than `(v, ²) tends to infinity,
in the sense that for all positive constants a and b
lim Π0e (v − I )[a + b`(v, ²)] = 0,

v→∞

(18)

then there exists a threshold M s.t. R c (v) < v for all v ≥ M .
For example, if Πe (x) = 1 − exp(−cx), for x > 0, with c > 0, and f (v|²) is exponential with
mean θ(²) and θ 0 (²) > 0, then
lim Π0e (v − I )[a + b`(v, ²)] = lim ce −c(v−I ) [a 0 + b 0 v] = 0,

v→∞

v→∞

25

where a 0 and b 0 denote constants that depend on a, b, θ and θ 0 . Condition (18) then holds and
the optimal contract involves a windfall tax when profits are high enough.

4.3 Political investment
There is an additional way that a firm may exert effort in order to increase its profits: it can
invest in political support, either by lobbying politicians or by trying to influence the press, in
order to reduce the probability of expropriation.28 This can also be treated as a moral hazard
model, but in this case effort affects the probability of expropriation and hence expected profits,
rather than the probability of high profit states directly.
4.3.1 The planner’s problem
Assume then that political effort can be described by ² and that expected profits are Πe ≡ Πe (x, ²),
which we assume satisfies:
∂Πe
≥ 0,
∂²

∂2 Πe
< 0,
∂²2

∂2 Πe
> 0,
∂v∂²

∂3 Πe
>0
∂v 2 ∂²

and where ∂Πe /∂² = 0 for v ≤ 0 because Πe (v, ²) = v for v ≤ 0.29 Using the first order approach,
the problem for the planner can be stated as:
Z
min

{R c (v),²}

Z
s.t.
Z

£
¤
µ(R c (v) − I ) + (1 − µ) {Πe (R c (v) − I , ²) − (v − I )} f (v)d v

(19a)

Πe (R c (v) − I , ²) f (v)d v ≥ k²,

(19b)

∂Πe
(R(v) − I , ²) f (v)d v = k
∂²

(19c)

0 ≤ R c (v) ≤ v.

(19d)

Denoting by γ > 0 the multiplier associated with (19b), which will hold with equality, and by
τ > 0 the multiplier associated with (19c), we have that the Lagrangian of the problem is:
L=

Z

£
¤
µ(R c (v) − I ) + (1 − µ) {Πe (R c (v) − I , ²) − (v − I )} f (v)d v
·Z
¸
Z
∂Πe
−γ
(R c (v) − I , ²) f (v)d v. (20)
Πe (R c (v) − I ) f (v)d v − k² − τ
∂²

28

This section was suggested by our discussant Richard Zeckhauser at the Natural Resources and Populism Conference.
29
e
In an abuse of notation we have written ∂Π
∂v for the partial derivative with respect to the first argument of Πe .

26

The first order condition w.r.t. to ², and using (19c), lead to:
Z

(1 − µ − γ)

∂Πe
(R c (v) − I , ²) f (v)d v + γk − τ
∂²

Z

∂2 Πe
(R c (v) − I , ²) f (v)d v =
∂²2
Z 2
∂ Πe
(1 − µ)k − τ
(R c (v) − I , ²) f (v)d v
∂²2

from which we derive an expression for τ:
τ= R

(1 − µ)k
∂2 Πe
∂²2

(R c (v) − I , ²) f (v)d v

< 0.

Now consider the first order conditions with respect to R(v):
µ + (1 − µ − γ)

∂2 Πe
∂Πe
(R c (v) − I , ²) = τ
(R c (v) − I , ²).
∂v
∂v∂²

(21)

Recall that 0 < µ < 1, that τ < 0, and that ∂Πe /∂v > 0 and ∂2 Πe /∂v∂² < 0, and therefore γ >
1 − µ > 0. Now consider the function:
H (R(v)) ≡ τ

∂2 Πe
∂Πe
(R c (v) − I , ²) − (1 − µ − γ)
(R c (v) − I , ²),
∂v∂²
∂v

where (21) is equivalent to H (R(v)) = µ. The conditions we imposed at the beginning of the
section ensure that ∂H (v)/∂v < 0. Let M be the value where H (v) = µ. Then if v > M , we have
that the Lagrangian is maximized at R(v) = M , and if v ≤ M , the Lagrangian is maximized at
R(v) = v.
We have shown that there is a bound M such that the optimal contract is:

R(v) =


v

if v ≤ M ,

M

if v > M .

Hence, in contrast to the case of moral hazard, in the case of political investment, the planner does not provide incentives to the firm, except in the range v ∈ [0, M ]. The reason is that
effort affects the probability of expropriation across all states, but does not increase the probability of higher income states v, hence there is no conflict between reducing the probability of
expropriation by limiting R(v) and providing incentives in order to increase the probability of
higher states. The resulting contract belongs to the family of threshold contracts that are optimal in the absence of moral hazard, even though the threshold itself will usually be different.

27

5 Conclusion
Developing countries need foreign investment in order to develop their natural resources. In
order to attract investment, they offer favorable conditions. When prices rise and revenues increase beyond expectations, there are often calls to change the terms of the original contracts, or
to expropriate the investment and appropriate the windfall profits. This can be costly because
the investor will try to defend the original contract in local and international courts. Moreover,
there will be less investment in the next price cycle. We have proposed an alternative contract
that improves welfare by reducing the attraction of expropriation by lowering profits in the good
states of the world. This implies that there is a smaller cost of expropriation directly, because
there will be less expropriation, and indirectly, because the expropriated assets are less profitable and therefore worth less to the foreign firm, which will not fight as forcefully to retain the
project.
We have shown that in the case of high demand projects, which are always profitable (though
some states may be better than others), the optimal contract can be achieved by a presentvalue-of-revenue (PVR) auction and there will be no expropriation. In the case in which the
project is profitable in expected value, but has bad states in which it never recovers the investment, the first best is achieved by setting a cap on profits, and this can be implemented fairly
easily via an auction. We have shown that this is analogous to a lump sum windfall tax on profits. Next, we showed that in the case when the government has the possibility of subsidizing the
firm in the bad states of the world by relaxing regulations, the first best is achieved by a system
of subsidies in bad states of the world and caps on profits on good states. Again, we found that
the first best can be implemented via an auction. We examined the case in which the firm can
invest in lobbying or other political activities (regional subsidies, for example) and show that
the optima contract is of the same type as before.
The most interesting case, however is when there is moral hazard and the firm can perform
unobservable (or partially observable) effort that increases the likelihood of the high revenue
states. Here the planner must provide incentives, which implies that a constant cap on revenues
is inappropriate. The optimal contract involves progressive taxation of revenues above a certain
cap, of revenues, thus providing incentives to attain higher revenue states while reducing the
attraction of expropriation and its associated costs.
Note however that all these measures: lump sum windfall profits or progressive taxation,
must be incorporated in the original contracts and must not be imposed ex post: in that case it
corresponds to the standard natural resource contract. Finally, we showed that there is positive
welfare gain from our contract, and that the gain is due solely to the better behavior of the
government in the good states of the world, above the cap.

28

References
[1] R. Boadway and F. Flatters, “The Taxation of Natural Resources: Principles and Policy Issues,” Working Paper No. 1210, World Bank, 1993.
[2] H. Bohn and R. Deacon, “Ownership Risk, Investment, and the Use of Natural Resources”,
Aemerican Economic Review, 90,3, 526-549, 2000.
[3] S. Devarajan and A. Fisher, “Hotelling’s ”Economics of Exhaustible Resources”: Fifty Years
Later,” J. of Economic Literature, 10 1, 65–73, 1981.
[4] E. Engel, R. Fischer and A. Galetovic, “Least-Present-Value-of-Revenue Auctions and Highway Franchising”, J. of Political Economy, 109 (5), October 2001, 993–1020.
[5] E. Engel, R. Fischer and A. Galetovic, “The Basic Public Finance of Public-Private Partnerships,” NBER Working Paper No. 13284, August 2007.
[6] R. Fraser and R. Kingwell, “Can expected tax revenue be increased by an investmentpreserving switch from ad valorem royalties to a resource rent tax?”, Resources Policy, 23,3,
103-108, 1997.
[7] M. Gillis, “Evolution of Natural Resource Taxation in Developing Countries,” Natural Resources Journal, 22, 620–48, July 1982.
[8] T. Heaps and J. Helliwell, “The Taxation of Natural Resources,” in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics Volume I, Amsterdam: North Holland,
421–72, 1985.
[9] H. Hotelling, “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources,” J. of Political Economy, 39, 137–75,
1931.
[10] J.J. Laffont and D. Martimort, The Theory of Incentives, Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2002.
[11] P. Osmundsen, “Dynamic taxation of non-renewable natural resources under assymmetric
information about reserves,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 31 No. 4, 933–51, 1998.
[12] W. Salant, “The Economics of Natural Resource Extraction: A Primer for Development
Economists,” World Bank Economic Observer, 10, 93–111, 1995.

29

Appendix
A The effect of a positive expropriation probability: a simple
model
Consider the following simple model that describes the effect of potential expropriation on investment. For simplicity, we assume the the firm’s present discounted profits, as a function of
price p and unobservable effort F , are given by:
Π(p, F ) = pq(F ) − F,
with q > 0, q 0 > 0 and q 00 < 0. Price uncertainty is described by a probability density g (p) with
c.d.f. G(p).

No Expropriation
Rents are dissipated via an upfront payment to the government in a competitive auction; all
firms are the same.
Once it wins the auction, the firm solves:
Z
max pq(F )g (p)dp − F
F

which leads to
q 0 (F ) = R ∞
0

1
pg (p)dp

.

(22)

Denote the optimal value of F by F ne .
Expropriation
If p > p̄, the firm is expropriated and receives no income at all. The firm is aware of this
when deciding how much to invest in effort, so that the price distribution it considers has mass
1 −G(p̄) > 0 at p = 0 and density g (p) for 0 < p < p̄.
The same derivation that led to (22) now yields
q 0 (F ) = R p̄
0

1

.

(23)

pg (p)dp

Denote the solution by F e . Since, trivially, the denominator in (23) is smaller than the one
in (22), concavity of q(F ) implies that F e < F ne .
As before, ex ante rents are dissipated via an upfront payment to the government and all
firms are the same. The upfront payment that wins is smaller than in the case without expropriation, for two reasons. First, the firm expects fewer rents since it realizes there is a probability
30

of being expropriated. Even if the firm exerts effort F ne , the upfront payment to the government
by the firm would be smaller, by exactly the amount the government expects to collect via expropriation. Furthermore, as F e < F ne we also have an efficiency loss to society, since the firm
exerts less effort and therefore social welfare—which is equal to the sum of what the government collects from the firm up-front and via expropriation—is lower.
Result 8 Expropriation when price realizations are high lowers social welfare because it induces
the firm to do less unobservable, yet socially desirable, investment upfront.
Given the inefficiencies introduced by expropriation, is there a way of designing a contract
that reduces the impact on investment? The following sections explore this issue.

31

