NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF TAXES ON ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 13745
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13745

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Effects of Taxes on Economic Behavior
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13745
January 2008
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses how the effects of taxes on economic behavior are important for revenue estimation,
for calculating efficiency effects, and for understanding short-term macroeconomoic consequences.
The primary focus is on taxes on labor income but some attention is given to taxes on income from
saving. Specific calculations illustrate the importance of behavioral responses for accurate calculation
of the revenue effects and deadweight losses of tax changes.

Martin S. Feldstein
President and Chief Executive Officer
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Effects of Taxes on Economic Behavior
Martin Feldstein*
I am pleased to be part of this National Tax Journal forum celebrating the 100th
anniversary of the National Tax Association and grateful for the invitation to discuss the effects
of taxes on economic behavior, a subject that has been central in my research since my 1967
paper on the effects of tax rules on corporate dividends (Feldstein, 1967) . Over the years, my
tax research has focused primarily on the ways that taxes affect household behavior and on the
welfare implications of those changes. That will be the focus of this paper.
The effect of taxes on economic behavior is important for three distinct reasons. First, the
behavioral response of taxpayers affects the revenue consequences of changes in tax rates and
tax rules. Second, the effects on economic efficiency or deadweight loss depend on taxpayers’
compensated behavioral responses, i.e. on the behavioral effects excluding pure income effects.
And, third, behavior is important for understanding the short-run macroeconomic consequences
of tax changes on aggregate demand and employment.
I have long been an advocate of reforming the revenue estimation process to reflect
explicitly the impact of taxes on behavior and the implications of that behavior for tax revenue
(e.g., Feldstein, 1997). I am pleased therefore that in recent years the revenue estimators of the
Treasury and the Congress have been taking behavior into account more fully in their revenue
*

Martin Feldstein is professor of economics at Harvard University and President of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper expands a talk presented at the 2007
meeting of the National Tax Association at which the past recipients of the Daniel Holland
Award were asked to speak about an important aspect of their own research.
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-1-

estimates, going beyond the traditional so-called “static estimates” that assume that taxes have
no effect on taxpayer behavior. But the very limited nature of the behavior that is taken into
account means that official analyses of tax rate increases still overstate the resulting revenue gain
while official analyses of tax rate reductions overstate the resulting revenue losses. These
revenue estimates therefore bias the political decision process to favor tax rate increases over tax
cuts. Although much can be done to improve these calculations, I am encouraged by the
willingness of the revenue estimators to improve their earlier methods and by their participation
in the annual meeting of the NBER group that focuses on these revenue estimation issues. I will
return later in this paper to the issue of improving the revenue estimates.
Unfortunately, there is no reason to be pleased about the analysis in policy discussions
of the efficiency effects of tax changes. Explicit estimates of the welfare consequences of
proposed tax changes are completely absent in the Congressional and White House discussions
of tax policy. Although policy makers understand that higher taxes hurt the economy by
distorting behavior – reducing work effort, saving, and risk-taking – there is no attempt to
quantify these adverse effects or translate them into reductions in economic efficiency. My own
experience is that the concept of the deadweight loss of a tax increase, i.e., the amount that
individuals would have to be paid to make them as well off as they would be without the
proposed tax change, is much easier to teach in a classroom than to convey in a Congressional
hearing. And yet any sensible policy analysis of alternative tax structures should involve
comparing the revenue, deadweight loss, and distributional consequences of the alternative tax
options. Later in this paper I will illustrate this with an example from the current debate about
raising payroll tax revenue to fund future Social Security benefits. I will also comment on two
common conceptual errors that economists make in assessing the deadweight losses of tax
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-2-

changes.
The short-run macroeconomic consequences of tax changes depend on how the Federal
Reserve changes monetary policy in response to the tax change. If a tax change produces a fiscal
stimulus that exceeds what the Fed believes to be prudent, it will neutralize it by raising interest
rates. Alternatively, a fiscal stimulus may simply substitute for an easier monetary policy that
the Fed would otherwise implement. As a general rule, it would seem best to assume that a
change in fiscal stimulus would be offset by the induced change in monetary policy. One
exception would occur when interest rates are so low that the Fed cannot lower rates any further.
In such a liquidity trap, a fiscal stimulus would raise aggregate demand. A second exception
would occur when financial market conditions or the availability of bank capital make it
difficult for the Fed to stimulate economic activity. In this case, the Fed would welcome a fiscal
stimulus and would not seek to offset it. Because of these exceptions to the general rule, the
possible fiscal stimulus effect of a tax change must be considered on a case by basis to assess
the likely reaction of the Federal Reserve to the proposed change in tax rates or tax rules. Note
that this discussion of the cyclical effects of tax policies is very different from the longer-term
supply side effects of tax changes on GDP that cannot be offset or reversed by monetaray policy.

Revenue Estimation

I turn now to the issue of revenue estimation, focusing on the effect of changes in tax
rates on labor income. It would of course be desirable to have a fully specified dynamic
microeconomic model that could trace out the revenue consequences through time of any
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-3-

proposed tax change, including the full general equilibrium effects. A variety of such models
have been studied by academic researchers (e.g., Golosov and Tsyvinsky, 2005) and by the staffs
of the Joint Tax Committee and the Treasury Department (e.g., Carroll et al) . In my judgement,
they are helpful in shaping our understanding of the complex economic interactions but are not a
suitable base for policy analysis now and will not be at any time in the foreseeable future. I will
therefore concentrate my comments on the more practical estimates that focus on the direct firstorder behavioral responses to tax changes.

When studying a proposed tax change it would also be desirable to know what current or
future change in taxes or spending will be made to maintain an unchanged level of the national
debt. This would be easy if the purpose of the tax increase is to finance some particular
program, e.g., a revenue increase to fund increased Social Security benefits or to allow the
elimination of another tax like the alternative minimum tax. In general, however, major tax
changes are not earmarked in this way. In such cases, I think we should follow the same analytic
approach that was done by Richard Musgrave and others in their studies of tax incidence, i.e., to
assume a concurrent budget balance achieved by a lump sum change in taxes or spending
(Musgrave, 1957).
In what follows I will focus first on the revenue and efficiency effects of changes in the
general tax rates on labor income. I will then comment briefly on the efficiency effects of taxing
the return to saving. I will not discuss the substantial amount of work that has been done on the
impact of capital gains taxes on the realization of capital gains and the resulting changes in
revenue (e.g., Feldstein and Yitzhaki, 1978). There has also been substantial work on the effect
of dividend tax rules on corporate payout rates. The results of this research on capital gains and
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-4-

dividends has been adopted by the official revenue estimators because it does not violate their
self-imposed rule that their estimates assume no change in GDP, a subject to which I return
below. There has, however, been no work on quantifying the efficiency effects of these taxes.
There is also relatively little work on the impact of taxes on the composition of individuals’
portfolios (Feldstein, 1976).

Taxes on Labor Income

Labor economists have produced a large body of research estimating the effects of
wages on labor force participation and total working hours. Public finance economists have
contributed to this literature by focusing on net-of-tax wages and showing that individuals
respond to the tax component of the net-of-tax wage. But what matters for revenue estimation is
not the change in working hours but the change in labor supply more broadly defined – including
effort, occupation, human capital, etc. – and in the mix between taxable cash wages and untaxed
fringe benefits and nice working conditions. Although it is not possible to estimate each of these
two components separately, the public use files of individual tax returns that the Treasury makes
available to researchers does permit estimating their combined effect, i.e., how changes in tax
rates affect tax revenue through the combination of changes in labor supply and in the form of
compensation.

Changes in tax rates also affect taxpayers’ behavior as consumers, altering the quantities
of tax-favored consumption (including owner-occupied housing, charitable contributions, and
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-5-

local property taxes). The overall revenue effect of a change in tax rates depends therefore on
the extent to which the tax base is reduced, including the effects on labor supply broadly defined,
on the form of compensation, and on the magnitude of tax deductions.
Several studies have now used the Treasury’s public use files of individual tax returns to
estimate the elasticity of taxable income with respect to the net-of-tax rate (i.e., one minus the
marginal tax rate). My 1995 paper (Feldstein, 1995) used panel data that followed the same
individuals before and after the major tax rate reductions of the 1987 Tax Reform Act in which
the top tax rate fell from 50 percent to 28 percent. The difference in difference estimates based
on comparing incomes in 1985 and in 1988 implied a compensated elasticity of about one.
Subsequent work by others (e.g., Auten and Carroll, 1998 and Gruber and Saez,2002) using
different data sets and different estimating methods found a range of estimates from about 0.4 to
1.0 for middle and upper income taxpayers.

There are of course disputes about the interpretation of this behavioral response. Gordon
and Slemrod (2000) have suggested that some of this reaction may reflect a shift between
corporate and personal income. In the opposite direction, it should be noted that this relatively
short-run response does not allow for the effect of the tax rate reduction on decisions about the
choice of occupation and the accumulation of human capital.

A more fundamental issue in the estimation of behavioral response is that it assumes that
the taxpaying unit is the decision making unit even when there are two working adults in the
unit. This is of practical importance when the husband and wife face different marginal tax rates
as they do in the United States when one of them but not both of them is earning below the
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-6-

ceiling on Social Security taxable income.

Because of the ceiling on the payroll tax base, some

couples will have different marginal tax rates for the husband and wife. In a study of data on
Swedish households Alex Gelber (2007) has shown that there are important differences between
husbands and wives in their income and substitution elasticities and in cross-elasticities.
My judgement, based on the existing studies, is that an elasticity of 0.5 for middle and
upper income taxpayers (who pay the overwhelming bulk of the taxes) is a reasonable estimate
and probably a conservative one. It is substantially higher than the response implicit in the
revenue estimates of the Treasury and the Joint Tax Committee. In presenting illustrative
calculations of tax proposals, such as the ones discussed below, I have generally been cautious
and assumed elasticities of 0.4 and 0.5.

The official estimates used by the Treasury and the Joint Tax Committee are generally
depressed by the quite remarkable self-imposed restriction that the changes of behavior implied
by changes in tax rates do not result in any change in GDP. In their analysis, a change in tax
rates can change the form of compensation, can change the realization of capital gains, and can
shift portfolios between taxable and tax exempt securities but it cannot alter the supply of labor
or the level of real compensation. To the extent that any change is admitted that alters GDP,
some offsetting assumption is made to keep GDP unchanged.

This “constant GDP” assumption eliminates the important effect of changes in labor
supply broadly defined, i.e., changes in labor force participation rates, in hours worked, in the
choice of jobs, in the degree of effort, etc.. Although the revenue estimators wish to allow for
changes in the form of compensation, the restriction that there be no change in GDP makes it
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-7-

impossible to use the tax return data to estimate the change in the form of compensation since
the observed changes in taxable incomes reflect both the change in total labor supply (i.e., in
potential labor income ) and in the extent to which the resulting change in potential income is
taken in the form of taxable cash. Since the changes in the form of compensation cannot be
observed or estimated separately, the revenue estimators are forced to make a judgement based
on their intuition, something very difficult for a civil servant whose working conditions and
degree of discretion in the form of compensation are quite different from those in many private
sector jobs.

The rationale for the “constant GDP” assumption is that the projected level of GDP is
established by the administration or the Congressional Budget Office and must therefore be
taken as a fixed parameter by the revenue estimators. In my judgement, this makes no sense at
all. The GDP forecast can be taken as a baseline number on which the effects of proposed tax
changes can be superimposed. I wonder how many members of Congress realize that the
“revenue estimates” given by the Joint Tax Committee staff have made this arbitrary assumption
of constant GDP.

Fortunately, the restricted nature of the estimated behavioral effects is beginning to
change and the official estimates of some proposed tax changes do attempt to use the
accumulating evidence on behavioral responses. It would be good to have more transparent
descriptions of these changes so that the economics profession could comment on the
assumptions and the resulting estimates.

EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-8-

Two Examples

Before turning to other aspects of taxpayer behavior, I will illustrate the importance of
the behavioral response by looking at two examples. Consider first an across the board tax
increase in which every tax rate is raised by one percent: the 10 percent marginal tax rate goes
to 10.1 percent, the 25 percent to 25.25 percent, etc.. My NBER colleague, Dan Feenberg, used
the NBER’s TAXSIM model to estimate how taxpayer behavior alters the estimated revenue
effect of this tax change. The analysis, based on 100,000 random tax returns for 2001 adjusted to
income levels of 2004, calculates that with no behavioral response (i.e., the so-called “static”
estimate) tax revenue would rise by $7.5 billion.

Using a very conservative compensated elasticity of tax revenue with respect to the net of
tax rate of 0.4 and an income elasticity of 0.15 (implying an uncompensated behavioral response
elasticity of less than 0.4) implied that the additional personal income tax revenue would be only
$5.0 billion or two-thirds of the “static” revenue estimate. The reduced taxable income would
also lower the payroll tax revenue by some $400 million, bringing the total additional revenue to
just $4.6 billion or 57 percent of the “static” revenue estimate.

The effect of taxpayer behavior on revenue can be even more dramatic when the
proposed tax change is not simply proportional. A few years ago, I analyzed the proposal to
raise the maximum taxable income for the Social Security payroll tax by 25 percent, from
$87,900 to $110,000 (Feldstein, 2004) . For someone with initial income at the top of the new
range, i.e., of $110,000, the tax base would rise by $22,100 if there is no behavioral response. In
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-9-

that case, the tax revenue would rise by 12.4 percent (the payroll tax rate) of this increased tax
base or $2740. But with a behavioral elasticity of 0.5 with respect to the net of tax rate – a
reasonable assumption for these high income individuals – the taxpayer would reduce taxable
earnings (by working less and taking more income as a fringe benefit) to $102,000. This lowers
the extra payroll tax and, more importantly, also lowers the personal income tax revenue and the
Medicare payroll tax revenue. Calculations show that the reductions in the personal tax revenue
and in the Medicare payroll revenue would actually exceed the extra Social Security payroll tax
revenue. The total taxes paid by this high income individual would actually decline if the payroll
tax base were increased in this way.

Extending this type of calculation to the entire population of taxpayers with incomes over
$87,900 , Feenberg and I found that the rise in the payroll tax revenue would be $19 billion a
year with no behavioral response but only $16 billion with the elasticity of 0.5. The lower tax
base shrinks the Medicare and Personal Income tax revenue by a total of $11 billion, bringing
the total revenue gain down to just $5 billion instead of the $19 billion “static” estimate,
implying that some two-thirds of the extra Social Security funds would come as the result of a
back door transfer from personal income taxes and Medicare taxes.

Although these examples show the importance of taking behavioral responses into
account when calculating the revenue effects of major changes in tax rates, there are strong
advocates of continuing to use the current “static” revenue estimates. They make two
arguments. First, since the behavioral elasticity is only a rough estimate, it is inappropriate for
use in revenue estimation. Second, there are a very large number of detailed and complex tax
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-10-

proposals for which revenue estimates must be produced. There would never be enough time to
do the research on the needed behavioral elasticities for these many proposals. These arguments
carry particular force because of the legislative requirement that any projected increase in the
budget deficit (through a tax cut or spending increase) must be financed by a decrease in the
projected deficit (by a tax increase or spending cut.) In this context, revenue “scoring “ must be
“precise” and must apply to all proposals.

Although there is much to recommend the marginal self-financing rule that Congress has
imposed on itself, it should not be an excuse for using grossly incorrect revenue estimates. As a
minimum, for proposals with large revenue implications (e.g, static revenue effects of more than
$10 billion a year), the members of Congress should see the revenue estimates based on
plausible behavioral assumptions as well as the traditional static analysis. The budget
committees should then have the option to replace the traditional static revenue estimate with the
more accurate (although imprecise) behavioral estimate.

Calculating Dead Weight Losses

Efficiency calculations are central to the analysis that public finance economists bring to
tax policy. But introducing these ideas into the actual Congressional evaluation of tax policies
involves three separate challenges. First, the politically responsible officials and their staffs
must come to understand the basic idea of deadweight loss. Second, the nature of the distortion
that gives rise to the deadweight loss must be correctly identified. And, third, the relevant
parameters must be estimated.
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-11-

In my experience, the concept of deadweight loss is difficult to explain because it does
not correspond to any observable number. Perhaps that is why the staff of the Joint Tax
Committee , even in its theoretical infinite horizon dynamic simulations, summarizes the
economic effects of alternative tax systems by the change in GDP rather than by an estimated
deadweight loss or gain. But a tax change could create deadweight losses even though it caused
GDP to rise (e.g., because of income effects or even because of incentives that lead to more
labor input than individuals would otherwise choose to supply). So economists have still not
gotten across the notion that taxes distort choices and that the revenue that the government
collects understates how much worse off an individual is because of a tax.
Perhaps an example would help noneconomists to grasp the idea. Consider a law that
prevented people from buying apples. That law would not transfer money to the government
but individuals would consider themselves worse off than in the absence of such a law. The
amount that the government would have to give people to make them feel as well off as they
would have been without the law is its deadweight loss, i.e., the loss to the individuals in excess
of the revenue to the government. Now consider a less draconian law that merely reduces the
number of apples that anyone can buy. That implies a smaller deadweight loss. But what if,
instead of a law limiting the purchase of apples, the government levies a tax on apples that
reduces the number of apples that the individual chooses to buy? The individual would then be
worse off relative to no law for two reasons: he consumes fewer apples and he must pay a higher
price per apple (which goes to the government as tax revenue). The extent to which the
individual is worse off because of the tax can be divided into two parts – the revenue transferred
to the government and the deadweight loss due to the reduced consumption of apples.
Similarly, a tax that induces someone to work less not only transfers revenue to the government
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-12-

but also causes a distortion in the individual’s behavior (reduces the extent to which the
individual supplies labor and obtains money with which to buy goods and services) and therefore
a deadweight loss.

More generally, the income tax causes a much broader set of distortions, reducing all
aspects of labor supply, causing a shift in the form of compensation, and inducing individuals to
substitute tax favored consumption (i.e., deductible expenditures ) for other types of
consumption. Fortunately, despite the multiple sources of deadweight loss, the total deadweight
loss can be calculated easily by focusing on the elasticity of taxable income with respect to the
net-of-tax rate. This simplification is appropriate because each of the three sources of distortion
is based on the same marginal tax rate: the individual buys “leisure” at one-minus the marginal
tax rate, he buys fringe benefits at this rate, and he buys tax deductible consumption at this rate.
The marginal deadweight loss is thus the same for any behavior that reduces the taxable income.
More technically, the three forms of behavior that reduce taxable income constitute a Hicksian
composite good and can therefore be treated as if they are one good for the purpose of welfare
analysis. (Feldstein, 1999)
Using an estimated compensated elasticity of 0.4 and the usual formula based on the
square of the marginal tax rate for approximating the incremental deadweight loss implies that
the one percent across the board increase in all tax rates that yielded incremental revenue of $4.6
billion would result in a deadweight loss of $3.5 billion. The deadweight loss is thus 76 percent
of the incremental revenue. This means that the total cost of an additional billion dollars of
government spending financed by an across the board increase in tax rates is $1.76 billion.
Similarly, cutting government spending by a billion dollars and passing the funds back in the
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-13-

form of an across the board proportional tax cut would raise taxpayers real incomes – including
the reduced deadweight losses – by $1.76 billion. Wouldn’t the Congressional process of
setting tax rates and authorizing government spending be improved if this were better
understood?

The implications of this analysis is even more striking when applied to a possible nonproportional change in the payroll tax. Recall that the proposal to raise the maximum income
subject to the Social Security payroll tax from $87,900 to $110,000 would result in net revenue
of $5 billion when the behavioral response is taken into account. The deadweight loss calculation
in this case implies an increased deadweight loss of $9 billion. The total cost of the $5 billion of
additional revenue is thus $14 billion, nearly three times as much as the revenue itself. It is
useful to contrast this with the implications of the static revenue analysis that implies additional
revenue of $19 billion and that ignores the deadweight loss.

An alternative way to raise payroll tax revenue by $5 billion would be to raise the payroll
tax rate instead of increasing the ceiling on the taxable payroll. With a payroll tax base of
approximately $5 trillion, the required increase in the tax rate is only 0.1 percent. The overall
marginal tax rate - including personal income tax, state income tax and payroll taxes - would rise
from about 45 percent to 45.1 percent, depending on the individual’s particular situation. The
resulting deadweight loss would be only about $1.6 billion, less than one-fifth of the deadweight
loss that would result from increasing the ceiling on taxable payroll. I believe the political
process should consider these two ways of raising the $5 billion, noting the difference in the
distribution of the increased tax burden and the difference in the deadweight losses.
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-14-

Taxes on Investment Income

I turn briefly now to the taxation of investment income. Tax rules affect many types of
behavior that influence investment income: the volume of saving, the allocation of that saving
among alternative investments, the realization of capital gains, etc.. I will focus on just one of
these: the effect of taxes on household saving.
I want to make a single important point about the deadweight loss associated with taxing
the return to saving . For a discussion of how taxes on the return to saving interacts with taxes
on labor income, see Feldstein (2006)
A common fallacy in discussing taxes on the return to saving is to note that the elasticity
of saving with respect to the net-of-tax interest rate is very low and to conclude from that
observation that taxing the return to saving has very little adverse efficiency effect (Feldstein,
1978). Even if one accepts the premise that the elasticity of saving with respect to the net-of-tax
interest rate is very low, the conclusion about the deadweight loss does not follow.

Why? Because the deadweight loss in this case depends not on the change in the level of
saving but on the distortion in the timing of consumption. It is consumption that matters for this
because it is consumption that enters the individual’s utility function. Even if saving is not
changed at all in response to a higher rate of tax on investment income, the level of future
consumption can fall substantially. It is that fall in future consumption that is the source of the
deadweight loss.

EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-15-

An analogy may help to clarify this point. Consider a simple excise tax on the
consumption of apples. If the pretax price of apples remains constant, an individual with a unit
elasticity of demand for apples will consume fewer apples but spend the same total amount on
the purchase of apples. It is clear in this case that the deadweight loss depends on the change in
the number of apples consumed and not on the unchanged spending on apples. By analogy,
saving is the “expenditure” today to purchase future consumption. The welfare loss depends on
the change in that future consumption and not on the spending today to purchase that future
consumption.

Future Research

I will conclude by pointing to some fruitful directions for future research in the study of
taxpayer behavior.
First, it would be good to reduce the uncertainty about the effect of the net-of-tax rate on
taxable labor income. New research should distinguish the response by different income levels,
marital status, and age/sex groups. More panel data from the Treasury would be enormously
helpful in this research. The separate payroll and income taxes should be used to distinguish the
own and cross elasticities of husbands and wives.

Second, we need better estimates of the income effect of changes in tax rates. These are
needed to calculate the revenue effect of tax changes.

Third, we need to develop a better analysis of the welfare effects of different aspects of
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-16-

capital taxation, particularly the effect of changes in dividends and in capital gains and in
outright tax evasion.

And finally we need to develop better ways of incorporating this research into the
analysis done by the staffs of the Treasury and the Joint Tax Committee and into the thinking of
the political decision makers.

Cambridge, MA
November 2007

References

Auten, Gerald and Robert Carroll. “Effect of Income Taxes on Household Incomes.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 81 Issue 4 (November 1999): 681-93. Office of Tax
Analysis Working Paper March 1998

Carroll, Robert et. al., “ A Summary of the Dynamic Analysis of the Tax Reform Options
Prepared for the President’s Advisory Committee on Tax Reform.” U.S. Department of the
Treasury. Office of Tax Analysis. Washington, DC, May 2006.
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-17-

Feldstein, Martin. "The Effectiveness of the British Differential Profits Tax," Economic Journal,
77 No. 308 (December 1967): 947-53.

______ "Personal Taxation and Portfolio Composition: An Econometric Analysis." 44, No. 4
(July 1976): 631-650.

______ "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation." Journal of Political Economy 86 No. 2
Part 2 (April 1978): S29-S51.

______ "The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of the 1986 Tax
Reform Act. Journal of Political Economy . 103 No 3 (June 1995): 551-72.

______ "How Big Should Government Be?" National Tax Journal L No.2 (June 1997):
197-214.

______ "Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax." Review of Economics
and Statistics

81 No. 4 (November 1999): 674-80.

______ “The $110,000 Question.” Wall Street Journal (September 1, 2004): A12

_______ "The Effect of Taxes on Efficiency and Growth." Tax Notes 111, No. 6 (May 8,
2006):
679-684.
EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-18-

Feldstein, Martin and Shlomo Yitzhaki. "The Effect of the Capital Gains Tax on the Selling and
Switching of Common Stock." Journal of Public Economics 9 Issue 1 (February 1978): 17-36.

Gelber, Alexander M. "Taxation and Family Labor Supply," Harvard University. Mimeo, 2007.

Golosov, Mikhain and Aleh Tsyvinski. “Optimal Taxation with Endogenous Insurance
Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 Issue 2 (May 2007): 487-534.
NBER Working Paper 11185, March 2005

Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod. “Are "Real" Responses to Taxes Simply Income Shifting
Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?” Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences
of Taxing the Rich, Slemrod, Joel, ed. New York: Russell Sage and Harvard University Press,
2000.

Gruber, Jon and Emmanuel Saez. "The Elasticity Of Taxable Income: Evidence And
Implications." Journal of Public Economics 84 Issue 1(April 2002): 1-32.

Joint Committee on Taxation. Joint Committee on Taxation Tax Modeling Project and 1997 Tax
Symposium Papers. Washington, D.C., 1997.

EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-19-

Musgrave, Richard. The Theory of Public Finance New York: McGraw Hill, 1959.

EffectsOfTaxes.NTJ.01082008.wpd

-20-

