NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RISE AND (PARTIAL) FALL OF ABSTRACT PAINTING IN THE TWENTIETH
CENTURY
David Galenson
Working Paper 13744
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13744

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by David Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Rise and (Partial) Fall of Abstract Painting in the Twentieth Century
David Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 13744
January 2008
JEL No. J01
ABSTRACT
Non-representational painting was one of the most radical artistic innovations of the twentieth century.
Abstract painting was created independently by three great pioneers - the experimental innovators
Kandinsky and Mondrian, and the conceptual Malevich - virtually simultaneously, in the years immediately
before and after the outbreak of World War I. It became the dominant form of advanced art in the
decade after the end of World War II, as Pollock, de Kooning, Rothko, and their colleagues developed
the experimental forms of Abstract Expressionism. But in the late 1950s and early ‘60s, Johns, Rauschenberg,
Warhol, and a host of other young artists abruptly made a conceptual revolution in advanced art, and
in the process reduced abstract painting to a minor role. The pioneers of abstract painting and the Abstract
Expressionists had all been committed to abstraction as a vehicle for artistic discovery, and had believed
that it would dominate the art of the future, but since the 1960s abstraction has become at most a part-time
style for leading painters, and it is often used to mock the seriousness of earlier abstract painters.

David Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu

3
Introduction
The abstract painter denounces representation of the outer world as
a mechanical process of the eye and the hand in which the artist’s
feelings and imagination have little part. Or in a Platonic manner
he opposes to the representation of objects, as a rendering of the
surface aspect of nature, the practice of abstract design as a
discovery of the “essence” or underlying mathematical order of
things.
Meyer Schapiro, 19371
Abstraction is perhaps the single most distinctive development in twentieth-century
painting. It is also among the most misunderstood, not only by the general public, but also by
many in the art world. In part this is a consequence of its variety, for artists have made nonrepresentational art from many different motives, using many different techniques. This paper
will trace the changing role of abstraction in painting over time, considering the goals of some
of its most important practitioners, and examining their methods. Before presenting a
chronological treatment, however, it is valuable to begin with a cautionary lesson.
Deceptive Appearances
[W]ith Mondrian, arriving at the idea was of exceptional
importance. The conception came before the painting; it was the
primary act of creation.
Harold Rosenberg, 19712
When Piet Mondrian died in 1944, the critic Clement Greenberg declared that his
painting “takes its place beside the greatest art.” Greenberg went on to defend the mechanical
nature of Mondrian’s art: “Perhaps Mondrian will be reproached for the anonymity with which
he strove for the ruled precision of the geometer and the machine in executing his paintings: their
conceptions can be communicated by a set of specifications and dimensions, sight unseen, and
realized by a draftsman. But so could the conception of the Parthenon.”3

4
In 1995, the scholars Angelica Rudenstine, Yve-Alain Bois, Joop Joosten, Hans Janssen,
and John Elderfield called attention to a “a problem of perception” involving Mondrian’s art:
“Mondrian’s early partisans praised his work as a blueprint for modern architecture or
typography, as ‘formal experimentation’ destined to be ‘applied’ in various fields; and his neoplastic work has often been characterized (admiringly) as that of a geometric designer.” They
emphasized that their research had led them to a very different understanding of Mondrian’s
working process: “As becomes especially clear from this selection of unfinished works,
Mondrian’s abstract work was far from geometric or mathematical in its origin or expression;
rather, it was the product of a highly intuitive mind and hand, gradually working toward
carefully modulated but far from measurable composition solutions.”4
Accounts by friends of Mondrian testify to the absence of preconception in his art. An
artist who knew him in Paris in the 1920s recalled watching him work: “If the black line was too
thick, he’d take a piece of white paper, or a paper of about the same color as the color planes
next to that line, and then he pasted it onto the canvas, and then held it at a distance to see ‘is the
line the way I want it or not.’”5 When the artist Charmion von Wiegand first met Mondrian in
New York late in his life, she recorded that “He explained that he did not work with instruments
nor through analysis, but by means of intuition and the eye. He tests each picture over a long
period by eye: it is a physical adjustment of proportion through training, intuition, and testing.”6
Von Wiegand became a close friend of Mondrian’s, and studied his art. Interestingly, she
reported that although he famously restricted his palette to primary colors, their precise
composition was never constant: “his hues changed in every picture. His red was never the same
red, nor his blue the same blue. It had to be in perfect equilibrium with the whole painting and

5
the proportions of each plane. He was very aware of how color interaction can change a hue and
make a red look bluer or a blue look redder.” She was shocked when she first saw what would
prove to be his last completed painting, Broadway Boogie Woogie, with its many small colored
squares that violated Mondrian’s published generalizations about his art. She recalled that “I
exclaimed: ‘But Mondrian, it’s against the theory!’ I remember him standing back from the
painting, squinting his eyes, and saying, ‘But it works. You must remember, Charmion, that the
paintings come first and the theory comes from the paintings.’”7 The painter Carl Holty, who
also knew Mondrian in New York, wrote of his constant revision of his works in progress:
“Watching the pictures change into others as he worked, I asked him whether he wasn’t losing
good pictures in numbers because of his exigence. He said, ‘I don’t want pictures. I just want to
find things out.’”8
On the basis of an intensive technical study of Mondrian’s late paintings, Ron Spronk
concluded that “He scraped away paint and often stripped parts of the paint surface and ground
layer to the bare canvas. These reworkings left their marks on the paintings. Many of them are
visible to the naked eye or can be seen with a microscope; others are hidden by (sometimes
multiple) layers of thick paint and need to be revealed by other means.”9 One example is
afforded by Composition with Red, Yellow, and Blue, which Mondrian dated as completed in
1942. The painting was photographed in 1934, and again in 1936, and it was recently X-rayed by
the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. Spronk reported in part that “Close comparison of the
images from April-May 1934, 1936, the present state, and the X-radiograph shows changes to
the composition both before and after the first state was completed in 1935. Between the 1934
photograph and the completion of the first state, the left vertical black line was shifted to the left,

6
the yellow color field was enlarged downward and the top horizontal brought down accordingly,
and the lower horizontal line was moved up. The black bar at upper left was widened and moved
up, while the lower black bar was widened and moved down. In the final, 1942 state Mondrian
added the blue field, the black and red bars at lower left, and the central horizontal black line.
The upper black bar was changed to a red bar, moved upward, and widened. The lower black bar
of the first state was brought down still further.”10
Technical examination of his paintings and eyewitness accounts by Mondrian’s friends
thus support the artist’s own claims that his art was made empirically and visually rather than
theoretically and mathematically. Both Clement Greenberg and Harold Rosenberg were deceived
by the appearance of his completed paintings into drawing the false conclusion that Mondrian
worked mechanically, by preconception.11 Mondrian was not a conceptual artist, who privileged
ideas, and for whom conception preceded execution, but rather an experimental innovator, who
allowed theory to emerge from his paintings, who worked by trial and error, and whose primary
goal was to learn from the process of making his paintings. The cautionary lesson is clear. If
even highly respected critics can make such basic errors, it must always be kept in mind that
simply looking at a painter’s finished works is not sufficient to understand how and why they
were made: the appearance of paintings alone cannot be assumed to reveal the methods and goals
of the artist.
The Pioneers
We, the abstractionists of today, will be regarded in time as the
“pioneers” of abstract art, who had the good fortune, through
clairvoyance, to live perhaps centuries ahead of our time.
Wassily Kandinsky, 192212
Abstract painting was first developed in the years immediately before and after the

7
outbreak of World War I. The three great pioneers – Kandinsky, Mondrian, and Malevich –
independently arrived at very different forms of abstraction, through different means, from very
different motives. Yet all three made their discoveries with the confident belief that abstract art
would play an active role in creating a better world in the future, whether by directly affecting
social behavior or by complementing the impact of political institutions.
In an essay titled “Reminiscences,” written at the height of his career in 1913, Kandinsky
described the development of his art. He recalled a key event that occurred in 1896, when he
was 30, which contributed to his decision to become a full-time artist. At an exhibition of the art
of the French impressionists in Moscow, for the first time he came upon a painting that was not
obviously realistic: “That it was a haystack, the catalogue informed me. I didn’t recognize it. I
found this nonrecognition painful, and thought that the painter had no right to paint so
indistinctly.” In spite of his discomfort, Kandinsky discovered that the painting had seized his
imagination: “I noticed with surprise and confusion that the picture not only gripped me, but
impressed itself ineradicably upon my memory, always hovering quite unexpectedly before my
eyes, down to the last detail. …What was… quite clear to me was the unsuspected power of the
palette, previously concealed from me, which exceeded all my dreams. Painting took on a fairytale power and splendor. And, albeit unconsciously, objects were discredited as an essential
element within the picture.”13 Kandinsky’s account revealed that he was intensely affected by a
visual event, as his first sight of a Monet not only demonstrated the power of color, but also
planted the seed that would eventually grow into the realization that effective art need not be
representational.
Another pivotal event occurred several years later, after Kandinsky had moved to Munich

8
to study painting:
I was enchanted on one occasion by an unexpected spectacle that
confronted me in my studio. It was the hour when dusk draws in.
I returned home with my painting box having finished a study, still
dreamy and absorbed in the work I had completed, and suddenly
saw an indescribably beautiful picture, pervaded by an inner glow.
At first, I stopped short and then quickly approached this
mysterious picture, on which I could discern only forms and colors
and whose content was incomprehensible. At once, I discovered
the key to the puzzle: it was a picture I had painted, standing on its
side against the wall.
The next day, Kandinsky was unable to recapture his enchantment with the picture: “even on its
side, I constantly recognized objects, and the fine bloom of dusk was missing.” He drew a
simple but momentous conclusion: “Now I could see clearly that objects harmed my pictures.”14
The empirical and visual source of Kandinsky’s belief in the validity of abstract art points
to his experimental nature as an artist. The same is true of the extended process by which he
gradually developed his form of abstract art. Thus he reflected in 1913 that “Only after many
years of patient toil and strenuous thought, numerous painstaking attempts, and my constantly
developing ability to conceive of pictorial forms in purely abstract forms, engrossing myself
more and more in these measureless depths, did I arrive at the pictorial forms I use today, on
which I am working today and which, as I hope and desire, will themselves develop much
further.” He recognized that he had to proceed intuitively, letting forms appear as he worked:
“My only consolation is that I have never been able to persuade myself to use a form that arose
within me by way of logic, rather than feeling. I could not devise such forms, and it disgusts me
when I see them. Every form I ever used arrived ‘of its own accord,’ presenting itself fully
fledged before my eyes, so that I had only to copy it, or else constituting itself actually in the
course of work, often to my surprise.”15 What Kandinsky came to understand was that he could

9
only create his art gradually, and that abstraction could only come at the end of a “long path,
which I had to follow.”16
Kandinsky considered painting as a “struggle with the canvas,” in the course of which he
“derived spiritual experiences from the sensations of colors on the palette.”17 While he worked
he was constantly sensitive to the appearance of the developing image: “The artist ‘hears’ how
something or other tells him: ‘Hold it! Where? The line is too long. It has to be shortened, but
only a little bit!’ ‘Just a little bit, I tell you.’ Or: ‘Do you want the red to stand out more?
Good! Then add some green. Now they will “clash” a little, take off a little. But only a little, I
tell you.’” Response to the work in progress was essential: “One must have the perception to
‘listen’ when the voice sounds. Otherwise, no art.”18 The importance of vision led Kandinsky to
reject systems: “My advice, then, is to mistrust logic in art.”19
Kandinsky evolved gradually from a painter of landscapes into a painter of images
abstracted from landscapes. Unlike most experimental artists, he routinely made preparatory
drawings, watercolors, and even oil sketches for his early abstract paintings. Unlike conceptual
artists, however, for whom a painting is often an enlarged replica of a final preparatory image,
Kandinsky’s paintings are generally the last, most abstract, stage of a progression, in which the
image became progressively more divorced from reality as each sketch moved farther from the
recognizable forms of the first drawing. Thus when Kandinsky spoke of hiding or concealing
objects in the approach to abstraction, he was not referring to a process that occurred in the
course of application of successive layers of paint to single canvas, but rather one that was
carried out in a series of separate works. Once consequence of this is that ambiguous objects in
his early abstract paintings can often be identified by consulting the related preparatory works.

10
Vivian Barnett made this point in discussing a key series of early abstractions:
Kandinsky’s Improvisations... retain unmistakable references to
his favorite, recurrent motifs. They contain multiple and abstract
images of horses, riders, boats, rowers, waves, cannons,
graveyards, citadels and reclining lovers... In formulating the
Improvisations between 1911 and 1913, the artist made
preparatory watercolor sketches. By studying a group of related
watercolors with the final oil version, it becomes clear that
Kandinsky moved away from the object, obscuring the specific
motif so only allusions to its representational origins are retained.
Sometimes he executed a detailed watercolor on which he based a
canvas... In the large oil paintings the forms have been obscured to
an even greater degree than in the preparatory study. The images
have been abstracted from nature to such an extent that they cannot
easily be identified or “read.”20
Scholars have remarked on the causes and consequences of Kandinsky’s experimental
approach. Alan Bowness observed that during his approach to abstraction “Kandinsky was a
man struggling in the dark. He was aware of this – it is part of his historic importance that he
admitted that neither the creation nor the appreciation of a work of art is an exclusively
conscious process.”21 Kandinsky’s friend and biographer Will Grohmann stressed that he
achieved abstraction not decisively, from theory, but tentatively, from experience:
It is only with the greatest caution that Kandinsky made the
transition to abstract forms. Had he been guided by theory alone,
he could easily, after he wrote On the Spiritual in Art (i.e., from
1910 onward), have completely eliminated naturalistic elements
from his painting. In actual fact it took him four years to reach that
point, and he was still painting landscapes as late as 1913.
Kandinsky did not want to paint decorative works, states of mind,
or music. He consciously aimed at the pictorial, and for this
reason he had to try to retain the forms he had intuitively
experienced, but at the same time he filled them with the content
of his lived experience.22
Analyzing Kandinsky’s work of this transitional period, David Sylvester compared his practice
to that of another great experimental painter: “The incompleteness of these paintings – the way

11
that passages are left unresolved – is something like the incompleteness of an unfinished
Cézanne still life.”23
Mondrian’s development of abstract art also originated in a process of simplification of
real scenes: as he wrote in 1914, “I am seeking to approach truth as closely as possible, and to
abstract everything from it until I reach the foundations (always visible foundations!) of
things.”24 He carried out this process gradually and tentatively. A Dutch friend recalled being
with Mondrian in Domburg in 1914: “On a walk beside the ocean, late in the evening, under a
radiant, starry sky, he took a tiny sketchbook out of his pocket and made a scribbled drawing of a
starry night. For days he worked over that suggestive little scribble. Every day he took a tiny step
further away from reality and came a tiny step nearer to the spiritual evocation of it.”25 The
critic Michel Seuphor, a friend of Mondrian’s, recalled his extreme attention to detail, finding
progress in changes so small that others might fail to notice: “Even so, it’s another step,’ he
once said to a friend who was studying a new picture of his, ‘or don’t you think so? Don’t you
find that it represents even a little step forward?’”26 For Mondrian, this process of incremental
change made all his work part of a single continuous progression: “I began as a naturalistic
painter. Very quickly I felt the urgent need for a more concise form of expression and an
economy of means. I never stopped progressing toward abstraction. One period flows logically
from the one before.”27 The cumulative effect of Mondrian’s many marginal changes was very
great. David Sylvester observed that “A Mondrian retrospective is not just a procession of great
pictures, but a progression which in itself is an aesthetic experience: the trajectory of a man’s art
becomes as much a thing of beauty as the art.”28
Mondrian not only made changes from one painting to the next, but also within the

12
execution of individual works. Joop Joosten and Angelica Rudenstine stressed that “Mondrian’s
compositional method was anything but systematic or mathematical... Nothing was
predetermined. Reworking, rethinking, and refining characterized his resolution of every
problem.”29 His revisions often occurred over extended periods. So for example when Mondrian
traveled to New York in 1940, he took with him 17 paintings that he had started in Paris and
London during the preceding five years. He exhibited these “transatlantic paintings” in New
York in 1942, and he inscribed on them dates indicating the intervals during which he had
revised them: thus Composition with Red, Yellow, and Blue, which was discussed above, was
dated 1935-42.30 Technical analysis of these transatlantic paintings led Ron Spronk to conclude
that “Mondrian routinely reworked his compositions in his New York years, and these revisions
were often elaborate and invasive.”31 Even the size of his paintings was provisional, as
throughout his career, Mondrian’s uncertainty about his finished works led him “to create most
of his paintings on supports whose final size was determined during the working process.”32
Charmion von Wiegand recalled that “Mondrian was never finished with a painting, which
further proves that he had no predetermined compositional ideas. He would change a picture
over and over again.” When she asked him why he didn’t make a series of paintings instead of
repeatedly revising Victory Boogie-Woogie, the large work that remained unfinished at his death,
Mondrian replied, “It is not important to make many pictures but that I have one picture right.”33
Although the appearance of their paintings differed enormously, the experimental artists
Kandinsky and Mondrian both arrived at non-representational images by a gradual and visual
process of abstraction from nature. The conceptual Malevich did not. In 1916, he declared that
“The artist can be a creator only when the forms in his picture have nothing in common with

13
nature.”34 Nor must progress necessarily be gradual: “in art it is not always a case of evolution,
but sometimes also of revolution.”35 He also believed that art should follow rules: “in
constructing painterly forms it is essential to have a system for their construction, a law for the
constructional inter-relationships of forms.”36 These rules should be derived from theory: “The
system, hard, cold and unsmiling, is brought into motion by philosophical thought.”37
John Milner observed that by 1913, when he began the key period in his development of
abstract art, Malevich and his colleagues Lyubov Popova and Vladimir Tatlin “were all three
constructing figures on the basis of geometry.” Rather that simplifying natural objects, they
were using mathematical relationships to create generalized forms: “Individuality, likeness and
character were all of secondary importance.” Milner concluded that “In preferring generalized
form to specific detail, and the approach of constructing with geometry, these painters
relinquished the whole realist tradition.”38 Larissa Zhadova explained that Suprematism, which
Malevich designated as the successor to Cubism and Futurism, was intended to symbolize the
cosmos, but not to resemble it: “His pictures can be described as images of the world’s cosmic
space. But they are not copied from nature; this is not the space one sees by looking at the blue
sky above one’s head. They are hypothetical images, conceptual images, plastic formulation
images, ‘factorizations’ carried out by the artist’s imagination.”39
Malevich considered Suprematism a radical new departure, that would effectively negate
all previous representational painting.40 The apocalyptic tone of the manifesto Malevich wrote
for the 1915 exhibition that announced the arrival of the new art underscored the drama of the
breakthrough, as he announced that “I have transformed myself into the zero of form, and
dragged myself out of the rubbish-filled pool of Academic art.” Denouncing the imitation of

14
nature as the cowardly act of artists lacking in creativity, he declared that “to gain the new
artistic culture, art approaches creation as an end in itself and domination over the forms of
nature.” The emblem of the new movement was to be his painting, Black Square: “The square is
a living, royal infant. It is the first step of pure creation in art.” Art would be changed forever:
“Our world of art has become new, non-objective, pure.” He closed with an appeal to all: “We,
Suprematists, throw open the way to you. Hurry! - For tomorrow you will not recognize us.”41
John Golding contended that Malevich’s art justified his rhetoric: “To be confronted by
Malevich’s work is like travelling in uncharted territory.”42
Kandinsky’s early experiences in Russia, which included ethnographic research on folk
art and a commitment to the Russian Orthodox Church, gave him an awareness of the moral
aspects of art, and an abiding belief in its healing and redemptive properties.43 Mondrian
believed in Theosophy, and from it he became convinced that all life is directed toward
evolution, and that the purpose of art is to give expression to that evolution.44 Kandinsky and
Mondrian thus both believed that the beauty of abstract art could accomplish utopian social
goals, but they were vague in explaining how and when this might occur. Malevich had more
immediate goals, as in 1918 he took Russia’s political revolution as a model for art: “The social
revolution which smashed the chains of capitalist slavery, has not yet smashed the old tables of
aesthetic values.” He was confident, however, that art had a key role to play in the new society,
as the next year he asserted that “The aesthetic, the pictorial, takes part in the construction of the
whole world.”45
The three pioneers of abstract painting were all important figures in early twentiethcentury art: Kandinsky was a leader of German Expressionism, Mondrian was initially the leader

15
of the Dutch De St−l movement, and Malevich was the founder of Russian Suprematism. Yet
Paris remained the center of advanced art, and the dominant figures there had the broadest
influence overall. The Cubists Picasso and Braque approached abstraction before World War I,
but their decision to stop short of it, together with Matisse’s steadfast dedication to
representation, prevented abstraction from taking the central place in advanced painting early in
the century.
Abstract Expressionism
The consciousness of the personal and spontaneous in the painting
and sculpture stimulates the artist to invent devices of handling,
processing, surfacing, which confer to the utmost degree the aspect
of the freely made. Hence the great importance of the mark, the
stroke, the brush, the drip, the quality of the substance of the paint
itself, and the surface of the canvas as a texture and field of
operation – all signs of the artist’s active presence. The work of
art is an ordered world of its own kind in which we are aware, at
every point, of its becoming.
Meyer Schapiro, “Recent Abstract
Painting,” 195746
It was only after World War II, with the emergence of Abstract Expressionism in New
York and Tachisme in Paris, that abstraction became the dominant form of advanced art. The
leading Abstract Expressionists, including Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning, Mark Rothko,
Arshile Gorky, Barnett Newman, and Robert Motherwell, became more influential than their
counterparts in Paris, the most prominent of whom were Pierre Soulages, Jean Fautrier, Hans
Hartung, and Nicolas de Staël.47 Although the two groups had little contact during their
formative years, and had little direct influence on each other artistically, they shared a number of
basic characteristics, including their belief in the need to create new forms of art and their
conviction that this should be done experimentally, by trial and error, rather than conceptually,

16
by the application of theory. Although these artists came to maturity little more than three
decades after the pioneers of abstraction, two world wars and a great economic depression had
occurred in this brief span, so it is not surprising that they did not share either the optimistic
utopianism of the pioneers, or their belief in the power of art to improve society. Instead, the
artists who led the new movements in both New York and Paris were individualistic, and their
goals were more personal and introspective than those of their predecessors. So for example in
1948 Barnett Newman declared that American painters, “free from the weight of European
culture” and its “outmoded images,” were creating a new art for a new age: “Instead of making
cathedrals out of Christ, man, or ‘life,’ we are making them out of ourselves, out of our own
feelings.”48
The Abstract Expressionists were deeply influenced by Surrealism, which was perhaps
the most important European development in advanced art between the wars. Most generally,
the Abstract Expressionists took from the Surrealists the idea of drawing on the subconscious to
produce new, personal images. So for example in 1943 Mark Rothko and Adoph Gottlieb wrote
a statement of their beliefs, which included the propositions that “To us art is an adventure into
an unknown world,” that “This world of the imagination is…violently opposed to common
sense,” and that “It is our function as artists to make the spectator see the world our way - not
his way.”49 Jackson Pollock explained in 1950 that modern artists wanted to express the aims of
contemporary society: “we have a mechanical means of representing objects in nature such as
the camera,” and consequently, “The modern artist, it seems to me, is inventing and expressing
an inner world.”50
A number of the Abstract Expressionists, including Pollock, borrowed the device of

17
automatism from the Surrealists, in order to accomplish their goal of painting from the
unconscious. Yet the Americans used this technique differently from the Europeans. André
Masson, Joan Miró, and other Surrealists often began their paintings with random markings, then
finished them by developing the figures and symbols they found to be suggested by these
markings. In contrast, the Americans did not use automatism to create figurative works, but
instead used the initial markings as the basis for coherent but still abstract compositions. Pollock
and other Abstract Expressionists thus adapted automatism to their own purposes, in order to
create a new and more spontaneous way of producing abstract images. Pollock explained in
1948 that “When I am in my painting, I’m not aware of what I’m doing. It is only after a sort of
‘get acquainted’ period that I see what I have been about.”51 Pollock’s celebrated drip method of
applying paint, with the inevitable spattering and puddling that could not be completely
controlled by the artist, was one means of escaping from preconceived ideas and forms.
Whether or not they used the technique of automatism, the Abstract Expressionists
almost unanimously subscribed to the belief that the artist should work without preconception.
Indeed, perhaps the most basic shared characteristic of the group was their goal of allowing
unexpected forms to emerge during the process of painting. Pollock declared that, while
working, “I have no fears about making changes, destroying the image, etc., because the painting
has a life of its own. I try to let it come through.”52 Rothko explained that “I think of my
pictures as dramas; the shapes in the pictures are the performers. Neither the action nor the
actors can be anticipated, or described in advance.” The painter’s initial ideas were only a point
of departure: “Ideas and plans that existed in the mind at the start were simply the doorway
through which one left the world in which they occur…The picture must be for [the artist], as for

18
anyone experiencing it later, a revelation.”53 De Kooning reflected that “I find sometimes a
terrific picture… but I couldn’t set out to do that, you know.”54 The importance of the working
process to their art in fact led one of the group’s leading supporters, the critic Harold Rosenberg,
to suggest in 1952 that they should properly be called “action painters,” on the grounds that their
paintings were records of the act of their own making. Rosenberg argued that “At a certain
moment the canvas began to appear to one American painter after another as an arena in which
to act – rather than as a space in which to reproduce, re-design, analyze or ‘express’ an object,
actual or imagined. What was to go on the canvas was not a picture but an event.”55 To increase
the visual impact of their gestures, many of the Abstract Expressionists worked on wall-sized
canvases that allowed the viewer to become engulfed by their images.
For most of the Abstract Expressionists, repeated revision of their works in progress was
a routine consequence of their uncertain goals. The painter and critic Elaine de Kooning
described how intensively her husband worked on his paintings in the early ‘50s: “He worked
on these one at a time – just all day, every day. Even the small ones. Even if it took a year…[0]n
any given canvas, I saw hundreds of images go by. I mean, paintings that were masterpieces. I
would come in at night and find they had been painted away.”56 Because they wanted to
discover new forms and images, for some of the artists much of this time was spent looking at
their works in progress. An assistant who worked for Rothko during the ‘50s recalled that he
“would sit and look for long periods, sometimes for hours, sometimes for days, considering the
next color, considering expanding an area.” A biographer concluded that “since the late 1940s
Rothko, building up his canvases with thin glazes of quickly applied paint, had spent more time
considering his evolving works than he had in the physical act of producing them.”57

19
Their uncertainty about their goals equally led to difficulties in deciding when a painting
was finished. During the last decade of his life, Pollock painted on lengths of canvas unrolled
and laid flat on the floor, and he often began without determining either the size or orientation of
the finished work. His widow, the painter Lee Krasner, recalled how this complicated the
process of completing a picture: “Sometimes he’d ask, ‘Should I cut it here? Should this be the
bottom?’ He’d have long sessions of cutting and editing…Those were difficult sessions. His
signing the canvases was even worse. I’d think everything was settled – tops, bottoms, margins
– and then he’d have last-minute thoughts and doubts. He hated signing. There’s something so
final about a signature.”58 Barnett Newman stressed the continuity in his own enterprise by
declaring that “I think the idea of a ‘finished’ picture is a fiction. I think a man spends his
whole lifetime painting one picture or working on one sculpture.”59
The Abstract Expressionists worked for long periods to create their mature styles, and the
eventual results were so novel and radical that even the artists themselves were uncertain about
their achievement. Thus for example Robert Motherwell wrote of helping a friend, William
Baziotes, hang the paintings for Baziotes’ first gallery exhibition in 1944. When they finished,
Motherwell recalled that Baziotes was seized by anxiety: “Suddenly, he looked at me and said,
‘You’re the one I trust; if you tell me the show is no good, I’ll take it right down and cancel it.’
At that moment, I had no idea whether it was good or not - it seemed so far out; but I reassured
him that it was - there was nothing else I could do.” Motherwell’s doubt went beyond the
immediate issue of the quality of Baziotes’ paintings: “You see, at the opposite side of the coin
of the abstract expressionists’ ambition and of our not giving a damn, was also not knowing
whether our pictures were even pictures, let alone whether they were any good.”60 Similarly, Lee

20
Krasner remembered that during the early 1950s, even after he had been recognized as a leader
of the Abstract Expressionists, Jackson Pollock had shared the same doubt, as one day “in front
of a very good painting... he asked me, ‘Is this a painting?’ Not is this a good painting or a bad
one, but a painting! The degree of doubt was unbelievable at times.”61
The Tachistes were as diverse stylistically as the Abstract Expressionists, and each of
them also developed signature abstract forms based on distinctive gestures. Their commitment
to an experimental method was strikingly similar to that of the Americans. So for example
Pierre Soulages explained that he painted by instinct: “Often I decide to do something, to
intervene in a certain way and I don’t know why, and I don’t seek to know why.” He discovered
forms as he worked: “It’s a kind of dialogue between what I think is being born on the canvas,
and what I feel, and step by step, I advance and it transforms itself and develops, becomes
clearer and more intense in a way that interests me or not. Sometimes it surprises me; those
aren’t the worst times, when I lose my way and another appears, unexpectedly.” The decision
that a painting was finished was made on visual grounds, over a period of time: “When I see that
I can’t add much without changing everything, I stop and consider that the picture is finished for
the moment…Then I turn the picture to the wall and I don’t look at it for several days, several
weeks, sometimes several months. And then when I look at it again, if it still seems to
accomplish something, if it seems alive, then it can leave the studio.”62
The generation of artists who came to maturity after World War II represented the high
point of abstraction in the twentieth century: this was the one generation in which virtually all of
the most important painters made their greatest contributions in an abstract idiom.63 The
pioneers of abstraction had confidently believed that abstraction would be the art of the future,

21
but for them this had been a matter of faith. During the early 1950s the Abstract Expressionists
and their supporters could legitimately feel that abstraction had become the dominant form of
advanced art. Remarkably, within a decade after the end of World War II, Pollock, de Kooning,
Rothko, and a few dozen other artists had simultaneously shifted the center of the art world from
Europe to the United States, and made Abstract Expressionism the dominant style of advanced
American painting.64 And unlike the diverse attitudes of the pioneers, the abstraction that
emerged at mid-century was based on a shared set of attitudes and practices. David Sylvester
summarized these, observing that “Most of the artists whose styles were formed in the 1940s
subscribed to the idea that making art meant feeling one’s way through unknown territory … Art
was the lonely journey of existentialist man… This common ethical ideal led to a generally
shared attribute of style: the way in which the work was made was more or less visible in the
end-product.”65
After Abstract Expressionism
Especially in the last fifty years, a lot of abstract art has
demonstrated that our intelligence innovates not by making things
up out of whole cloth or by discovering new things about nature,
but by operating with and upon the repertoire of the already
known; by adapting, recycling, isolating, recontextualizing,
repositioning, and recombining inherited, available conventions in
order to propose new entities as the bearers of new thought.
Kirk Varnedoe, 200366
Although a number of important Abstract Expressionists worked through the 1960s, the
demise of Abstract Expressionism as the central form of advanced art began when Jackson
Pollock died in an automobile accident in 1956, progressed further when Jasper Johns had his
first gallery exhibition in New York in 1958, and was effectively completed when Andy Warhol
and Pop art exploded on the art world in 1962. Nearly all of the forms of abstract painting that

22
have been developed since Pollock’s death have been reactions to Abstract Expressionism.
A basic division appears among the abstract painters who came to maturity during the
late 1950s and the ‘60s. One group followed the Abstract Expressionists, trying to extend their
art while accepting their basic attitudes and methods. Another group rebelled against Abstract
Expressionism, and created a variety of new forms of abstraction that nearly always consisted of
a direct and negative comment on the older art. This basic division followed a clear pattern, for
the followers of the Abstract Expressionists were experimental artists, whereas those who
repudiated Abstract Expressionism were conceptual.
The following discussion will briefly examine the motives and methods of some of the
key figures in each of the two camps. It should immediately be emphasized that during the past
five decades, styles of abstraction have proliferated. The reasons for this will be seen here, but
one consequence is that no treatment on the scale of this one can possibly be complete in
coverage: there are too many important artists, who have created too many different approaches
to abstraction, to examine all of them even briefly. What this discussion will do is to consider
how, and why, some of the most important painters from the late 1950s on have gone about
making abstract art.
Most of the key experimental abstract painters of recent times first emerged during the
late ‘50s, as direct followers of the Abstract Expressionists – often students and friends of the
older artists. These were primarily younger artists who were inspired by the beauty of the
Abstract Expressionists’ art, and excited by their conviction and commitment to existentialist
ideals. So for example Helen Frankenthaler recalled that when she first saw Pollock’s paintings
in 1951, shortly after she had graduated from college and moved to New York to become an

23
artist, “It was if I suddenly went to a foreign country but didn’t know the language, but had read
enough and had a passionate interest, and was eager to live there. I wanted to live in this land; I
had to live there, and master the language.”67 Frankenthaler followed Pollock in applying paint
without touching the canvas. She achieved novel results, however, by pouring thinned pigment
onto canvas that had not been primed: the diluted paint soaked into the fabric of the canvas, and
produced a visual effect closer to watercolor than to traditional oil painting. Kenneth Noland
and Morris Louis emulated Frankenthaler’s new technique, and produced new forms of
abstraction that featured pure colors stained into canvases that were often as large as Pollock’s
late works. The paint was absorbed into the canvas, and the pigment consequently did not create
the surface texture that was visible in Pollock’s paintings. Because there was nothing to distract
from the effect of the areas of color, this art was often called “color-field” abstraction.68
A number of younger experimental painters followed the Abstract Expressionists in
developing their own distinctive abstract forms, that became recognizable as their signature
marks or gestures. Joan Mitchell and Sam Francis were prominent among these. The beauty of
their work was based on the interaction of their imaginative use of color and their free, often
calligraphic brushstrokes.69
The first-generation Abstract Expressionists were all born before 1920. Most of their
second-generation followers, including Frankenthaler, Noland, Mitchell, and Francis, were born
between 1920 and 1930. Relatively few important experimental abstract painters emerged from
later birth cohorts. One who did is Brice Marden, who was born in 1938. Marden is an avowedly
visual artist who works without preconception: “If you’re not working with preconceived forms
and thinking, then you can concentrate on expression.” He hopes to make discoveries while

24
working: “There are times when a work has pulled ahead of me and goes on to become
something new to me, something that I have never seen before; that is finishing in an
exhilarating way.”70 Marden admires Cézanne’s “intense, long, slow process of working,
looking, assimilating.”71 Marden has also acknowledged his debt to Pollock. In 1989, he
explained that Pollock’s approach had affected his attitude toward his own art: “The great thing
about Pollock ... was his conviction that each work is part of a continuing quest. To be an artist is
not about making individual works. To be an artist is to do your work and let your work express
the evolution of a vision.”72
Marden’s comments about Cézanne and Pollock focus on central elements of the
experimental approach to art in general. The long, slow process of development and the
conviction that the artist is engaged in a quest for a personal vision together point to a shared
characteristic of all the experimental abstract painters discussed here, from Kandinsky and
Mondrian through the two generations of Abstract Expressionists - namely the goal of creation
by the individual of a unique signature style. At some point in their careers, each of these artists
became committed to abstraction, and for nearly all of them this subsequently became a lifelong
commitment to that form. Even in those cases, including Pollock and de Kooning, in which the
artist returned to varieties of figuration, this occurred gradually, and within an aesthetic of color,
brushstrokes, and forms that demonstrated clear continuities with their earlier nonrepresentational work.
The conceptual approaches to abstraction that have been developed since Pollock’s death
are generally very different. Not only are they extremely diverse in style and purpose, as will be
described below in a number of specific cases, but almost without exception they do not have the

25
characteristic of commitment. Since the demise of Abstract Expressionism, conceptual painters
have developed the novel practice of part-time abstraction - of alternating between making
representational paintings and abstract paintings. And beyond this absence of commitment to
abstraction, most of these artists have lacked a commitment even to a single style of abstraction.
One of the most important painters of the era, Andy Warhol, clearly demonstrates both of these
practices. Thus although Warhol’s most celebrated paintings, including those of Marilyn Monroe
and Campbell’s soup cans, were based on photographs, he made non-representational paintings
at a number of points in his career, and he made these abstract paintings in a number of
completely different ways, in completely different styles. Not surprisingly, Warhol explained
that this should not be a source of concern: “an artist ought to be able to change his style without
feeling bad.”73 Many of his fellow conceptual artists shared this opinion, and this is a distinctive
feature of conceptual abstraction since the late 1950s.
The aesthetic of Abstract Expressionism and Tachisme was a powerful presence in the
advanced art world of the 1950s, and ambitious young conceptual artists quickly rebelled against
it on both sides of the Atlantic. Robert Rauschenberg is a prominent early example of an artist
who was deeply influenced by the Abstract Expressionists, but who reacted against their art in a
number of ways. Rauschenberg conceded that he owed a great debt to the Abstract
Expressionists, but he stressed that “I was never interested in their pessimism or editorializing.
You have to have time to feel sorry for yourself if you’re going to be a good Abstract
Expressionist, and I think I always considered that a waste.”74 His artistic rejections of Abstract
Expressionism were not subtle. So for example in 1953 the 28-year-old Rauschenberg carefully
erased a drawing by de Kooning that the older artist had given him, somewhat reluctantly, for

26
this purpose. Rauschenberg framed the work, and titled it Erased de Kooning Drawing. He
considered it “a legitimate work of art, created by the technique of erasing.”75 Harold Rosenberg
described this as a turning point: “Art-historically, the erasing could be seen as symbolic act of
liberation from the pervasive force of Abstract Expressionism... ‘Erased de Kooning’ became the
cornerstone of a new academy, devoted to replacing the arbitrary self of the artist with
predefined processes and objectives.”76
Many of the conceptual reactions to Abstract Expressionism not only appear to comment
on that style, but to do so ironically. In 1957, Rauschenberg produced Factum I and Factum II,
two paintings with collage elements, done in an Abstract Expressionist style, that appear
identical, even to the drips of paint that run down from the smeared brushstrokes. The two
paintings have been widely interpreted as a parody of the Abstract Expressionists’ insistence on
spontaneity and uniqueness.77 Their somewhat obscure titles may underscore this challenge, for
an obsolete definition of “factum” is from mathematics: “the product of two or more factors.”
The two paintings are in any case early examples of preconceived, conceptual abstract paintings
that are designed to appear unplanned and experimental.78
As a young artist in Paris during the 1950s, Yves Klein explored the use of pure color to
represent the infinite in nature, an interest that he had developed looking at the sea and sky
during his childhood on the Mediterranean coast of southern France. He wanted to make abstract
paintings, but he strongly rejected the attitudes of the Tachistes, and their emphasis on the use of
gesture as personal expression: “ I detest artists who empty themselves in their paintings, as is
often the case today... In place of thinking of beauty, goodness, truth, they render, ejaculate, spit
out all their horrible, impoverished and infectious complexity in their paintings as if to relieve

27
themselves.”79 In 1955, Klein began to make monochrome paintings, each a single uniform
color, most often the intense ultramarine pigment he patented as International Klein Blue, or
IKB. Initially he gave each of these paintings its own distinctive surface texture, but within a few
years he stopped doing this, and began applying the paint to uniform flat surfaces with a roller,
to eliminate any gestural traces of the artist’s hand. Klein explained that “My personal
psychology does not impregnate the painting when I paint with a roller, only the color value
itself radiates in pure and inherent quality.”80
In 1960, Klein began to make what a friend, the critic Pierre Restany, named his
“anthropometries,” in which nude models pressed themselves against canvases tacked to the
wall, or rolled on canvases laid on the ground, after covering themselves with blue paint. From
then until his premature death in 1962, at the age of 34, Klein devised a series of other ways to
produce abstract paintings. So for example he painted with fire, by using a blow torch to scorch
the surface of a specially prepared canvas; with wind, by coating a canvas with wet paint,
strapping it to the roof of his car, and driving from Paris to Nice; and with rain, by putting a
freshly painted canvas outside to be marked by a spring shower. (He also attempted to record the
impact of lightning on a canvas, but noted that “Needless to say, the last-mentioned ended in a
catastrophe.”) In a 1961 manifesto, Klein discussed these methods, and specifically responded to
critics who claimed that the anthropometries were a form of action painting: “I would like now
to make it clear that this endeavor is opposed to ‘action painting’ in that I am actually completely
detached from the physical work during its creation.”81 Throughout his brief career Klein made
abstract paintings without using the traditional method of applying paint with a brush. In effect,
much of his oeuvre can be thought of as answering a question: how many ways could a

28
conceptual artist think of to make paintings that resembled gestural abstractions, but in which the
forms were created by means other than the artist’s personal gestures in applying paint to a
canvas?
Jasper Johns’ famous early work reacted against the attitudes of the Abstract
Expressionists, in its preconceived depiction of everyday objects. As he later recalled, “There
was this idea associated with Abstract Expressionist painting that the work was a primal
expression of feelings, and I knew that was not what I wanted my work to be like.”82 Johns’ most
celebrated works remain his early, representational paintings of flags, targets, numerals, and
maps, but at several points in his career he has made non-representational paintings. Many of
these have consisted of groups of parallel cross-hatched line segments, fitted together like
flagstones on a patio. Kirk Varnedoe has observed that these paintings parody Pollock. Like
Pollock’s large, all-over compositions, Johns’ abstractions have no central point of interest. Yet
in each case, Johns’ composition presents “a systematization of the idea of gestural abstraction.
Its complexity can be reduced to modular form.” Johns thus transforms Pollock’s improvised
experimental art into a planned conceptual form: “It is a calculated program, quite the opposite
of Pollock’s sense of automatic release. You do not need a roadmap to recognize that there is an
order to this picture; you understand that it is fragmented, not continuous, and that it is
plotted.”83
The entire Pop art movement was in large part a reaction against Abstract Expressionism,
and many of its members mocked the older artists not only with words but with works of art.
Warhol’s famous statement of 1963, that “The reason I’m painting this way is that I want to be a
machine,” was an obvious affront to artists whose goal was self-expression, but he did not limit

29
his challenges to interviews.84 The most insulting of Warhol’s parodies of Abstract
Expressionism was the series of Oxidation paintings he produced during 1978. Large canvases up to 25 feet long - were spread on the floor of his studio and coated with copper paint. Warhol,
his assistants, and occasionally visitors to his studio then urinated on the canvases, producing
abstract images where the acid in the urine oxidized the metallic base, turning it from copper into
shades of green and brown.85 Their large size, their flowing liquid forms, and their execution on
canvas laid flat on the floor all made these works immediately recognizable as references to
Pollock’s drip paintings, which had emerged as the most famous emblems of Abstract
Expressionism.86
The Warhol paintings that are generally considered his most important abstractions are
the series of 102 works, titled Shadows, that he made during 1978-79. Large paintings, each 6' x
4', were produced by silkscreening a single enlarged photograph that an assistant took of the
shadows cast by cardboard cutouts.87 In each painting, a black form that resembles the bold
brushstrokes of the Abstract Expressionist Franz Kline is placed on a colored monochrome
background. Although the use of a number of different ground colors makes the appearance of
the paintings differ, the same shape recurs in every work, making the series an ironic comment
on Abstract Expressionist uniqueness and spontaneity.
Warhol subsequently produced other abstract works. In 1983, he made a large
silkscreened painting from an enlarged photograph of lengths of yarn of various colors tangled in
interlocking loops against a white background. The resemblance to Pollock’s drip paintings is
obvious.88 In 1984 Warhol made the Rorschach series. After pouring black paint onto a large
canvas laid on the floor, he folded the canvas to duplicate the image. Warhol improvised his own

30
abstract compositions, in the mistaken belief that psychiatric patients created their own ink blots
for Rorschach tests. He later explained that he would have preferred to enlarge the standard
images: “I wish I’d known there was a set.”89 The symmetry of the black forms has been
considered to be an ironic comment on the paintings of the Abstract Expressionist Robert
Motherwell, which often consisted of abstract black forms on a white ground, while Warhol’s
method of pouring paint onto unprimed canvas parodied the stain paintings of Helen
Frankenthaler and Morris Louis.90
In addition to his famous early paintings based on comic strips, during the 1960s Roy
Lichtenstein made a series of works based on paintings by great modern artists. Having quoted
paintings by Cézanne, Picasso, and Mondrian by reproducing specific paintings by each artist
using his trademark benday dots, he found himself “inevitably led to the idea of a de Kooning.”
Instead of reproducing the image of a painting, however, as he had done for the earlier artists,
Lichtenstein found that he “was very interested in characterizing or caricaturing a brushstroke.”
During 1965-66, he made a series of large Brushstroke paintings, each of which presented
stylized characterizations of one or more magnified brushstrokes: thick black outlines, the spaces
enclosed by them filled with solid colors, set against backgrounds of Lichtenstein’s imitations of
benday dots. Lichtenstein made these forms by brushing black paint onto transparent plastic
sheets, allowing the paint to shrink and dry, then projecting the result onto a canvas, and tracing
the enlarged contours. Although the brushstrokes were not actually copied from de Kooning,
Lichtenstein conceded that they “obviously refer to Abstract Expressionism.”91
Lichtenstein’s Brushstrokes, which he intended to look as brushstrokes would appear in a
comic strip, are clearly parodies. David Sylvester observed that “we see his meticulous

31
imitations of slashing brushmarks as a joke about the Abstract Expressionist cult of heroic
spontaneity... [T]he basic irony is simply the notion of representing the appearance of any
spontaneous daub with obvious deliberation and care.”92 Kirk Varnedoe agreed: “He takes the
lavish, heated, inimitable, signature brush stroke of painters like de Kooning... and shows that it
can be codified - freeze-dried, if you will - as if in comics, undermining as insincere the rhetoric
and scale of these painters. Everything that is supposed to be ethereal, ineffable, ambiguous, or
soulful about abstract expressionism is rendered as die-cut, stamped form, reduced literally to
comic formulae in these hard-won brush stokes by Lichtenstein.”93
Frank Stella rejected representational painting when he was in junior high school: “I
wasn’t very good at making things come out representationally, and I didn’t want to put the kind
of effort that it seemed to take into it.” During his high school and college years, he painted in a
style derived from Abstract Expressionism. In his senior year of college, however, he saw Jasper
Johns’ first exhibition in New York, and he was strongly affected by the patterns of the targets
and flags, “the idea of stripes... the idea of repetition. I began to think a lot about repetition.” He
soon began to react against “the romance of Abstract Expressionism... which was the idea of the
artist as a terrifically sensitive ever-changing, ever-ambitious person... I began to feel very
strongly about finding a way [of working] that wasn’t so wrapped up in the hullabaloo,... that
wasn’t constantly a record of your sensitivity.” 94
Stella promptly devised a new approach, based on his rejection of the idea of the painting
as a record of process: “I didn’t want to record a path. I wanted to get the paint out of the can and
onto the canvas.” He also rejected the goal of recording the artist’s subconscious feelings: “I
always get into arguments with people who want to retain the old values in painting... [T]hey

32
always end up asserting that there is something there besides the paint on the canvas. My
painting is based on the fact that only what can be seen there is there.” He disliked the visual
complexity of gestural abstraction: “One could stand in front of any Abstract-Expressionist work
for a long time, and walk back and forth, and inspect the depths of the pigment and the inflection
and all the painterly brushwork for hours. But I wouldn’t particularly want to do that and also I
wouldn’t ask anyone to do that in front of my paintings. To go further, I would like to prohibit
them from doing that in front of my painting.” Toward this end, he wanted his paintings to
present simple and straightforward images: “All I want anyone to get out of my paintings, and all
I ever get out of them, is the fact that you can see the whole idea without any confusion... What
you see is what you see.”And he rejected the older artists’ uncertainty: “We believe that we can
find the end, and that a painting can be finished. The Abstract Expressionists always felt the
painting’s being finished was very problematical.”95 Stella left no doubt that he valued ideas over
technique: “I do think that a good pictorial idea is worth more than a lot of manual dexterity.”96
Stella’s objections to gestural abstraction led him to make a series of abstract works
called the Black paintings, which he completed at the age of 24. These paintings, which remain
his most important works, effectively made the repetitive patterns of Johns’ targets and flags
non-representational, as he used housepainters’ brushes to fill large canvases with parallel stripes
of black paint, each approximately 2 ½” wide, in a variety of simple geometric patterns.97 Harold
Rosenberg belittled Stella’s paintings as “the most professorial paintings in the history of art,”
arguing that they represented the result of formalist art criticism rather than artistic selfdiscovery: “He wished to negate not only the content of Abstract Expressionism but its gesture,
too.”98 Stella followed the Black paintings with a series of paintings which used aluminum paint

33
to create geometric patterns. These effectively enacted his wish to prohibit viewers from
standing in front of his works for an extended period, for as he conceded, the aluminum paint
was “repellent” to look at: “these would be very hard paintings to penetrate... It would appear
slightly reflective and slightly hard and metallic.”99 Stella’s “slap in the face” to Abstract
Expressionism had a considerable impact, for his avoidance of the gestural brushstrokes and
tactile surfaces of Abstract Expressionism in favor of simple geometric patterns produced with
anonymous techniques and industrial materials gave a powerful stimulus to the young artists
who went on to create Minimalism, by making simple geometric sculptures out of industrial,
manufactured materials.100
Gerhard Richter is widely considered one of the most influential painters of recent
decades. His reputation rests largely on an innovation of the early 1960s, in which he responded
to Pop art’s revival of figuration by devising a new, distinctive style of representational painting
based on photographs. But he is also known for the great stylistic variety of his work, and it is
consequently not surprising that he has made abstract paintings. What is striking is how many
distinctly different styles of abstraction he has devised, each based on a different method. His
output is so large and varied that no simple summary of his approaches is possible, but many of
his paintings fall into groups, to which he gives collective titles.
In 1966 Richter began making large paintings he called Color Charts, which consisted of
grids of rectangular blocks of color that were copies of sample cards from paint manufacturers.
The earliest Color Charts had small numbers of colors, but over time Richter increased these by
mixing colors to make new shades; by 1974 he made a painting with 4096 different colors.101
The paintings were made systematically, as Richter and his assistants applied the paint as

34
smoothly as possible, and distributed the blocks of color randomly on the support. The Color
Charts thus blended accident and preconception, as Richter observed that “I found it interesting
to tie chance to a wholly rigid order.”102
In the early 1970s Richter made the Gray Paintings, monochrome works with a variety of
surface textures, some with visible brushstrokes, others with smooth surfaces. In the late ‘70s he
began several series of Abstract Pictures, which he continued over the following decades. Some
of these, often called the “soft abstractions,” were made by taking photographs of small sections
of earlier paintings, then enlarging them by projecting them onto new canvases. With scale
enlargements of 100:1, the new works become both non-representational and blurred. Another
series of abstract paintings was made by drawing rigid squeegees vertically or horizontally over
the surfaces of large canvases that had been covered with a variety of colors, often chosen at
random. Richter would repeat this process many times, each time applying more paint, then
scraping the surface - in one documented case, a painting went through 33 discrete stages - with
the effect that the final paintings generally bear visible traces of many colors in many layers.103
A theme that runs through Richter’s statements in interviews and published writings is
that his art is motivated by ideas. In considering Richter’s alternation between forms, Varnedoe
remarked that he was “programmatic in his gambits between abstraction and representation,” and
in pondering Richter’s methods in making non-representational paintings, Varnedoe further
observed that “He comes to his abstraction from a climate of dead cynicism and irony.”104
Conclusion
The standard history of abstraction, and the one that the satirists
and ironists of the 1980s would write, smugly and in selfcongratulation, is a history of faith and its loss, a history of
illusions replaced by knowing, of dreams dispelled by reality.

35
Kirk Varnedoe, 2003105
Early in the twentieth century, three great artists pioneered a radical new form of
painting. All three came from places that lay outside the central traditions of western art Kandinsky and Malevich from Russia, Mondrian from Holland - but each was heavily influenced
by mainstream artistic movements of their time - Kandinsky by Fauvism, Mondrian by Cubism,
and Malevich by both of those movements, as well as by Futurism. They proceeded in very
different ways, the experimental Kandinsky and Mondrian gradually and visually, the conceptual
Malevich precipitously and conceptually, in arriving at their discoveries. Their specific goals for
their art also differed greatly, but they shared a basic optimism, and a belief that the new forms
of art they were pioneering would not only be the advanced art of the future, but would directly
and powerfully contribute to improving human society.
Abstraction became the dominant form of advanced painting during the decade following
the end of World War II. The rise of abstraction coincided with the rise of New York as the
center of the advanced art world, as a group of ambitious young experimental artists worked for
decades in what proved to be a successful attempt to transform themselves from art world
outsiders into the new leaders of modern art. Only thirty years, but also two world wars and a
worldwide depression, separated their arrival at their mature art from the pioneers’ original
discoveries, so it is hardly surprising that the Abstract Expressionists were less optimistic than
their predecessors, and few if any of them genuinely believed that their art would have a real
impact on society at large. They were committed, however, to using art as a vehicle for learning
about themselves: as they experimented with new ways to use paint to create novel images, they
hoped that the forms they discovered on their canvases would reveal new insights into the

36
sources of their own feelings and motivations.
The dominance of abstraction as the leading form of advanced painting was cut short
abruptly during the late 1950s and early ‘60s by the innovations of a succession of young
conceptual artists; the hegemony of Abstract Expressionism did not last a millennium, as some
of its leading members had expected, but barely a decade. The rise of conceptual approaches in
advanced art, from the late ‘50s on, greatly reduced the importance of abstract painting. In part
this was a consequence of the return to figuration in painting, while in part it was also a product
of a general deemphasis of painting in favor of new genres of art, many of which were devised as
rejections of Abstract Expressionist painting.
Yet although abstract painting declined in importance, it did not disappear altogether
from advanced art after 1960. It persisted, but in a new role that many analysts have found
puzzling. So for example in an essay of 2002 the critic Arthur Danto, a thoughtful observer of
the contemporary art world, looked back to what he called “the art wars of the mid-twentieth
century,” and reflected that “it says something about human passion that the distinction between
figuration and abstraction was so vehement that, in my memory, people would have been glad to
hang or shoot one another, or burn their stylistic opponents at the stake, as if it were a religious
controversy and salvation were at risk. It perhaps says something deep about the spirit of our
present times that the decisions whether to paint abstractly or realistically can be as lightly made
as whether to paint a landscape or still life - or a figure study - was for a traditional artist.”106
Although Danto did not attempt to explain the difference between these two eras, the answer in
fact appears to lie in the analysis outlined in the two preceding sections of this paper. At midcentury, disputes over the relative merits of figuration and abstraction were spearheaded by

37
experimental artists, who were deeply committed to just one or the other as a superior path to
artistic truth. Thus an Abstract Expressionist who returned to figuration - as both Pollock and de
Kooning did, temporarily, during the ‘50s - might be denounced by his colleagues or the critics
who championed abstraction as reactionary traitors to the cause.107 In contrast, by 2002 a host of
conceptual artists alternated between these forms frequently and at will, since they considered
them no more than different languages, each with its own advantages in expressing certain ideas.
No critic would have thought to call them traitors, for there were no commitments or causes at
stake.
Abstract painting thus underwent a series of remarkable transformations within little
more than five decades. When it first appeared on the eve of World War I, its creators had no
doubt that it would not only dominate the future of art, but that it would play a central role in
creating a better world. Three decades later, it did become the central form of advanced painting
in the hands, and gestures, of the Abstract Expressionists. The cataclysmic events that separated
Pollock and his colleagues from the pioneers of abstraction produced a radical diminution in the
later artists’ expectations for the role of art in society at large, but they were nonetheless
committed to a quest for the personal image, and to abstraction as a vehicle for exploration and
personal discovery. Within a decade after Pollock’s death, however, abstract painting was
largely taken over by conceptual artists, the most prominent of whom saw it as no more than a
part-time style, and many of whom used it primarily to mock the seriousness of earlier abstract
painters. Today abstraction is considered by most artists as a particular strategy, and considered
by most of those who employ it as merely one available means among many of making their
personal artistic statements.

38

39
Footnotes
I thank Robert Jensen for valuable discussions.
1.

Meyer Schapiro, Modern Art (New York: George Braziller, 1982), p. 195.

2.

Harold Rosenberg, Art on the Edge (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), p. 39.

3.

Clement Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 1 (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1986), pp. 188-89.

4.

Yve-Alain Bois, Joop Joosten, Angelica Rudenstine, and Hans Janssen, Piet Mondrian
(Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1995), p. xix; also see p. 295.

5.

Harry Cooper and Ron Spronk, Mondrian, (New Haven: Yale University Press. 2001), p.
49.

6.

Michel Seuphor, Piet Mondrian (New York: Henry N. Abrams, 1956), p. 181.

7.

Thomas Messer, Piet Mondrian (New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1971),
pp. 81-82.

8.

Carl Holty, “Mondrian in New York: A Memoir,” Arts, Vol. 31, No. 10 (1957), p. 21.

9.

Cooper and Spronk, Mondrian, p. 67.

10.

Cooper and Spronk, Mondrian, p. 118.

11.

More recently, the scholars Simon Schama and Rosalind Krauss have also considered
Mondrian’s work to be conceptual; Cooper and Spronk, Mondrian, pp. 8-9.

12.

Kenneth Lindsay and Peter Vergo, eds., Kandinsky: Complete Writings on Art (New
York: Da Capo Press, 1994), p. 481.

13.

Lindsay and Vergo, Kandinsky, p. 363.

14.

Lindsay and Vergo, Kandinsky, pp. 369-70.

15.

Lindsay and Vergo, Kandinsky, p. 370.

16.

Lindsay and Vergo, Kandinsky, p. 393.

17.

Lindsay and Vergo, Kandinsky, pp. 372-73.

18.

Lindsay and Vergo, Kandinsky, p. 799.

19.

Lindsay and Vergo, Kandinsky, p. 827.

40
20.

Vivian Barnett, Kandinsky at the Guggenheim (New York: Abbeville Press, 1983), pp.
29-30.

21.

Alan Bowness, Modern European Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1972), p. 133.

22.

Will Grohmann, Wassily Kandinsky (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1958), p. 145.

23.

David Sylvester, About Modern Art (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1997), p. 79.

24.

Hans Janssen and Joop Joosten, Mondrian 1892-1914: The Path to Abstraction (Zwolle:
Waanders Publishers, 2002), p. 196.

25.

Bois, et. al., Piet Mondrian, p. 162.

26.

Seuphor, Mondrian, p. 198.

27.

Janssen and Joosten, Mondrian 1892-1914, p. 24.

28.

Sylvester, About Modern Art, p. 434.

29.

Bois, et. al., Piet Mondrian, p. 295.

30.

Cooper and Spronk, Mondrian, p. 114.

31.

Cooper and Spronk, Mondrian, p. 67.

32.

Janssen and Joosten, Mondrian 1892-1914, p. 40.

33.

Messer, Piet Mondrian, pp. 79, 82.

34.

K. S. Malevich, Essays on Art, 1915-1933, Vol. 1 (London: Rapp and Whiting, 1969), p.
24.

35.

Malevich, Essays, Vol. 1, p. 94.

36.

Malevich, Essays, Vol. 1, pp. 100-01.

37.

Malevich, Essays, Vol. 1, p. 121.

38.

John Milner, Kazimir Malevich and the Art of Geometry (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1996), pp. 80-81.

39.

Larissa Zhadova, Malevich (London: Thames and Hudson, 1982), p. 53.

40.

Martin Kemp, ed., The Oxford History of Western Art (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2000), p. 414.

41
41.

Malevich, Essays, Vol. 1, pp. 19, 38, 41.

42.

John Golding, Visions of the Modern (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), p.
178.

43.

John Golding, Paths to the Absolute (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), pp.
82-83.

44.

Carel Blotkamp, Mondrian (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1994), pp. 14-15.

45.

Malevich, Essays, Vol. 1, pp. 49, 83.

46.

Schapiro, Modern Art, p. 218.

47.

David Galenson, Artistic Capital (New York: Routledge, 2006), Chap. 4.

48.

Barnett Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1992), p. 173.

49.

James Breslin, Mark Rothko (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 193.

50.

Pepe Karmel, ed., Jackson Pollock (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1999), p. 21.

51.

Karmel, Jackson Pollock, p. 18.

52.

Karmel, Jackson Pollock, p. 18.

53.

Breslin, Mark Rothko, pp. 239-40.

54.

David Sylvester, Interviews With American Artists (New Haven: Yale University Press,
2001), p. 57.

55.

Harold Rosenberg, The Tradition of the New (New York: Da Capo Press, 1994), p. 25.

56.

Elaine de Kooning, The Spirit of Abstract Expressionism (New York: George Braziller,
1994), p. 228.

57.

Breslin, Mark Rothko, pp. 317, 469.

58.

E. A. Carmean and Eliza Rathbone, American Art at Mid-Century: The Subjects of the
Artist (Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1978), pp. 133-39.

59.

Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews, p. 240.

60.

Stephanie Terenzio, ed., The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1992), p. 3.

42
61.

B. H. Friedman, Jackson Pollock (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), p. 183.

62.

Sandor Kuthy, Pierre Soulages (Berne: Musée des beaux-arts, 1999), pp. 22-24. The
translations are mine.

63.

E.g. see Galenson, Artistic Capital, Chaps. 3-4.

64.

Serge Guilbaut, How New York Stole the Idea of Modern Art (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1983), p. 1; William Seitz, Abstract Expressionist Painting in America
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983), p. 165.

65.

Sylvester, About Modern Art, pp. 229-30.

66.

Kirk Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing: Abstract Art Since Pollock (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2006), p. 29.

67.

Barbara Rose, Frankenthaler (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1971), p. 29.

68.

William Seitz, Art in the Age of Aquarius, 1955-1970 (Washington: Smithsonian
Institution Press, 1992), pp. 36-39.

69.

Irving Sandler, The New York School (New York: Harper and Row, 1978), pp. 69-87.

70.

Gary Garrels, Plane Image: A Brice Marden Retrospective (New York: Museum of
Modern Art, 2006), pp. 21, 26.

71.

Michael Kimmelman, Portraits (New York: Modern Library, 1999), p. 198.

72.

Garrels, Plane Image, p. 23.

73.

Kenneth Goldsmith, ed., I’ll Be Your Mirror: The Selected Andy Warhol Interviews (New
York: Carroll and Graf, 2004), p. 17.

74.

Emile de Antonio and Mitch Tuchman, Painters Painting (New York: Abbeville Press,
1984), p. 87.

75.

Calvin Tomkins, Off the Wall: Robert Rauschenberg and the Art World of Our Time
(Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1981), pp. 96-97.

76.

Harold Rosenberg, Art and Other Serious Matters (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1985), p. 245.

77.

Sandler, The New York School, pp. 180-83.

78.

de Antonio and Tuchman, Painters Painting, p. 94.

79.

Sidra Stich, Yves Klein (Stuttgart: Cantz Verlag, 1994), p. 68.

43
80.

Stich, Yves Klein, p. 68.

81.

Yves Klein, Le dépassement de la problématique de l’art et autres écrits (Paris: Ecole
nationale supérieure des beaux-arts, 2003), pp. 295-96.

82.

Jasper Johns, Writings, Sketchbook Notes, Interviews (New York: Museum of Modern
Art, 1996), p. 256.

83.

Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing, pp. 226-27.

84.

Goldsmith, I’ll Be Your Mirror, p. 18; Kelly Cresap, Pop Trickster Fool (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 2004), p. 71.

85.

Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing, p. 203; David Bourdon, Warhol (New York: Harry N.
Abrams, 1989), pp. 365-72.

86.

Rosalind Krauss, “Warhol’s Abstract Spectacle,” in Yve-Alain Bois, et. al., Abstraction,
Gesture, Ecriture (Zurich: Alesco, 1999), p. 126.

87.

Bourdon, Warhol, p. 372.

88.

Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing, pp. 203-04.

89.

Bourdon, Warhol, pp. 393-94.

90.

Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing, p. 204; Bourdon, Warhol, p. 394.

91.

John Coplans, ed., Roy Lichtenstein (New York: Prager, 1972), pp. 44-45, 89.

92.

Sylvester, About Modern Art, p. 233.

93.

Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing, p. 194.

94.

William Rubin, Frank Stella (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1970), pp. 8-13.

95.

Gregory Battcock, ed., Minimal Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), pp.
157-61.

96.

Rubin, Frank Stella, p. 32.

97.

David Galenson, Artistic Capital (New York: Routledge, 2006), p. 54.

98.

Harold Rosenberg, The De-Definition of Art (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1983), pp. 121-31.

99.

Emile de Antonio and Mitch Tuchman, Painters Painting (New York: Abbeville Press,
1984), p. 140.

44
100.

Amy Dempsey, Art in the Modern Era (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002), pp. 232-37.

101.

Armin Zweite, Gerhard Richter (New York: Distributed Art Publishers, 2005), pp. 5054.

102.

Gerhard Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995), p. 264.

103.

Zweite, Gerhard Richter, pp. 48-91.

104.

Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing, pp. 214-16.

105.

Varnedoe, Pictures of Nothing, p. 237.

106.

Arthur Danto, Unnatural Wonders (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2005), p. 187.

107.

Thomas Hess, Willem de Kooning (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1968), p. 74;
Clement Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 4 (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1993), p. 124.

