NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUI GENERIS EMU
Barry Eichengreen
Working Paper 13740
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13740

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

Revision of a paper prepared for the European Commission’s workshop "EMU@10: Achievements
and Challenges," 27 November 2007. Financial support from the Commission and the Coleman Fung
Risk Management Center at the University of California, Berkeley is gratefully acknowledged, as
are comments from Lars Jonung and other conference participants. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Sui Generis EMU
Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 13740
January 2008
JEL No. F15,N14
ABSTRACT
The thesis of this paper is that there is no historical precedent for Europe's monetary union (EMU).
While it is possible to point to similar historical experiences, the most obvious of which were in the
19th century, occurred in Europe, and had "union" as part of their names, EMU differs from these
earlier monetary unions. The closer one looks the more uncomfortable one becomes with the effort
to draw parallels on the basis of historical experience. It is argued that efforts to draw parallels between
EMU and monetary unions past are more likely to mislead than to offer useful insights. Where history
is useful is not in drawing parallels but in pinpointing differences. It is useful for highlighting what
is distinctive about EMU.

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Sui Generis EMU1
Barry Eichengreen
University of California, Berkeley
December 2007

1. Introduction
The thesis of this paper is that there is no historical precedent for Europe’s
monetary union. To be sure, it is possible to point to similar historical experiences, the
most obvious of which were in the 19th century, occurred in Europe, and had “union” as
part of their names. But EMU differs from these earlier monetary unions.2 The closer
one looks the more uncomfortable one becomes with the effort to draw parallels on the
basis of this, and related, historical experience.
I elaborate these points by reviewing previous efforts to use historical experience
to shed light on European monetary union. I argue that these earlier efforts to draw
parallels between EMU and monetary unions past are more likely to mislead than to offer
useful insights. The important lesson is the need for nuance when drawing lessons from
this history.
Where history is useful is not in drawing parallels but in pinpointing differences.
It is useful for highlighting what is distinctive about EMU and why, therefore, parallels
mislead. I illustrate the point with reference to three issues around which discussion of
EMU currently focuses: the relationship between monetary union and financial

1

Revision of a paper prepared for the European Commission’s workshop “EMU@10: Achievements and
Challenges,” 27 November 2007. Financial support from the Commission and the Coleman Fung Risk
Management Center at the University of California, Berkeley is gratefully acknowledged, as are comments
from Lars Jonung and other conference participants.
2
Here I use EMU to refer to European Monetary Union (as opposed to Economic and Monetary Union as
tends to be the practice in Brussels). Alas, “Sui Generis Euro Area” does not roll off the tongue.

1

integration; the connections between monetary union and financial stability; and the
probability that the euro area might break up.

2. Imperfect Analogies
The leading historical analogies with EMU are the classical gold standard, the
Latin and Scandinavian Unions, a number of relatively specialized 20th century monetary
unions, and various national experiences with monetary and political unification.
2.1. The Gold Standard. A number of authors have sought to use gold standard
experience to draw implications for EMU. The idea is that the gold standard constrained
national monetary autonomy in the same manner as EMU. Its maintenance therefore
required the development of alternative adjustment mechanisms. Evidence from the gold
standard permits one to test the notion that wage and price flexibility – and the flexibility
of markets generally – is important for the smooth operation of such a regime. It can be
used to explore whether adoption of this regime encouraged the development of the
relevant flexibility. It can be used to test whether by limiting exchange rate variability
the gold standard was conducive to the growth of international trade and to financial
integration. It can be used to investigate how much fiscal and macroeconomic policy
coordination was needed for the operation of this system.3
The problem is that the gold standard was a first and foremost a national
arrangement. It involved a national decision to peg the national currency to an external
numeraire, like Latvia’s today, not a decision to abolish the bilateral exchange rate by
abolishing the national currency, as the founding members of EMU agreed in 1999. To
3

Thus, Flandreau, le Cacheaux and Zumer (2006) inquire into how much fiscal autonomy was retained
under the gold standard and attempt to draw out lessons for EMU. Panic (1992) seeks to draw a variety of
lessons from the gold standard for Europe’s monetary union.

2

be sure, the attractions of adopting the gold standard were not independent of the number
of other countries that similarly adopted the gold standard.4 But occasional international
conferences on the desirability of harmonizing national monetary arrangements
notwithstanding, the decision was taken at the national level and the regime was operated
by the national central bank, treasury or equivalent.
Under the gold standard, as in the case of all exchange rate pegs, the central parity
was surrounded by a fluctuation band, reflecting transactions costs.5 Thus the gold
standard, unlike a monetary union, did not eliminate exchange rate variability among the
participants.6 Studies of modern experience caution against drawing inferences about the
effects of monetary union on, say, the volume of trade from evidence on the effects of
reducing exchange rate volatility. They suggest that the trade-promoting effects of
reducing exchange rate variability, even to low levels, are less powerful than those of
establishing a monetary union. (This is the finding of Rose 2000.) Similarly, in their
study of exchange rate regimes and international trade prior to 1913, Lopez-Cordova and
Meissner (2000) find a smaller trade-promoting effect of the gold standard on a pair of
gold-standard countries than when two or more countries established a monetary union.
Moreover, because the gold standard was a national arrangement, it was
straightforward for the national authorities to suspend or abandon it, as they not
infrequently did. They could and did suspend the law or statute requiring the free
convertibility of the national currency into gold at a fixed domestic-currency price or
4

Gallarotti (1995) and Meissner (2005) analyze these interdependencies.
The edges of the band being the famous gold import and export points, defined by the costs of
international gold market arbitrage. Giovannini (1989) generalizes the point, showing that all fixed-rate
regimes have in practice involved not just a central parity but a fluctuation band. The point will also be
familiar to students of Argentina’s recent quasi-currency board and Hong Kong’s currency-board regime.
6
Thus, countries that maintained the gold standard but also formed a monetary union where they
committed to accepting the obligations of their partners at par further narrowed these fluctuation bands.
See the discussion of the Latin Monetary Union and Scandinavian Monetary Union below.
5

3

even just complicate the operation of convertibility.7 Europe’s monetary union treaty, in
contrast, makes no provision for exit.8
It has been argued that suspensions of convertibility in periods of distress, during
which the exchange rate was allowed to depreciate, were integral to the operation of this
system.9 In the absence of another adjustment mechanism, this escape clause provided
partial insulation from balance-of-payments disturbances. Countries were able to peg
under normal circumstances precisely because they could float in periods of exceptional
volatility. This escape clause was not destabilizing because it was presumed that
convertibility at the previous parity would be restored as soon as the crisis had passed.
There is no analogous escape clause in EMU.
This mechanism functioned differently at different times and places. The
presumption that, as soon as the period of distress had passed, convertibility would be
restored at the previously prevailing price of gold applied more powerfully in some cases
than others. The more economically and financially developed was a country, the more
likely it was that it would adhere to this resumption rule. The assumption that
convertibility would be restored at the earlier exchange rate was also more prevalent
before World War I than after.10
Whatever the other advantages of the escape clause, it created uncertainty.
Currency stability today did not guarantee currency stability tomorrow. Especially after
1914 and especially in less developed countries, there was little assurance that the
7

Thus, the authorities might use moral suasion in an effort to discourage banks and others from converting
domestic currency into coin, or they might follow the Bank of France by only accepting requests for
conversion at a remote country office of the central bank (for details see Bloomfield 1959).
8
Countries could conceivably exit from EMU by unilaterally abrogating their treaty obligations, but the
barriers to unilateral exit are substantial, as I argue in Section 3 below.
9
See Bordo and Kydland (1996).
10
This is the argument about the decline in the stability of the gold standard between the pre-World War I
and interwar periods developed in Eichengreen (1996).

4

exchange rate would retain its value. Investors in domestic-currency-denominated
securities might see their claims devalued. The literature on interest rate spreads suggests
that the gold standard made for interest rate convergence, but it does not suggest that the
gold standard, unlike EMU, eliminated currency risk.11
2.2. Multinational Monetary Unions. Pre-1913 monetary unions, the Latin
Monetary Union and Scandinavian Monetary Union, have also been studied in an effort
to shed light on these questions. The Latin Union was established in 1866 by France,
Belgium, Italy and Switzerland, joined subsequently by Greece. The union treaty
specified standard sizes and fineness for the gold and silver coins of the participating
countries, guaranteed the acceptability of each member’s coins as legal tender for
effecting private and public payments in other member states, and attempted to regulate
the emission of subsidiary silver coins (with lower specie content) by each union member.
Flandreau (2000), Einaudi (2001) and Helleiner (2003) discuss the members’
motivations. These included the desire to simplify international transactions and foster
trade, the desire on the part of France to enhance the position of Paris as a financial center
by enlarging the domain over which a franc-like monetary unit circulated, and the effort
to reinforce French foreign policy by raising the influence of the franc.12 But the
fundamental problem that the Latin Union was designed to solve had nothing to do with

11

See Bordo and Rockoff (1996) and Ferguson and Schlurarick (2006). Similarly, even if adherence to the
gold standard enhanced the ability of governments to issue long-term, domestic-currency-denominated debt
securities on international markets, this does not tell us anything about how quickly monetary union might
solve this problem. See e.g. Flandreau and Sussman (2005) and Bordo, Meissner and Redish (2005).
12
Some of these ambitions will resonate with historians of the euro. Certainly the possibility that the euro
would encourage intra-European trade figured prominently in discussions of whether to create a single
currency. There were also those who suggested that the single currency would encourage the development
of a European financial center to rival New York (not that they anticipated that this financial center would
develop outside the euro area, namely in London). And, in academic circles at least, there was also the
argument that the single currency would encourage political integration and eventually the emergence of a
single European foreign policy.

5

modern arguments for or against monetary unification. The participating countries, led
by France, operated a bimetallic system under which they supplemented full bodied
large-denomination coinage with less valuable silver coins and, where necessary,
subsidiary coinage whose metallic content was less than its face value. Bimetallism
required stabilizing the relative price of silver and gold in the face of fluctuations in
world market prices. This could be done if central banks paid out the metal whose price
was high in return for the metal whose price was low and allow the composition of the
domestic circulation change so as to meet changes in the composition of global demand
without exhausting the circulation of either metal.13 While a single bimetallic country,
even one as large as France, was too small to exercise this stabilizing influence, doing so
be might easier for a collection of countries whose weight relative to world markets was
greater. From this flowed the effort to coordinate.
In the event, the Latin Union proved too small to stabilize the world market price
of silver. As silver supplies continued to expand, the Latin Union countries were forced
to suspend silver convertibility and go onto de facto gold standards. Now the problem
shifted to their subsidiary coinage, which they had an incentive to overproduce and
circulate in neighboring countries. There followed a series of agreements designed to
limit its emission, which proved incompletely effective. The Latin Union treaty was
another effort to solve this problem.
In contrast to EMU, then, this was an attempt to create a common monetary
circulation without a common monetary authority. There was no central bank at the level
of the union. Precisely because policy was not decided by a transnational entity like the
European Central Bank, there was more scope than in Europe today for individual
13

How exactly this worked is the subject of Flandreau (1997).

6

member states to control their money supplies. Countries were able to produce their own
subsidiary coinage in excess of levels specified in the monetary union treaty so long as
they could get away with it. They had an incentive to do so, since increases in the
circulation drove up prices not just at home but monetary-union-wide.14 The requirement
that the issuing central bank redeem that subsidiary coinage at par or accept it in payment
of taxes and other public obligations provided a check, but an imperfect one insofar as
collecting large amounts of small coin and transferring it from, say, Paris to Athens was
costly. Greece’s partners in the Latin Union sought to solve this problem by requiring
that all small Greek coins be produced at the Paris mint, but the provision does not appear
to have been effective.15 No analogous free rider problem exists under EMU, since the
national central banks participating in the European System of Central Banks have no
independent control of the money supply.
Nor does membership in the Latin Union appear to have been as difficult to
modify as membership in EMU. Within a few months of ratification of the Latin Union
treaty, Italy suspended the convertibility of her banknotes into metal coin and injected
into circulation large numbers of small denomination banknotes, contravening provisions
of the treaty. The result was increased seigniorage for Italy and inflation for its partners,
as Italy’s small silver coins flowed into the Latin Union countries.16 Monetary options
under this earlier union were thus quite different than under EMU.

14

Equivalently, since the cost of producing subsidiary coins whose metallic content was less than their face
value was less than the ability of those coins to command goods and services in neighboring countries.
15
See Bailey and Bae (2003).
16
Just why the Latin Union agreement was not more effective and why it was not as constraining as the
EMU treaty are interesting questions. My own view is that the LMU treaty was not part of a larger political
bargain that involved also commitments on other nonmonetary issues that could be jeopardized by reneging
on its monetary provisions (for more on this, see below). Others would say that the LMU treaty was less
effective because there was nothing to constrain irresponsible fiscal behavior, which led countries like Italy
to pursue policies that heightened their need for seigniorage.

7

The other prominent 19th century experiment along these lines, the Scandinavian
Monetary Union, was in many respects similar. The motivation for its formation was to
simplify transactions among the participating states (Denmark and Sweden, joined
subsequently by Norway) and to restrain the temptation to engage in excessive emission
of currency notes that might also circulate in neighboring countries. The union was
formed in the 1870s following Germany’s adoption of the gold standard and the
concurrently with the shift of the Latin Union countries to gold. Hence the circulation of
the participating countries (Denmark and Sweden, joined subsequently by Norway) was
based on gold. Gold coins being impractical for small transactions, they were
supplemented (in practice dominated) by token coins and notes convertible into gold.17
From 1873 the three central banks agreed to accept one another’s coins at par. From
1894 they agreed to permit the drawing of drafts on one another at par. From 1901 they
accepted one another’s notes at par.18 The result was a significant narrowing of the gold
points.19
Again, however, analogies with EMU are strained because there was no central
bank at the level of the union. The three members retained their national central banks
and the ability, within the constraints of the gold-bullion standard, to regulate their
money supplies. Separate exchange rates continued to be quoted in financial centers like
Copenhagen on their respective monies, reflecting the fact that the gold points had been

17

This, then, was a gold bullion standard, under which notes were backed by the bullion reserves of the
respective central banks. This is distinct from a gold coin standard (where only gold coin circulates,
obviating the need for the central bank to hold bullion reserves) and a gold-exchange standard, where notes
are backed not just with gold bullion but also with convertible foreign exchange.
18
The Swedish central bank accepted Norwegian and Danish notes at par from the beginning of the union,
but Norway accepted Swedish notes at par only from 1894 and Denmark accepted the notes of its partners
at par only from 1901. See Bergman, Gerlach and Jonung (1993) and Hendriksen and Kaergard (1995).
19
See Bergman (1999), p.366 and footnote 5 above.

8

narrowed but not eliminated. All this is quite different from the current European
situation.
What deterred the excessive emission of token coins and banknotes during the
period when these were accepted at par? In part the answer is the gold standard; partner
central banks could demand conversion into gold by the issuing monetary authority;
knowledge of this restrained the temptation to over-issue.20 Another part of the answer is
mechanisms for detecting attempts to renege on the agreement: to prevent debasement,
the union agreement provided for regular examinations of national coins and for sharing
of information on minting and issuance practices. A final part of the answer is political.
Recall that Sweden and Norway maintained a political union from 1814 until 1905.
Revealingly, dissolution of that union led the Bank of Sweden to terminate the agreement
to accept the notes and drafts of its partners at par.21 The outbreak of World War I then
led national imperatives to the fore and forced the participating central banks to suspend
gold convertibility and subordinate the creation of paper money and token coins to the
war effort. Sweden threatened to withdraw from the union unless its partners agreed to
embargo gold exports, which they quickly did. Even this did not prevent the agreement
to accept one another’s gold coins at par from being terminated in 1920.
The Scandinavian Union was more durable than the Latin Union.22 But exit –
either partial as in 1905 or complete as during and after World War I – was relatively
easy because the participating countries never stripped their national central banks of the
power to create money. Indeed, the Scandinavian Union treaty included an explicit exit

20

Although it did not eliminate that tendency, owing to transactions costs. See also the discussion of this
question in the subsection on the Latin Union above.
21
It continued to accept them at a discount.
22
This is also the conclusion of de Cecco (1992).

9

clause, which required members terminating their participation only to give one year’s
notice (Bergman, 1999, p.365). In this respect as well, the Scandinavian Union was very
different from EMU.
2.3. 20th Century Monetary Unions. Previous work has also examined a
number of 20th century monetary unions. Examples include the Anglo-Irish monetary
union that prevailed from the foundation of the Irish Republic until the creation of the
European Monetary System in 1979, the CFA franc zone of francophone West and
Central Africa (and one former Portuguese colony, Guinea-Bissau) that has operated for
more than 45 years, the Belgium-Luxembourg monetary union that prevailed from the
early 1920s until the advent of the euro, the Switzerland-Lichtenstein monetary union, the
France-Monaco monetary union, the Italy-San Marino-Vatican City monetary union, the
U.S.-Liberia monetary union, and the U.S./Panama monetary union.23 There have also
been attempts to draw lessons for EMU from these experiences. Studies have shown that
members of these common-currency groupings trade more extensively with one another
than their characteristics otherwise predict.24 They run lower inflation rates than
otherwise comparable countries with national currencies. Their financial markets are
unusually integrated. There is little evidence that they exhibit more fiscal discipline than
nonmembers (Fatas and Rose 2001).
The problem is that these arrangements are all quite unlike EMU. Typically they
are composed of one large country and a much smaller one rather than of several

23

Rose (2000) provides a catalog of such arrangements.
Although how much more is disputed; see Baldwin (2006). The same qualitative result as obtained in
these cross-country comparisons has been found in time series studies of countries forming or dissolving a
monetary union (as in the case of Ireland in 1979; see for example Dwane, Lane and McIndoe (2006).

24

10

comparably sized members.25 Policy is delegated to the large member, giving the small
member little say. Belgium determined monetary policy for the Belgium-Luxembourg
monetary union (subject to Luxembourg’s consent).26 The Swiss National Bank makes
policy for the Switzerland-Lichtenstein union. The Federal Reserve Board sets policy
without input from the Liberian or Panamanian authorities. Issues of shared governance
and of the creation of transnational institutions analogous to the ECB do not arise.
One can reasonably question the generality of inferences drawn from trade,
financial and other effects when one country is so small relative to the other. Technically,
the problem is that the control group and treatment group are very different.27 At least
this is the problem if one doubts the ability of multivariate regression (where the
independent variables include measures of country size) to adequately control for
differences in the two groups (Baldwin, 2006).
An unusual case is the CFA franc zone, which includes a number of countries of
broadly similar size and where there exist two transnational monetary authorities, one for
the West African Currency Union and one for the Central African Currency Union .28
But countries are restrained from exiting (and their policies are restrained in other ways)
by the fact that France provides them with direct assistance and subsidies, partly
contingent on their participation in the arrangement. France’s ability to do so derives
from the fact that its financial system is roughly 30 times the combined size of the
financial systems of the CFA franc zone countries; in this sense this system exhibits the

25

Together with some smaller ones.
An interesting study of this case is Meade (1956).
27
Unless one limits the latter to country pairs where one member is also very small relative to the other.
28
See Masson and Patillo (2004) for details. Comoros, and island in the Indian Ocean, has its own
currency, the Comoros franc, and its own central bank, although its pegs to the CFA franc and participates
in other CFA franc zone arrangements.
26

11

same asymmetry as the other monetary unions enumerated above. To be sure, the
relationship between France and the members of the CFA zone is not exactly that of
monetary union partners. Indicative of this, the CFA franc has been devalued several
times against the franc of Metropolitan France, most recently in 1999. France’s role in
the system means that this case is not particularly useful for drawing analogies with EMU.
2.4. National Monetary Unions. At one level, the most relevant of these
imperfect analogies are cases of national monetary unification – how the United States
became a monetary union (Rockoff 2006), how Germany became a monetary union
(Holtfrerich 1989), how Italy became a monetary union (Toniolo, Conte and Vecchi
2003). These countries all evolved true monetary unions, with a single currency whose
availability was regulated by a single central bank. They were more than quasi-fixedexchange-rate arrangements like the gold standard, the Latin Union and the Scandinavian
Union. They all ended up creating central banks at the level of the union that effectively
monopolized control of the money supply.29 All of them eventually abandoned monetary
rules like gold convertibility that had relieved the central bank of responsibility for
making policy decisions.30
At another level, however, these national cases lack the distinguishing feature of
EMU, which is monetary union in the absence of political union. In Europe today there
exists a central bank whose domain is wider than that of the national political institutions
whose consent was required for its creation and continued existence. The United States

29

“Effectively” because a number of private banks retained limited note-issuing powers in Italy
significantly into the post-unification period.
30
In these respects the analogy with EMU is direct. Hence these are the type of cases on which I focus for
much of Section 3 below.

12

and Germany have (or had) a federal government and a central bank at the level of that
federation. Europe possesses the central bank but not the federal government.31
This is not simply EMU’s distinguishing feature but also the source of its most
fundamental challenges. How can the ECB be held socially accountable for its decisions
in the absence of an equally consequential political counterweight at the level of the
monetary union?32 In the absence of political federation, how can the fiscal policies of
the member states be restrained? How can a monetary union work in the absence of a
federal government with an economically consequential budget to effect stabilizing
transfers across member states?
History offers few useful answers. Some observers argue that monetary union
without political union is not viable in the long run, either because the answers to the
preceding questions are negative on a priori grounds or because evidence shows that
monetary union not accompanied by political union tend to be unstable.33 My own view
is that history does not demonstrate any such incompatibility because the combination
has never been tried. History provides no useful evidence one way or the other.34

3. Highlighting Differences
I have argued that historical experience with monetary unification is quite
different from EMU. Where that history is useful, therefore, is in identifying what is

31

This is not to overlook the existence of political institutions like the European Commission and European
Parliament at the level of the EU or the emergence of proto-European politics (Hix, Noury and Roland
2007). But the degree of centralized decision making characteristic of true political federation is still far
off in the case of Europe.
32
The argument is that the European Parliament lacks gravitas and in any case is the representative body of
more than two dozen EU members, not just those participating in the monetary union.
33
The analytical and historical arguments are advanced by DeGrauwe (2006) and Bordo (2004),
respectively.
34
Again, the point is that EMU is sui generis.

13

distinctive about Europe’s 21st century monetary union. I now illustrate the point with
reference three issues concerning the operation of Europe’s monetary union: implications
for financial integration, provision of the financial stability function, and exit and
dissolution. In the first two contexts I contrast EMU with the experience of the United
States.35 In the last one I look at the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a case that
has attracted considerable attention.
3.1. Financial Integration. I first show that the connections between financial
integration and monetary union are different in 21st century Europe than in earlier
historical cases. I do so with reference to the experience of the United States in the 19th
century.
The relevance of the American case derives from the fact that, as in Europe today,
the task was to build a monetary union and an integrated financial market that were
continental in scope. Physical distance posed a challenge for monetary and financial
integration (Snowden 1995), as did cultural and institutional differences between north
and south (Wright 1986).36 Different levels of development (lack of cohesion in EU
parlance) implying excess supplies and demands for capital and therefore large capital
flows and current account balances – placed further demands on the financial system.
The Constitution had prohibited the states from issuing paper money and gave
Congress the exclusive right to “coin money.”37 The United States thus entered the postconfederation period with a monetary union based on specie. But the convenience of
paper money was irresistible. Where the Constitution had prohibited state governments
35

Which I have argued previously is a particularly revealing national case. See Eichengreen (1992).
Not to mention limited labor mobility.
37
Why is debated. Rockoff (2003) argues that the motivation was to restrain inflationary tendencies in the
Western states. Rolnick, Smith and Weber (1993) suggest that it was to encourage trade within the new
federation.
36

14

from issuing notes, it did not prevent commercial banks from doing so. This they began
doing, especially once the charter of the Bank of the United States was not renewed.38
Had those notes always been convertible into specie at par, the resulting system would
have been no different from a conventional gold-bullion standard in which the circulation
of gold coin was supplemented by convertible paper. In practice, however, convertibility
of notes was less than assured – the states relaxed restrictions on bank entry, allowing flyby-night operators to obtain charters and emit inadequately backed notes that traded at a
discount.39 In effect, the U.S. had two monetary systems: a unified system of coinage
based on specie, and a fragmented paper system in which the notes issued by banks in
different states traded at variable exchange rates against one another.40
Markets and institutions responded with mechanisms for dealing with the
information and transactions costs associated with incomplete monetary integration.
Banks in New England formed the Suffolk System to clear drafts at par, sharing
information and imposing sanctions and rewards to make par clearing incentive
compatible.41 Other banks built reputation by cultivating correspondent banking
relationships with institutions in regional financial centers, holding deposits with them in
return for par clearing of their notes. Circulars known as “note reporters” listed the
discounts at which different banknotes traded in different financial centers, easing the
conduct of business.
38

As Bodenhorn (2000, p.169) explains, the Second Bank under Nicholas Bibble possessed a large volume
of state bank notes and used them to discipline those banks by threatening to redeem them or actually doing
so if a bank showed signs of emitting excessively and allowing its notes to trade at a significant discount.
With the expiry of the Second Bank, this mechanism no longer operated.
39
See Rockoff (1974) and Rolnick and Weber (1983).
40
Again, this was not the case in the 1820s, when Biddle oversaw the operations of the Second Bank.
Under his direction, the Bank integrated the operation of its branches. Acting as a quasi-central bank, it
then used that branch network to purchase and sell inland bills of exchange at a fixed price, effectively
pegging interregional exchange rates. See Fraas (1974).
41
Bodenhorn (2002) questions the incentive compatibility of the system.

15

The severity of the obstacles that all this posed to the integration of U.S. financial
markets is the subject of ongoing debate.42 The key point for present purposes, and on
which there is no dispute, is that U.S. financial markets remained much less integrated
than European financial markets today – even after residual barriers to full monetary
integration dissolved following the Civil War.43 While there was convergence over time
– according to the conventional wisdom, from the 1870s – interregional interest rate
differentials on bank funds of 100 basis points and more remained unexceptional. These
large and persistent interest rate gaps were an order of magnitude larger than those under
EMU.44
The explanation lies in a set of factors that were quite different than in the euro
area. The risks of banking differed more dramatically across regions than today, and
banks had more limited mechanisms for diversifying them away. Default rates were
higher in the agricultural west, where knowledge of temperature and precipitation
patterns was imperfect and much of the population was transient.45 Regulation prohibited
banks from branching across state borders and lending out of state. Barriers to entry,
both regulatory and economic, were significant, rendering some regions underbanked and
giving incumbent financial institutions significant market power.46 There was no
efficient, centralized clearing and settlement system. There was no modern interbank
42

The traditional argument, due to Davis (1965), is that the domestic financial market was fragmented until
the very late 19th century. Bodenhorn and Rockoff (1992) and Rockoff (2000) are two of the very few
studies to look explicitly at ante-bellum data. They argue that financial integration traced out more of a ushaped pattern over time: reasonably high prior to the Civil War, then low during the Reconstruction period
as a result of wartime destruction of financial institutions and relationships, and gradually rising to antebellum levels and presumably beyond up to the turn of the century.
43
Following the Civil War, new taxes and restrictions on state bank note issues were imposed, and par
clearing of the notes issued by more stringently-regulated national banks became the rule.
44
See Lane and Walti (2006) and Baele et al. (2004). ECB (2007), especially pp.24-5, provides an analysis
of country differences in bank interest rates that is most directly comparable to the historical evidence
discussed here.
45
As emphasized by Smiley (1975) and Eichengreen (1994).
46
As emphasized by Sylla (1969).

16

market. There was no integrated commercial paper market. Rather than a single,
centralized stock market, there were a set of segmented regional markets.
With time, financial innovation, including regulatory innovation, responded to
these imperfections. Capital requirements, which were a significant obstacle to entry in
small markets in particular, were reduced for country banks.47 Information accumulated
about the determinants of agricultural yields, and financial institutions developed
mechanisms (inter alia, sending loan officers into the field) to more effectively monitor
their clients. There was some diversification of regionally-concentrated portfolios, as
mortgage companies in the west sold portfolios of mortgages to insurance companies in
the east.48 Some mortgage companies further spread the risks of lending by issuing
mortgage-backed securities.49 Bill brokers took commercial paper on consignment from
wholesale grocers, manufacturers and others, offering it to potential buyers, including
out-of-town banks and individual investors. They formed correspondent relationships
with brokers in other cities to facilitate the collection and resale of bills. The
development of commercial paper houses, which purchased commercial paper outright
and then offered it in secondary markets, thus bringing together lenders and borrowers
from different regions, played a key role in integrating the market.50 With the telegraph

47

Most notably under the provisions of the Gold Standard Act of 1900.
See Snowden (1995a).
49
Afficionados of the “subprime crisis” will appreciate knowing that many of these securities then lapsed
into default with the rural property downturn of the 1890s. Many of the Western mortgage companies
failed in the course of this crisis, not unlike subprime lenders in 2007. On the history of mortgage-backed
securities in the United States, see Snowden (1995b).
50
See Davis (1965) and Janes (1976). This is another context in which the debate over timing arises.
Whereas Davis emphasized the development of commercial paper houses in the 1880s, Bodenhorn (2000)
emphasizes that those houses did not simply materialize at that point; rather, the developed out of the
network of exchange brokers that was already active before the Civil War (see above). His amendment to
the conventional wisdom only reinforces the present point, namely that financial integration was long in
developing.
48

17

and the decline in information and communication costs, there was arbitrage among
regional stock markets and competition between banks and security markets.51
These are the explanations for how it was that regional interest rate differentials
showed a tendency toward convergence in the decades leading up to World War I.
Historians disagree about when a substantially integrated national money market
developed – in the 1870s and 1880s, in the first decade of the 20th century, in some
accounts only following the foundation of the Fed. Still, the striking fact is that these
differentials remained substantial for many years following the completion of the
country’s monetary union. Unlike Europe today, monetary unification did not catalyze
an immediate and dramatic increase in financial integration.
On reflection, the explanations for this difference are obvious enough. Suspicion
of financial markets and institutions with national scope was an abiding characteristic of
the United States in the 19th century. This explains Jacksonian opposition to the First and
Second Banks of the United States, restrictions on inter-state branching, and the absence
of a central bank until the 20th century. Regulation did as much to segment financial
markets as to integrate them, and its effects were not easy for market forces, even
invigorated by monetary integration, to overcome. There was no attempt to build a
centralized clearing and settlement system. There was no lender of last resort to provide
liquidity to securities markets and banks. There was no public-policy argument that an
integrated financial market was needed to support the monetary union.
In contrast, European policy makers today see financial integration as an
achievement in and of itself and a foundation stone of monetary union. Financial
integration is not something to be avoided on the grounds that it allows those in the
51

This is the factor emphasized by Sushka and Barrett (1984).

18

financial centers to exploit their brethren in low-income regions (the complaint of
Populists in 19th century America). Rather, it is something to be sought as a way of
fostering growth and convergence. Financial integration is also seen as buttressing
support for monetary integration, insofar as financial integration is conducive to
efficiency and growth and as a backlash against EMU is more likely in a low-growth,
high-unemployment environment.
Efforts to encourage financial integration go back to the Single European Act, if
not before; in other words, they preceded monetary union by 15 and more years. Among
the corollaries was the removal of restrictions on cross-border branching by existing
financial institutions and on cross-border mergers and acquisitions. European policy
makers similarly saw the creation of TARGET, Europe’s wholesale payments system, as
an integral corollary of monetary union.52 Another integral element of the monetary
union was a central bank with a mandate to contribute to the stability of the payments
system by providing emergency liquidity assistance.53 As recent events remind us, the
fact that the euro area has an active, liquid interbank market through whose operation the
cost of bank funds is equalized across countries and regions is due in no small part to the
fact that this market is backstopped by the central bank. Pro-active policies in this area
continue. The European Commission has issued a Green Paper detailing measures to
promote the integration of national mortgage markets. The Giovannini Group has
recommended simplifying cross-border securities clearing and settlement so as to
facilitate the emergence of an integrated securities market.

52
53

The launch of TARGET2, an enhanced successor to TARGET, is timed to coincide with our conference.
For more on this, see the second subsection below.

19

There has been considerable discussion in Europe about how quickly monetary
union will deepen financial integration. The issue is important, but it is not one on which
historical experiences like that of the United States in the 19th century can shed much
light, because the economic, political and regulatory circumstances are all quite different.
3.2. The Financial Stability Function. Next I examine the experience of the
United States in the Great Depression in order to highlight what is different about the
financial stability function in the European System of Central Banks.
The role of the banking crisis in the spread of the Depression and the failure of the
policy response were famously highlighted by Friedman and Schwartz (1963). That
failure had multiple sources, but one was that the framers of the Federal Reserve Act
were ambiguous about the locus of responsibility.54 Under the 1913 Act, reserves were
held by the regional reserve banks, which could then provide credit to commercial banks
operating in their region, up to the limit consistent with their holdings of reserves, via the
discount window. Notes injected via the discount window (or for that matter via open
market operations) had to be backed with 40 per cent gold. The remainder of the
collateral could take the form of eligible paper, defined as commercial, agricultural and
industrial paper and bankers’ acceptances (“real bills”).
But the 1913 Act was ambiguous about the roles of the reserve banks and the
Federal Reserve Board in determining the rates charged for discounts and advances.55
The relevant passage read that “Every Federal Reserve Bank shall have the power…to
establish from time to time, subject to review and determination of the Federal Reserve

54

This changed with the passage of the 1935 Banking Act, which definitively consolidated authority with
the Board, but that episode is beyond the parameters of the present analysis.
55
Even more ambiguously, nothing was said about responsibility for the conduct of open market operations,
since their importance was not anticipated by the framers.

20

Board, rates of discount to be charged by the Federal Reserve bank for each class of
business.” In January 1915 Reserve Bank governors formed the Governors Conference
to defend their prerogatives against encroachment by the Board. The outcome of their
deliberations, predictably, confirmed the right of each regional bank to decide its own
operations (Meltzer, 2003, p.142).56
In 1923, Adolph Miller, the economist on the Board, tabled a proposal to
empower the Board to control the intervention policies of the Reserve Banks. Again the
Reserve Banks resisted the recommendation. In response to Miller’s proposal, an Open
Market Investment Committee of five governors (led by Benjamin Strong of the New
York Fed) was created to direct the intervention policies of the System, but individual
Reserve Banks retained the right to opt out, as insisted on most vocally by James
McDougal of the Chicago Fed.
In March 1930, the Open Market Investment Committee was replaced by the
Open Market Policy Conference. All 12 Reserve Bank governors were represented, this
reform being designed to reduce what other banks complained was the excessive
influence of the New York Fed. But again it was unclear whether the banks were obliged
to accept the recommendations of the Conference and execute its instructions. The 1930
resolution creating the Open Market Policy Conference stated that recommendations of
the Conference, when approved by the Board, should be submitted to each Reserve Bank
“for determination as to whether it will participate in any purchases or sales
recommended; any Federal Reserve bank dissenting from the proposed policy shall be
expected to acquaint the Federal Reserve Board…for the reasons for its dissent.”
“Acquaint” was ambiguous in this context, but evidently individual banks were still
56

It was also agreed to execute those operations in the central money market, New York.

21

entitled to decline to engage in interventions recommended by the Open Market Policy
Conference and the Board.
When it came to supervision and regulation, the Board had the power to conduct
special examinations of member banks, but for information on where special
examinations were required it relied on the Reserve Banks, which were in more regular
communication (and were also allowed to examine) member banks in their districts. At
the outset, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency also conducted twice-yearly
examinations of all national and state member banks, but the Comptroller was jealous of
his prerogatives and instructed examiners not to provide the Federal Reserve with all the
information they collected. Resentment of these actions led the Congress to strip the
Comptroller of responsibility for examining state member banks in 1923, but this left the
banks subject only to the oversight of state inspectors, the quality of whose supervision
was variable (White, 1983, p.166 and passim).
This combination of decentralization and ambiguous responsibility undermined
policy coherence. The Reserve Banks in their role as gatherers of intelligence on the
local financial system did not provide accurate information in timely fashion to the Board
in Washington, D.C. (The same could be said of the Office of the Comptroller until the
mid-1920s.) This was less a conscious attempt on the part of the Reserve Banks to
increase their power by withholding information than a reflection of the view that if
intervention was required it should be organized by the a Reserve Bank and not the Board.
State banking agencies responsible after 1917 for inspecting state member banks were
even less efficient at passing information to the Board, given that this had to first be

22

communicated to a Reserve Bank and from there to Washington, D.C. The result was
that the Board knew too little about the condition of the banking system.
Most importantly, disagreements among Reserve Banks over lender of last resort
intervention compounded the difficulty of the System in providing financial assistance to
problem banks and liquidity to distressed markets.57 The New York Fed, attuned to
liquidity problems in the New York market, decided on its own to inject $100 million in
the wake of the 1929 crash in order to assist banks that had taken stocks as collateral
against loans.58 Although the majority of the Board approved of the intervention, it
objected to New York having acted without prior authorization. The New York Fed was
threatened with various consequences if, in the future, it did not secure authorization for
similar action. Although if this did not necessarily prevent Reserve Banks from
intervening – they were still permitted to do so with prior authorization and unilaterally in
the event that the Board was not available – it created uncertainty about how the system
would respond.59
A more extreme example was the third banking panic in early 1933. By late
February, this had risen to the level of a run on the U.S. banking system. Intervention
was essential to prevent the payments system from seizing up. But the New York Fed,

57

In reviewing these ideological disagreements about the desirable extent of liquidity provision, one is
reminded about differences between the ECB and the Bank of England in August 2007 – when the Bank of
England took a harder line, at least initially, about the danger of moral hazard and was therefore more
reluctant to intervene. The difference then was that no one was constrained in intervening by the
availability of gold reserves. The ECB could therefore proceed unilaterally, and problem banks in the UK
could turn to it, as those with euro-area branches in fact did.
58
And which therefore experienced withdrawals from correspondent banks in the interior of the country
that had placed deposits with them.
59
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Meltzer (2003) disagree on the nature of the conflict and its
consequences. Friedman and Schwartz argue that the New York Fed curtailed its operations due to
criticism from the Board that these would aggravate moral hazard – together with the threat of
consequences if New York officials failed to comply. Meltzer argues that there was no real difference
between the New York Fed and the Board over appropriate policies but that the Board was concerned to
establish its prerogatives.

23

which had disproportionately borne the burden of earlier interventions, saw its goldreserve ratio fall to the statutory minimum of 40 per cent on March 4th. Providing
emergency liquidity now required intervention by other regional reserve banks;
equivalently, intervening in the central money market required other Reserve Banks to
transfer gold to the New York Fed.60 But the Chicago Fed, which by this time was the
principal repository of the system’s gold reserves, was reluctant. Together with the
Boston Fed, it emphasized the dangers of moral hazard; the two banks had repeatedly
warned that providing emergency liquidity might only encourage another round of stock
market speculation leading to an even more devastating crash. On March 1st the Chicago
Fed had lent $105 million to its counterpart in New York. But on March 3rd it withdrew
its cooperation. On March 4th the Board declined to compel the Chicago bank to support
New York, and the New York Fed curtailed its intervention in the markets. The situation
deteriorated further, leading the Board to reverse its decision three days later. But by this
time the damage had been done.
The situation in Europe today differs extensively. The ECB is not constrained in
providing emergency liquidity by any remaining vestiges of the gold standard. The
closest analogy is with the central bank’s commitment to stabilize the general price
level.61 From the start there have been worries that fixation on this mandate might lead
the ECB to neglect its other responsibilities.62 But in fact that mandate is multi-faceted:
the central bank is also responsible for contributing to the stability of the payments and
financial system. It does not have to keep core inflation below 2 per cent week by week,

60

Alternatively, it would have been possible to suspend the statutory gold backing provision or take a
variety of other exceptional measures, but this was not something that officials were yet prepard to broach.
61
As opposed to a specific component of that price level, namely gold.
62
In fact, even before the start: such warnings go back to Folkerts-Landau and Garber (1992).

24

day by day, or hour by hour. If emergency liquidity creates inflationary pressure, it can
be drained from the financial system subsequently. The knowledge that interventions
with inflationary consequences will be reversed out should minimize those inflationary
consequences in the first place, assuming the credibility of the ECB’s commitment to
price stability. Thus, the ECB can be thought of as possessing the stabilizing escape
clause that the Fed and other interwar central banks lacked.
The Eurosystem has simulated a variety of crisis scenarios. An April 2006
simulation exercise, for example, involved representatives from all EU banking
supervisory authorities, central banks and finance ministries. The results “indicated that
the relevant Member State authorities were able and willing to cooperate in managing
cross-border systemic financial crises” (ECB, 2006, p.173).
Of course, one can question whether an exercise where the stakes are hypothetical
and the participants know that they will be judged on their cooperation is a useful
predictor of how they will act in true crisis situations. But we now possess evidence on
this, courtesy of the subprime crisis. The precipitating event of the crisis was the
revelation at the beginning of August of large losses at IKB Deutsche Industriebank, a
prominent small-company lender. The German financial regulator Bafin, the German
finance ministry, and the Bundesbank swiftly cobbled together a $5 billion rescue
package.63 While this intervention did not eliminate questions about the adequacy of risk
standards at other German banks, it prevented runs.
63

With the participation of private banks as well as public Landesbankenand and Sparkassen. One reason
for involving private banks was to minimize the likelihood that the rescue would be found to conflict with
the EU’s anti-subsidy laws. In the event, the Commission quickly announced that it would examine the
rescue’s compliance with those regulations. Note that the decision to aid a bank that lacks the collateral
needed to tap the ECB’s standard facility (the ECB’s equivalent of the Fed’s discount window) resides with
the national central bank of the relevant jurisdiction. That national central bank is required to inform the
other members of the Eurosystem of its actions so that, inter alia, the ECB can adjust the provision of

25

Then on August 10th, in response evidence of stringency in the interbank market,
the ECB injected E95 billion of liquidity in the first of a series of special tenders.64 These
took the form of reverse repurchase agreements under which the ECB lent funds to
commercial banks against eligible collateral.65 Initially the ECB provided funds at its
policy interest rate of 4 per cent without limit. A series of further such operations
followed. On September 27th, for example, the ECB granted a $5.5 billion loan to an
unnamed borrower, again through its standing facility, against collateral, using an
overnight reverse-repo transaction. In December the ECB agreed to coordinate further
liquidity auctions with the Fed and the Bank of England.
Europe’s response to the crisis remains controversial. But while there were
sporadic reports of depositors queueing up at banks (in Spain for example, and outside
the euro area at offices of Northern Rock), there were no widespread bank runs. There
was no cascade of defaults. The ECB’s response was not obviously delayed by the
failure of regulatory authorities to convey information about the delicate condition of
financial institutions and markets.66 There was no 1933-style scenario.

liquidity to limit the potential impact on monetary policy. One can imagine a national central bank
ideologically opposed to the provision of emergency assistance might refuse to aid a bank in its jurisdiction
even when the ECB and other national central banks were concerned about the implications for systemic
stability. One can imagine that, even in the absence of ideological considerations, emergency liquidity
assistance might be underprovided if the adverse effects of that bank’s failures were felt in other
jurisdictions. But one can also argue that there is nothing unique to EMU about these problems: crossborder banking is widespread in the 21st century; such structures and therefore the associated externalities
are not limited to Europe. That said, the fact that the EU has gone further in promoting the development of
an integrated financial market suggests that, qualitative similarities notwithstanding, the problem is
probably more pervasive in Europe.
64
This was its first emergency injection of liquidity since September 12 and 13, 2001, when the ECB had
injected E100 billion of liquidity in the aftermath of the attack on the World Trade Center in New York.
65
Which was then repurchased the next day, at the agreed price, by the counterparty.
66
This is not to deny that inadequate information was a problem for crisis management. But the problem
was that all of the relevant regulators were incompletely informed about, inter alia, the position of conduits
and Specialized Investment Vehicles (SIVs) to which commercial banks had off-balance-sheet exposures.
A unified regulator at the level of the monetary union would have been little different in this regard.

26

In anything, the problem lay not in the ECB’s capacity to respond to the crisis but
with the ability of European authorities to anticipate it.67 Padoa-Schioppa (2007)
criticizes supervisors for failing to failing to see the crisis developing, for failing to share
critical information before it erupted, and for failing to hold emergency meetings.
Supervisors, he argues, adopted narrowly national perspectives and resisted pooling the
information needed to anticipate problems in transnational banks and contagion through
interbank markets. Although the EU possesses common principles for bank supervision,
those principals are implemented in different ways by different national supervisors
overseeing local branches of the same banking group. There is also a race to the bottom
insofar as supervisors have an incentive to apply common standards forgivingly in order
to make their market attractive to footloose financial institutions.
But Padoa-Schioppa also suggests that Europe possesses arrangements and
understandings capable, if suitably strengthened, of solving these problems. Discussion
of these issues dates back to 2000, when the Economic and Financial Committee (or EFC,
established by treaty to advise the ECOFN Council and the Commission) established an
ad hoc “Financial Stability Table” comprised of finance ministry and central bank
representatives. In April 2000 the EFC recommended measures to strengthen crosssector cooperation, enhance the exchange of information among responsible authorities,
reinforce cooperation between supervisors and central banks, and foster the convergence
of regulatory practice. Its conclusions were quickly endorsed by ECOFIN. A second
report in April 2001 offered three specific recommendations. Supervisors should adopt
measures ensuring their access to accurate information (from large financial groups, in

67

The ECB’s June 2007 Financial Stability Review had in fact anticipated at least some of the problems
that followed.

27

particular) and establish contingency plans. Member states should remove legal and
practical obstacles to the exchange of information among supervisors and central banks.
And there should be ex ante agreement on who would do what in a crisis situation.68
These recommendations informed the EU-wide Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) on cooperation in crisis situations adopted under the auspices of the ESCB’s
Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) in March 2003. This MOU set out procedures
for identifying which authorities were responsible for taking the lead in a crisis situation,
enumerated the required flows of information between supervisors and central banks, and
specified modalities for information sharing.69 A second MOU in 2004-5 provided a
more detailed description of procedures for sharing information and assessments.70
None of this is to deny that more needs to be done to strengthen the supervisory
function so that nascent threats to financial stability in the monetary union are more
effectively anticipated. Padoa-Schioppa argues against creating a single European
supervisor, in parallel to the ECB, suggesting instead that existing arrangements should
simply be strengthened. Specifically, there should be more uniformity in the application
of EU regulations and more systematic information sharing. Again, the situation ten
years after the creation of the euro is very different from the situation in the United States

68

In addition, there was a fourth recommendation: competition authorities were called on to “maintain
timely and robust procedures” for considering the competitive implications of crisis-management efforts.
The issue here was whether public credit or a public takeover of a distressed institution might violate antisubsidy provisions of the single market. I cite an example of this below.
69
Including a list of emergency contacts.
70
One could go on. In addition there exist a series of bilateral and regional agreements for managing
financial crises arising out of problems in banks with cross-border establishments. Beyond that, there are
EU Committees (the EFC, BSC, Committee of European Banking Supervisors, and Financial Services
Committee), all of which include banking supervisors, central bank officials, and/or representatives of
finance ministries that provide venues for ad hoc information sharing. A number of these bring together
European officials from both inside and outside the monetary union, which is helpful insofar as crossborder establishment and other links do not respect the borders of EMU. Finally, the Eurosystem itself has
formed committees of ECB and national central bank officials in order to establish operational procedures
for dealing with financial disturbances.

28

ten years after the creation of the Fed, when there was open hostility among competing
supervisors.
3.3. Exit and Dissolution. Finally I discuss the disintegration of the AustroHungarian monetary union and how it should make us think about the possible
dissolution of EMU.
Elsewhere I have analyzed the barriers to exit facing an incumbent member of the
euro area struggling with problems of competitiveness and high unemployment.71 My
argument emphasizes procedural obstacles to exit. There may be economic costs, but it is
not clear ex ante that these will dominate the benefits. The main such cost is likely to be
the increase in debt service if investors anticipate that exit will be followed by chronic
deficits. However, countries can minimize and may even be able to eliminate that
increase if they take their exit from the euro area as an occasion to strengthen fiscal
institutions and procedures. Similarly, there may be political costs – a member state
unilaterally abrogating its EMU obligations will not be welcomed at the table where EU
policies are made. But it is not clear that such international political considerations
dominate domestic political pressures, especially in periods of high unemployment.
In the end, the binding constraints are likely to be procedural. In a democracy, the
decision to exit will require discussion. Executing it will require planning. Computers
will have to be reprogrammed. Vending machines will have to be modified. Payment
machines will have to be serviced to prevent motorists from being trapped in
subterranean parking garages. To prevent counterfeiting, high-quality notes and coins

71

See Eichengreen (2007). The case of a country that abandoned the monetary union over dissatisfaction
with excessive inflation is more complicated to think about. This is discussed in the revision to the
aforementioned paper (available from the author on request).

29

will have to be printed, imported, and positioned around the country. One need only
recall the elaborate planning that preceded the introduction of the physical euro.
During the transition to the euro there was little reason to expect changes in
exchange rates and thus little incentive for currency speculation during the period when
discussion and planning were underway. In 1998 the founding members of the euro area
agreed to lock their exchange rates at the then-prevailing levels as of the beginning of
1999. This effectively ruled out efforts to manipulate currencies in order to steal a
competitive advantage prior to the locking of parities in 1999. In contrast, during a
period when the reintroduction of the national currency is discussed, changes in exchange
rates would be viewed as all but certain, since the very motivation for leaving would be
to change the parity.
Market participants would be aware of this fact. Households and firms
anticipating that domestic deposits would be involuntarily converted into, say, lira, which
would then depreciate against the euro, would shift their deposits to other euro-area banks.
In the worst case a system-wide banking panic would ensue. Investors anticipating that
their claims on the Italian government would be redenominated into lira would shift into
claims on other euro-area governments, causing a bond-market collapse. Insofar as the
precipitating event was a government decision to abandon the lira, the ECB would not be
inclined to provide lender-of-last-resort support. And if the government was already in a
tenuous fiscal position, it would not be able to borrow to bail out the banks and buy back
its debt. This would be the mother of all financial crises.
History, specifically in the form of the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire, is invoked by those who argue that the problem is not so difficult (see e.g.

30

Dornbusch 1992 and Garber and Spencer 1994). Austria, Hungary and the other ethnic
regions of the empire all successfully introduced national currencies following World
War I. Previously they had operated a formal monetary union, with control of the
circulation vested in the Austro-Hungarian bank in Vienna. The component parts of the
empire constituted a free trade zone, and both real and financial integration were
extensive. At the same time, like EMU today, constituent states (Austria and Hungary)
decided on separate budgets while contributing to some of the expenditures of the
union.72
Ethnic demands for autonomy boiled up during World War I. Vienna, occupied
elsewhere, lost the capacity to assert its control over non-Austrian parts of the empire.
Other regions held back food supplies, disrupting the operation of the internal market.
Czechs and other ethnic groups withdrew from the military alliance, siding with the
Allies. With the armistice, the Czechs, Poles and Hungarians declared their political
independence and sought to establish and defend their national borders. They also
abandoned prior restraints on their fiscal policies, partly owing to postwar exigencies,
partly in reflection of the value they now attached to political sovereignty.
Importantly, however, the Austrian crown remained the basis for the monetary
circulation throughout the former empire.73 This was awkward for separate sovereign
nations that did not share the seignorage, experienced asymmetric shocks, and suffered
from chronic fiscal and financial imbalances. Starting with Czechoslovakia and the

72

Flandreau (2005) describes how budgetary autonomy was granted Hungary in 1867 in order to damp
successionist pressures.
73
In Poland, rubles and German markets circulated alongside Austrian crowns, while in the Kingdom of
Serbs, Croats and Slovenes Serbian dinars, Montenegran perpers and Bulgarian leva circulated along side
the crown. But these cases were exceptional.

31

Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Yugoslavia), one successor state after another
left the monetary union and introduced a national currency.
Typically, this involved first announcing that only stamped Austrian banknotes
would be acceptable in transactions. Stamping (either overprinting with an ink stamp or
adding a physical stamp) had to be conducted carefully, with a high level of uniformity,
to discourage forgery.74 At the same time the currency was stamped, a portion was
withheld as a capital levy (as a way of transferring desperately needed resources to the
government). In Hungary, for example, 50 per cent of tendered notes were withheld as a
forced loan. In Czechoslovakia, the 50 per cent tax was applied to current accounts and
treasury bills when these were redenominated in stamped crowns.
In turn this created an incentive to withhold currency from circulation if there
were prospects of using it in other countries where stamping had not yet taken place.
Thus, there was an incentive for capital flight not unlike that which might afflict an
inflation-prone country today that chose to opt out of Europe’s monetary union.
Stamping was therefore accompanied by physically closing the country’s borders and
comprehensive exchange controls. Individuals were prohibited from traveling abroad,
and merchandise trade was halted. The capital levy, equivalent to depreciation of the
new currency against the old one, could also precipitate a run on the banks, as it did in
Czechoslovakia. In Austria, which could observe Czechoslovakia’s earlier experience,
bank securities and deposits were frozen at the outset of the transition.
One interpretation is that this history demonstrates the feasibility of exiting from a
monetary union and (re)introducing a national currency. But in these historical cases,
74

Forgery was still a significant problem. In the case of a European country that sought to reintroduce its
national currency, it would similarly be necessary to contract for the production of high-quality bank notes
relatively immune from forging, which would add to the time involved in the transition.

32

avoiding serious financial dislocations required closing the borders, banning foreign
travel, halting merchandise trade, and imposing draconian exchange controls while the
conversion was underway. The feasibility of similar measures today is dubious.
Exchange controls would be difficult to enforce in a European country with a highly
developed financial system that is the host and home of international banks. Given the
development of the single market, suspending foreign trade would be prohibitively
expensive. Residents would not stand for a ban on foreign travel. And then there are the
country’s other obligations to the single market. Exit would be relatively attractive if the
country exiting the monetary union did not lose the other privileges of EU membership.
But that it would have to interrupt the free movement of goods and services suggests that
its partners in the single market would not be inclined to look the other way.
All this suggests that circumstances today are quite different than those following
World War I. In today’s more financially developed economies, freezing bank accounts
and halting credit transactions would have higher costs. In long established democracies,
where citizens are accustomed to traveling freely, the acceptability of closing borders is
questionable. The costs of disrupting merchandise transactions would be greater than a
century ago. Again, this history is useful not as a parallel or precedent but precisely for
illustrating what is different about current circumstances.
A more recent historical precedent, with similar implications, is the corralito
imposed in Argentina when one-to-one peso-dollar parity was abandoned in 2001.75 The
end of “convertibility” was not the same as reintroducing a national currency, since the
peso had never been withdrawn from circulation. But discussions of the possibility that
the currency might be devalued after a ten year period in which the one-to-one parity had
75

“Corralito” being Spanish for little corral.

33

been treated as sacrosanct, together with the fact that bank deposits and other financial
claims were denominated in dollars, created analogous problems for the Argentine
authorities.
The Argentine crisis and the policy response have been extensively documented.76
The authorities first suspended trading in their bonds. On December 1st, 2001, in order to
stop the hemorrhage of deposits out of the banking system precipitated by the impending
devaluation, they froze all bank accounts, initially for 90 days.77 No withdrawals from
accounts denominated in dollars were allowed without agreement to convert the proceeds
into pesos. Cross-border transfers were limited to trade-related transactions.78
In fact, news of the freeze only accelerated the withdrawal of deposits by
corporations and individuals able to circumvent its provisions. Depositors filed lawsuits
in the effort to access their funds, and in several cases the courts decided in their favor.
Protests and demonstrations, some violent, then led to the resignation of President
Fernando de la Rua on 21 December. A five-day bank holiday ensued. De la Rau’s
second interim successor, Eduardo Duhalde, announced further bank holidays and
hardened the corralito, requiring the compulsory exchange of many deposits for bonds
denominated in pesos. On January 11th 2002 the government lifted its three-week ban on
foreign exchange transactions, but the corralito remained in place.
On February 1st, the Argentine Supreme Court ruled against the restrictions on
deposit withdrawals in response to claims filed by individuals.79 In response, the
government declared another bank holiday. At the end of the holiday the authorities
76

See for example Mussa (2003). On the corralito itself, see Lopez (2002).
They permitted only very small withdrawals, initially 250 pesos a week.
78
And international credit card clearing.
79
Previously the court had ruled in favor of the restrictions, but justices had been subjected to continuous
public demonstrations and threats of impeachment proceedings by the Congress.
77

34

announced a new plan, which entailed the conversion of all debts into pesos at a 1:1
parity; conversion of dollar deposits into pesos at a 1.4 parity; the transfer of government
bonds to banks that had suffered balance sheet damage as a result of differential
conversion rates on bank deposits and assets; and a 180-day embargo on legal actions
against the deposit restrictions. Further adjustments to these measures followed in
February, March and subsequently. The last vestiges of the corralito were only
eliminated in December 2002, fully a year after its imposition.
This was an exceptionally messy and costly episode. It disrupted the operation of
the payments and financial system for the better part of 12 months. To be sure, the
corralito was only one factor in Argentina’s economic collapse. And it is possible to
suggest that restrictions on deposit withdrawals, the conversion of foreign currency debt
into local units, and limits on capital-account transactions could have been applied in a
less chaotic manner. But the fact is that as soon as agents get wind of the government’s
intentions, they will act, requiring the authorities to respond before they are ready. There
will be pressure to treat debtors and creditors differently when converting assets and
liabilities into local currency. In turn this will require compensating the banks, a decision
that will require further deliberation, during which the payments system will remain
frozen.
There is no avoiding the conclusion that the process would be costly and
disruptive. And, in turn, this makes it unlikely that a disaffected euro-area member
would abandon the monetary union.

4. Conclusion

35

Everyone has a favorite quote about the uses and misuses of history. Mine is
“History is the science of what never happens twice.”80 The point is that those drawing
parallels should proceed cautiously.
The point applies to the search for lessons for EMU from the classical gold
standard, multinational monetary unions in the 19th and 20th centuries, and experience
with monetary unification at the national level. EMU is different. It is not like the gold
standard, which left room for fluctuations in the exchange rates between participating
countries and from which members could and did exit at will. It is not like multilateral
monetary unions in the 19th century under which there was no centralized control of
money supplies by a transnational central bank. It is not like the monetary union
inherited by the successor states of the Austro-Hungarian empire, from which exit was
straightforward because of relatively low levels of financial development and the ease of
freezing transactions and sealing borders during the period when national currencies were
being (re)introduced. It is not like national experiences with monetary unification,
precisely because these were virtually all cases where political unification preceded
monetary unification.
Does this mean that our organizers erred in commissioning historical papers for
the present project? My defense of our organizers is that history is useful precisely for
what is pointing up what is distinctive about EMU. EMU is monetary unification,
extending to centralized control of the money supply by a central bank at the level of the
union, without political unification.81 It takes place in an environment of deep financial
integration among a group of countries with well-developed capital markets. There is no
80

Due to Paul Valery. My second favorite is attributed to Mark Twain. “Get your facts first, and then you
can distort them as much as you please.” Quoted in Kipling (1900), Letter 37.
81
Subject to the qualifications in footnote 31 above.

36

provision for exiting and reintroducing a national currency. And there is no historical
precedent for any of this.

37

References
Baele, Lieven, Annalisa Ferrando, Peter Hordahl, Elizaveta Krylova and Cyril Monnet
(2004), “Measuring Financial Integration in the Euro Area,” Occasional Paper no. 14,
Frankfurt: European Central Bank (April).
Bailey, Warren and Kee-Hong Bae (2003), “The Latin Monetary Union: Some Evidence
on Europe’s Failed Common Currency,” unpublished manuscript, Cornell University
(July).
Baldwin Richard (2006), “The Euro’s Trade Effects,” ECB Working Paper no.594,
Frankfurt: European Central Bank (March).
Bergman, Michael (1999), “Do Monetary Unions Make Economic Sense? Evidence from
the Scandinavian Currency Union, 1873-1913,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 101,
63-377.
Bergman, Michael, Stefan Gerlach and Lars Jonung (1993), “The Rise and Fall of the
Scandinavian Currency Union, 1873-1920,” European Economic Review 37, 507-517.
Bloomfield, Arthur (1959), Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard, New
York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Bodenhorn, Howard (2000), A History of Banking in Ante-Bellum America, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bodenhorn, Howard (2002), “Making the Little Guy Pay: Payments-System Networks,
Cross-Subsidization, and the Collapse of the Suffolk System,” Journal of Economic
History 62, 147-168.
Bodenhorn, Howard and Hugh Rockoff (1992), “Regional Interest Rates in Antebellum
America,” in Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff (eds.), Strategic Factors in Nineteenth
Century American Economic History, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 159-188.
Bordo, Michael (2004), “The United States as a Monetary Union and the Euro: A
Historical Perspective,” Cato Journal 24, 163-170.
Bordo, Michael and Finn Kydland (1995), “The Gold Standard as a Contingent Rule: An
Essay in Exploration,” Explorations in Economic History 32, 423-464.
Bordo, Michael, Christopher Meissner and Angela Redish (2005), “How Original Sin
Was Overcome: The Evolution of External Debt Denominated in Domestic Currencies in
the United States and the British Dominions, 1800-2000,” in Barry Eichengreen and
Ricardo Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial

38

Instability in Emerging Market Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 122153.
Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff (1996), “The Gold Standard as a Good Housekeeping
Seal of Approval,” Journal of Economic History 56, 389-428.
Davis, Lance (1965), “The Investment Market, 1870-1914: Evolution of a National
Market,” Journal of Economic History 25, 355-399.
De Grauwe, Paul (2006), “On Monetary and Political Union,” unpublished manuscript,
Catholic University of Leuven (November).
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1992), “Monetary Problems of Post-Communism: Lessons from the
End of the Austro-Hungarian Empire,” Weltwirtschaftsliches Archiv 92, 391-424.
Dwane, Christine, Philip Lane and Tara McIndoe (2006), “Currency Unions and Irish
External Trade,” IIIS Discussion Paper no. 189, Dublin: Institute for International
integration Studies (November).
Eichengreen, Barry (1992), “Designing a Central Bank for Europe: A Cautionary Tale
from the Early Years of the Federal Reserve System,” in Matthew Canzoneri, Vittorio
Grilli and Paul Masson (eds.), Establishing a Central Bank: Issues in Europe and
Lessons from the U.S., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 13-40.
Eichengreen, Barry (1984), “Mortgage Interest Rates in the Populist Era,” American
Economic Review 74, 995-1015.
Eichengreen, Barry (1996), Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary
System, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry (2007), “The Break-Up of the Euro Area,” NBER Working Paper
no.13393 (September).
Einaudi, Luca (2001), Money and Politics: European Monetary Unification and the
International Gold Standard, 1865-1873, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
European Central Bank (2006), “The EU Arrangements for Financial Crisis
Management,” Financial Stability Review (December), 165-174.
European Central Bank (2007), Financial Integration in Europe, Frankfurt: European
Central Bank (March).
Fatas, Antonio and Andrew Rose (2001), “Do Monetary Handcuffs Restrain Leviathan?
Fiscal Policy in Extreme Exchange Rate Regimes,” CEPR Discussion Paper no.2692
(February).

39

Ferguson, Niall and Schurlarick (2006), “The Empire Effect: The Determinants of
Country Risk in the First Age of Globalization, 1880-1913,” Journal of Economic
History 66, 288-312.
Flandreau, Marc (1997), “The Gradient of a River: Bimetallism as an Implicit Fluctuation
Band,” unpublished manuscript, Sciences-Po (November).
Flandreau, Marc (2000), “The Economics and Politics of Monetary Unions: A
Reassessment of the Latin Monetary Union, 1865-71,” Financial History Review 7, 25-43.
Flandreau, Marc (2005), “The Logic of Compromise: Monetary Bargaining in AustriaHungary, 1867-1913,” unpublished manuscript, Sciences-Po (November).
Flandreau, Marc, Jacques le Cacheaux, and Frederic Zumer (1998), “Stability without a
Pact? Lessons from the European Gold Standard 1880-1914,” Economic Policy 26, 115152.
Flandreau, Marc and Nathan Sussman (2005), “Old Sins: Exchange Clauses and
European Foreign Lending in the Nineteenth Century,” in Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo
Hausmann (eds.), Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Instability
in Emerging Market Economies, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 154-189.
Folkerts-Landau, David and Peter Garber (1992), “The ECB: A Central Bank or
Monetary Policy Rule?” in Matthew Canzoneri, Vittorio Grillio and Paul Masson (eds.),
Establishing a Central Bank: Issues in Europe and Lessons from the US, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 86-110.
Fraas, Arthur (1974), “The Second Bank of the United States: An Instrument for an
Interregional Monetary Union,” Journal of Economic History 34, 447-467.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz (1963), Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gallarotti, Guilio (1995), The Anatomy of an International Monetary Regime: The
Classical Gold Standard 1880-1913, New York: Oxford University Press.
Garber, Peter and Michael Spencer (1994), “The Dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire: Lessons for Currency Reform,” Essays in International Finance no. 191,
International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University
(February).
Giovannini, Alberto (1989), “How Do Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes Work? Evidence
from the Gold Standard, Bretton Woods and the European Monetary System,” in Marcus
Miller, Barry Eichengreen and Richard Portes (eds.), Blueprints for Exchange Rate
Management, New York: Academic Press, 13-42.

40

Graboyes, Robert (1990), “The EMU: Forerunners and Durability,” Economic Review of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond (July/August), 8-17.
Helleiner, Eric (2003), The Making of National Money: Territorial Currencies in
Historical Perspective, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Hendriksen, Ingrid and Niels Kaergard (1995), “The Scandinavian Currency Union 18751914,” in Jaime Reis (ed.), International Monetary Standards in Historical Perspective,
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 91-112.
Hix, Simon, Abdul Noury and Gerard Roland (2007), Democratic Politics in the
European Parliament, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holdfrerich, Carl-Ludwig (1989), “The Monetary Unification Process in 19th Century
Germany: Relevance and Lessons for Europe Today,” in Marcello de Cecco and Alberto
Giovannini (eds.), A European Central Bank? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
216-241.
James, John (1976), “The Development of the National Money Market,” Journal of
Economic History 36, 878-897.
Kipling, Rudyard (1900), From Sea to Sea, London: Macmillan.
Lane, Philip and Sebastien Walti 92006), “The Euro and Financial Integration,” IIIS
Discussion Paper no. 139, Dublin: Institute for International Integration Studies (May).
Lopez, Carina (2002), “The Argentina Crisis: A Chronology of Events after the
Sovereign Default,” Standard and Poors (12 April), www.standardandpoors.com.
Lopez-Cordova, J. Ernesto and Christopher Meissner (2000), “Exchange-Rate Regimes
and International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era,” CIDER-IBER
Working Paper no. 188, Department of Economics, UC Berkeley.
Masson, Paul and Catherine Patillo (2004), The Monetary Geography of Africa,
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Meade, James (1956), “The Belgium-Luxembourg Monetary Union, 1921-1939: Lessons
from an Early Experiment,” Princeton Essays in International Finance no.25,
International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Meissner, Christopher (2005), “A New World Order: Explaining the Emergence of the
Classical Gold Standard,” Journal of International Economics 66, 305-406.
Meltzer, Allan H. (2003), A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913-1951,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

41

Mitchener, Kris James (2005), “Bank Supervision, Regulation and Financial Instability
During the Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History 65, 152-185.
Mussa, Michael (2003), Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy, Washington,
D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso (2007), “Europe Needs a Single Financial Rulebook,”
Financial Times (10 December), www.ft.com.
Panic, M. (1992), European Monetary Union: Lessons from the Gold Standard, London:
Macmillan.
Papademos, Lucas (2007), “The Financial Market Turmoil, the European Economy, and
the Role of the European Central Bank,” Speech to the European Institute, new York (27
September), www.ecb.int.
Rockoff, Hugh (1974), “The Free Banking Era: A Reexamination,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 6, 141-167.
Rockoff, Hugh (2003), “How Long did it Take the United States to Become an Optimal
Currency Area?” in Forrest Capie (ed.), Monetary Unions: Theory, History, Public
Choice, London: Routledge, 76-104.
Rolnick, Arthur, Bruce Smith and Warren Weber (1993), “In Order to Form a More
Perfect Monetary Union,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 17, 213.
Rolnick, Arthur and Warren Weber (1983), “New Evidence on the Free Banking Era,”
American Economic Review 73, 1080-1091.
Rose, Andrew (2000), “One Money, One Market: The Effect of Common Currencies on
Trade,” Economic Policy 30, 7-45.
Schinasi, Garry (2007), “Resolving EU Financial-Stability Challenges: Is a Decentralized
Decision-Making Approach Efficient?” unpublished manuscript, IMF (October).
Schinasi, Garry and Pedro Gustavo Teixeira (2006), “The Lender of Last Resort in the
European Single Financial Market,” IMF Working Paper no.06/127 (May).
Smiley, Gene (1975), “Interest Rate Movements in the United States, 1888-1913,”
Journal of Economic History 35, 591-620.
Snowden, Kenneth (1995a), “The Evolution of Interregional Mortgage Lending Channels,
1870-1940: The Life Insurance-Mortgage Company Connection,” in Naomi Lanoreaux
and Daniel Raff (eds.), Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the
Organization of Enterprise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 209-256.

42

Snowden, Kenneth (1995b), “Mortgage Securitzation in the United States: Twentieth
Century Developments in Historical Perspective,” in Michael Bordo and Richard Sylla
(eds.), Anglo-American Financial Systems, New York: Irwin, 261-298.
Sushka, Marie Elizabeth and Brian W. Barrett (1984), “Banking Structure and the
National Capital Market 1869-1914,” Journal of Economic History 44, 463-477.
Sylla, Richard (1969), “Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital
Mobilization in the United States, 1863-1913,” Journal of Economic History 29, 657-686.
Toniolo, Gianni, Leandro Conte and Giovanni Vecchi (2003), “Monetary Union,
Institutions and Financial Market Integration: Italy 1862-1905,” CEPR Discussion Paper
no. 3684 (January).
White, Eugene Nelson (1983), The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking
System, 1900-1929, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wright, Gavin (1986), Old South, New South, New York Revolutions in the Southern
Economy Since the Civil War, New York: Norton.

43

