NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DON'T PEOPLE INSURE LATE LIFE CONSUMPTION:
A FRAMING EXPLANATION OF THE UNDER-ANNUITIZATION PUZZLE
Jeffrey R. Brown
Jeffrey R. Kling
Sendhil Mullainathan
Marian V. Wrobel
Working Paper 13748
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13748

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

We thank Abby Bookman and Garth Wiens for exceptional research assistance. We are grateful to
the Pew Charitable Trusts and the TIAA-CREF Research Institute for financial support; Kling also
thanks the MacArthur and Mott Foundations for support. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research,
the Pew Charitable Trusts, the TIAA-CREF Institute, the MacArthur Foundation or the Mott Foundation
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Don't People Insure Late Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-Annuitization
Puzzle
Jeffrey R. Brown, Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel
NBER Working Paper No. 13748
January 2008
JEL No. G11,H55,J14
ABSTRACT
Rational models of risk-averse consumers have difficulty explaining limited annuity demand. We posit
that consumers evaluate annuity products using a narrow "investment frame" that focuses on risk and
return, rather than a "consumption frame" that considers the consequences for lifelong consumption.
Under an investment frame, annuities are quite unattractive, exhibiting high risk without high returns.
Survey evidence supports this hypothesis: whereas 72 percent of respondents prefer a life annuity
over a savings account when the choice is framed in terms of consumption, only 21 percent of respondents
prefer it when the choice is framed in terms of investment features.

Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820-9080
and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu
Jeffrey R. Kling
The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Ave NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
jkling@brookings.edu

Sendhil Mullainathan
Department of Economics
Littauer 208
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mullain@fas.harvard.edu
Marian V. Wrobel
Institute for Quantitative Social Science
Harvard University
1737 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
mwrobel@iq.harvard.edu

According to standard economic models, a risk-averse consumer who faces uncertainty about
length-of-life should place a high value on life annuities that provide guaranteed income for life.
Yet numerous studies show that few consumers voluntarily annuitize their retirement savings. As
public and private pension systems around the world continue the ongoing shift from traditional
defined benefit plans, which typically pay benefits for life, to defined contribution structures
which rarely require annuitization, retirees find themselves increasingly exposed to longevity
risk – the risk of being unable to sustain their consumption should they live longer than average.
Numerous papers have attempted to resolve the puzzle of why so few individuals purchase
life annuities despite the large individual welfare gains predicted by economic models (for a
review of this literature, see Jeffrey R. Brown 2007). Studies have explored the role of high
prices and asymmetric information, high fractions of wealth already annuitized by public pension
plans, bequest motives and other forms of risk sharing within families, the option value of
delayed annuitization, and incomplete annuity markets, including the absence of inflation
protection, the inability to insure against medical expenditure or other consumption shocks, and
the limited ability to access the equity premium while annuitizing. By combining a number of
these factors, it is possible to rationalize very low demand in some specific contexts.
As a whole, however, the literature has failed to find a sufficiently general explanation of
consumer aversion to annuities. Many proposed “solutions” simply create new puzzles. For
example, family risk-sharing implies that annuity demand should increase upon the death of one
spouse, yet we do not observe this. Nor do we observe significantly different annuitization
propensities between those who self-proclaim strong bequest motives and those that do not.
Several hypotheses suggest that annuitization is optimal only at more advanced ages, yet we do
not observe a substantial fraction of the population annuitizing at older ages. Additionally, the

1

industry has created life annuities that overcome many of the product-based objections (e.g.,
inflation-protected annuities, annuities with payout streams linked to equity returns, policy riders
that provide benefits for long-term care expenses), and yet few consumers buy these products.
Rather than attempting to rationalize the lack of annuity demand, this paper explores the idea
that aversion to annuities is not a fully rational phenomenon. A large literature has documented
behavioral biases in a wide range of activities that are important steps in the process of planning
for retirement, including whether to participate in employer sponsored pension plans, how much
to save, and how to allocate one’s portfolio. To the extent that individuals exhibit biases in the
wealth accumulation aspects of planning for retirement, it seems natural that similar biases might
also extend to the wealth decumulation stage of retirement planning.

I. The Framing Hypothesis
This paper suggests that a psychologically richer model of consumer behavior can explain
under-annuitization. Since the development of prospect theory, economists have increasingly
understood the importance of framing in economic decisions (Amos Tversky and Daniel
Kahneman, 1981). While loss/gain asymmetry—the differential responses when a choice is
framed as a loss than when it is framed as a gain—is the most commonly discussed example,
framing is a more general phenomena. Put simply, experimental findings suggest that choices are
not based solely on material consequences, but instead are filtered through the particular frame
that individuals use to interpret the choices.
To understand our model of framing, it is useful to start with the standard, fully rational
model. Suppose an individual planning for their retirement maximizes the discounted sum of
T

each period’s utility of consumption:

∑δ
t =0

t

u (ct ) where u (ct ) is concave, δ<1 is the discount

2

factor, and T (time of death) is a stochastic variable. In this setting, annuities provide valuable
insurance by transferring resources from states where resources have no value (death) to states
where resources provide utility through consumption. This is most easily seen in the two-period
case where the individual has probability q of dying. If this individual invests wealth W in a
simple bond with a return R, he can only consume W(1+R) in the second period. If, in contrast,
he buys an actuarially fair life annuity, he is able to consume W(1+R) /(1-q) if he lives, which,
by assumption, is all he cares about. To understand why the annuity allows for higher
consumption, imagine all individuals pool their wealth at time 1 and share it amongst at
survivors at time 2; this generates a mortality premium.
The above model implicitly has two components: an investment component, in which the
individual decides how much to invest in each asset, and a consumption component, in which
she decides how to spend the money from that investment. We propose that instead of viewing
the problem through the consumption frame (focusing on the end result of what can be spent over
time), many consumers adopt an investment frame (focusing on the intermediate results of return
and risk features when choosing assets and not considering the consequences for consumption).
This assumption is closely related to the notion of choice bracketing and mental accounting
(Richard H. Thaler, 1985; Daniel Read, George Loewenstein and Matthew Rabin, 1999).
Consumers effectively isolate one choice (how to invest) from others (how to consume) and
focus on specific features of this choice rather than viewing it as part of a broader, integrated set
of choices. Specifically, suppose that individuals consider the rate of return and the variance of
payouts, a natural frame for someone investigating alternative approaches to investing for
retirement. In the above example, a bond has return R and poses no risk, since it pays the same
irrespective of state. On the other hand, the annuity has a return

3

(1 + R)
with probability 1-q and
1− q

return 0 with probability q. If the annuity is actuarially fairly priced and individuals have rational
expectations about mortality, then the annuity has expected return R. Yet despite having the same
return, the annuity appears riskier than the bond. This reversal is key to our hypothesis: under the
consumption frame, the annuity is attractive because it serves as a form of insurance. In
contrast, under the narrow investment frame, the annuity is viewed as being riskier than a bond
because its return depends on a random variable T.
Practically, this framework suggests that the unattractive feature of the annuity in the
investment frame will be the potential for the investment to have a negative return. This matches
the qualitative intuition that practitioners provide: people react negatively to the possibility that
they could lose money. Indeed, if an individual dies immediately after annuity purchase, he
could lose his entire principal. Although not necessary for our analysis, loss aversion can
strengthen this fear, as noted by Wei-Yin Hu and Jason S. Scott (2007). The possibility of loss is
particularly problematic since the annuity does not offer a higher expected return to offset this
extra “risk.” This insight is also consistent with industry market research that has found that
many consumers think of annuities as a “gamble” rather than as insurance. In fact, the annuity is
even more unattractive: life annuities payouts are typically less than actuarially fair due to
administrative costs and adverse selection, meaning that the higher risk is bundled with a lower
return. In addition, the risk of adverse selection also necessitates that most annuity contracts are
essentially irreversible, resulting in illiquidity.
To summarize, we argue that when choosing how to invest their money, individuals focus too
narrowly on risk and return. The annuity, when viewed in this narrow investment frame, looks
risky and unattractive. In the next section we test this hypothesis.

4

II. Testing the Framing Hypothesis

In this paper, we provide a preliminary test of the framing hypothesis. We created
descriptions of potential scenarios to be presented to potential consumers, some of which
represent annuities and some of which represent competing non-annuitized products (such as a
savings account.) The essence of the test is that some of the subjects are presented these
products in an investment frame, which emphasized the depersonalized return on an account by
using words such as “invest” and “earnings,” describing periods in terms of years, mentioning
the value of the initial investment ($100,000 in every case), and alluding to the account value at
other points in the description. The other subjects are presented these products in a consumption
frame, meaning that they are told how much each product would ultimately allow its purchaser to
consume and for how long, using words such as “spend” and “payment,” describing periods in
terms of the purchaser’s age, and never alluding to an account or its value. The key distinction is
that the consumption frame shifts the frame: instead of simply considering the returns on the
investment, individuals are presented with the consumption consequences of the investment. The
consumption frame implicitly incorporates the results of investment decisions as well as the time
path of consumption, and, in this sense, is broader. The framing hypothesis suggests that the life
annuity should be attractive in the consumption frame and unattractive in the investment frame.
We collected data to test this hypothesis in a four-arm internet survey conducted in
December 2007. The internet survey firm Zoomerang hosted the survey and recruited
respondents over age 50 from a pre-existing panel of individuals willing to participate in surveys
in return for small incentives. A total of 1342 individuals, approximately 335 per arm, completed
the survey. All respondents answered seven forced-choice questions. Each question described the
investment/spending decisions of two fictitious people and asked, “Who has made the better

5

choice?” In all arms of the survey, an introduction stated that both people receive $1,000 each
month from Social Security, have “some savings” and have already set aside money for their
children. The presence of savings and money for the children were intended to address
respondents’ potential concerns about insurance from consumption shocks and bequests. In a
real-life setting, such concerns could be addressed via partial annuitization.
Two arms of the survey presented the introduction and the choices using the investment
frame, and two arms used the consumption frame. The exact wording of the products and the
frames is provided in Appendix A. In all four arms of the survey, the choices were described in
terms of amounts and durations: the specific terms “annuity,” “savings account,” and “bond”
were not used for labels. Several choices were compared in all arms: (1) a life annuity paying
$650 each month until death (2) a traditional savings account bearing 4 percent interest (3) a
consol bond paying $400 each month forever (4) a 35 year period annuity paying $500 each
month and (5) a 20 year period annuity paying $650 each month. In all four arms of the survey,
each respondent compared the life annuity separately to each of the other products. In addition,
in the investment frame each respondent compared a principal-protected life annuity (i.e., a life
annuity that guaranteed enough payments so that the nominal value of the principal would be
repaid even in the event of an early death) paying $625 each month to the traditional savings
account. All choices were designed to be actuarially equivalent and respondents were informed
of this fact. To avoid spurious effects, the survey included several other comparisons that did not
feature the life annuity, varied the order of the comparisons, and varied whether the life annuity
was presented first or second within a given comparison.
To further address the role of the bequest motive in suppressing annuitization, we added an
additional dimension of variation in the survey. Half of the respondents in each frame were told

6

that, after death, remaining earnings or payments went to charity (the weak bequest condition);
the other half that they went to children (the strong bequest condition).
We note that while our survey results are based on hypothetical scenarios, these scenarios are
very similar to actual financial decisions that respondents and people they know have made. This
stands in sharp contrast to the frequently used (and criticized) contingent valuation situations that
attempt to value the existence of things outside of normal experience. Robert B. Barsky et al.
(1997) showed that data on stated preferences regarding risk tolerance and consumption path
preferences were related in sensible ways to predicted behaviors. More generally, in a review of
studies using stated preference data versus revealed preference data, Jordan J. Louviere, David
A. Hensher and Joffre D. Swait (2002) found that estimates of parameters based on the two types
of data are often quite similar. An advantage of this approach is that we can obtain stated
preferences over alternatives that may not be offered in a market (and for which there are no
revealed preferences) but that are constructed to directly test our hypothesis. While we do not
intend these stated preference data to be conclusive, the results are useful for guiding future
research, possibly including experiments using actual product choices.

III. Results

Table I reports our results. When questions were presented in the consumption frame, the
majority of individuals preferred the consumption stream consistent with a life annuity to the
consumption streams available from other products of comparable actuarial value. Specifically,
in this frame, when individuals were told that any payments after death went to charity, 72
percent of respondents preferred the $650 per month that could be provided by a life annuity to
the consumption stream from a savings account of comparable actuarial value. 77 percent

7

preferred the life annuity to receiving $650 per month for 20 years (age 85); 76 percent preferred
the life annuity to receiving $500 per month for 35 years (age 100); and 71 percent preferred the
life annuity to receiving $400 forever (the consol bond).
In contrast, when individuals faced the same choices in the investment frame, the proportions
reversed, with the majority of individuals not choosing the life annuity. Specifically, only 21
percent of respondents preferred an account earning $650 each month for life (i.e., a life annuity)
to investing $100,000 at four percent. Further, only 48 percent preferred the life annuity to an
account earning $650 per month for 20 years; 40 percent preferred the life annuity to an account
earning $500 per month for 35 years; and only 27 percent preferred the life annuity to an account
earning a five percent interest rate from which interest but not invested money could be
withdrawn. Note that in the life and period annuity cases, the respondent was explicitly told that
that, at the end, the investment would be worth nothing. In every case, the difference in rates
between the consumption and investment frames was statistically significant.
In order to explore the direct effect of bequest motives, as well as any interaction between
bequests and framing, we also randomized the treatment of bequests in our sample. When
individuals were told that remaining payments went to children, rather than to charity, the
percentages of respondents preferring the life annuity in the consumption frame declined,
although it remained above 50 percent in most cases. Specifically, 59 percent of respondents
preferred the life annuity to a savings account; 65 percent preferred the life annuity to $650 per
month to age 85; 53 percent preferred the life annuity to $500 per month to age 100; and 49
percent preferred the life annuity to $400 “forever.” Importantly, however, the percentages of
respondents preferring the life annuity also fell in the investment frame so that the magnitude of
the between-frame differences remained quite similar. Thus, across both a strong and a weak

8

framing of bequests, we find a substantially larger fraction of the population finds annuities
attractive when framed in consumption, rather than investment, terms.
While the strong effect of the frame on the stated preferences for life annuities is the key
finding of the survey, our research also provides insights on how the framing affects various
features of the annuity product. Specifically, there are at least two distinct features of a life
annuity that distinguish it from a savings account: (i) the conversion from flexible access to
money (i.e., “liquidity” in the investment frame) to a fixed stream of payments, and (ii) the
application of the mortality premium to the annuity payments. We are able to isolate the effect of
each of these factors by comparing alternative products within each frame.
In the consumption frame, we find that the loss of flexibility did not have much impact on the
respondents’ evaluation of choices. Similar, albeit slightly lower, percentages of respondents
preferred the life annuity to the savings account (flexible access) as preferred the life annuity to
the period-certain annuity (fixed payment). In contrast, the loss of flexibility did matter in the
investment frame: a smaller fraction of respondents chose the life annuity over the savings
account than chose the life annuity over the period-certain annuity.
We also find that the mortality premium, which arises from pooling mortality risk, was a
positive attribute in the consumption frame, with respondents consistently favoring life annuities
relative to period-certain annuities. In contrast, the mortality premium was viewed neutrally or
negatively in the investment frame, with respondents split equally on the choice of a life or 20 year
annuity and a majority disliking the life annuity relative to its 35 year counterpart. These attitudes
are consistent with our hypothesis: a dislike of illiquidity and loss of control are salient in the
investment frame, but not in the consumption frame. Similarly, a desire to insure against longevity
risk is salient in the consumption frame but not the investment frame.

9

Our survey also indicates that principal protection is highly valued in the investment frame:
in the weak bequest condition, 47 percent of respondents believe that a principal-protected life
annuity earning $625 per month is a better choice than a savings account, while only 21 percent
believe that an unprotected life annuity dominates; the result is more dramatic in the strong
bequest arm. Again, this high valuation is consistent with our hypothesis and specifically with an
aversion to the loss of wealth with a reference point at the amount of the initial investment.

IV. Conclusion

We hypothesize that framing matters for annuitization decisions: in a consumption frame,
annuities are viewed as valuable insurance, whereas in an investment frame, the annuity is a
risky asset because the payoff depends on an uncertain date of death. Survey evidence is
consistent with our hypothesis that framing matters: the vast majority of individuals prefer an
annuity over alternative products when presented in a consumption frame, whereas the majority
of individuals prefer non-annuitized products when presented in an investment frame. To the
extent that the investment frame is the dominant frame for consumers making financial planning
decisions for retirement, this finding may help to explain why so few individuals annuitize.
This finding provokes the immediate question: if framing matters, why don't annuity
providers use the consumption frame? We conjecture that the investment frame is the dominant
frame in the market and in most younger customers' minds both because it is simpler, due to the
focus on nearer-term and impersonal outcomes, and because little is lost by using this frame
during the wealth accumulation stage of life. We further conjecture that firms tend not to
"convert" retirement-age customers to the consumption frame for several reasons: resources are
required to incorporate additional personalized information and thus convert consumers to a

10

more complex frame; a given firm may not capture the return from raising a customer's interest
in particular products in the consumption frame because the converted customer can purchase
from another lower-cost seller; the compensation of sales staff (e.g., through commissions) may
be oriented to products most consonant with investment frame and the compensation system may
involve sales people outside the direct control of a given firm; invoking the consumption frame
may undermine demand for the firm's other non-life-contingent products. Exploration of these
conjectures would be valuable future work.

11

REFERENCES
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.

“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 537-579.
Brown, Jeffrey R. 2007. “Rational and Behavioral Perspectives on the Role of Annuities in

Retirement Planning.” NBER Working Paper 13537.
Hu, Wei-Yin and Jason S. Scott. 2007. “Behavioral Obstacles to the Annuity Market.”

http://ssrn.com/abstract=978246.
Louviere, Jordan J., David A. Hensher and Joffre D. Swait. 2002. Stated Choice Methods.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Read, Daniel, George Loewenstein, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Choice Bracketing.” Journal

of Risk and Uncertainty, 19(1-3): 171-197.
Thaler, Richard H. 1985. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice.” Marketing Science.

4(3): 199-214.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1981. “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology

of Choice.” Science, 211(4481): 453-458.

12

Table 1
Percent of Respondents Preferring Annuities to Alternative Products
Comparison of Consumption and Investment Frames

Product comparison

Remaining payments left to
“charity”
Consumption Investment
p
Frame
Frame
%
%

Remaining payments left to
“children”
Consumption Investment
p
Frame
Frame
%
%

Life annuity ($650 per month)
Traditional savings account
72
21
.000
59
12
.000
4% interest
20 year period annuity
77
48
.000
65
28
.000
$650 per month
35 year period annuity
76
40
.000
53
28
.000
$500 per month
Consol bond
71
27
.000
49
12
.000
$400 per month forever
Principal-protected life annuity ($625 per month)
Traditional savings account
47
50
4% interest
N
352
321
339
330
Notes:
1. Each question described two fictitious men’s decisions for investing/spending in retirement and asked,
“Who has made the better choice?” An introduction stated that both men had $1,000 each month
from Social Security and “some savings” and had already set aside money for their children.
2. The Consumption frame used terms such as “spend” and “payment,” described periods in terms of
the individual’s age, and never alluded to an account or its value. The Investment frame used terms
such as “invest” and “earnings,” described periods in terms of years, mentioned the value of the
initial investment ($100,000 in every case), and alluded to the account value at other points in the
survey. All decisions were described in terms of amount and duration; the terms “annuity”, “savings
account”, and “bond” were not used to label decisions.
3. Standard error 2.7 percentage points.
4. All respondents were 50 years old or older.
5. Data collected via internet survey mid-December 2007

13

Appendix A
Text of Survey Instrument
FRAME I: Consumption Frame with Weak Bequest

Introduction
On the following screens you will be asked seven questions. In each case, two people have made
permanent decisions on how to spend a portion of their money in retirement. You are asked to
judge which person has made a better choice.
In all scenarios, each person has some savings and can spend $1,000 each month from social
security in addition to the portion of income mentioned in each question. They have already set
aside money to leave for their children when they die. The choices are intended to be financially
equivalent and based on personal preferences for spending in retirement.
Life annuity
Mr. Red: Mr. Red can spend $650 each month for as long as he lives in addition to social
security. When he dies, there will be no more payments.
20-year period annuity
Mr. Orange: Mr. Orange can spend $650 each month until he is 85 years old in addition to
social security. When he turns 85, he will have no additional money left to spend. However, if he
dies before he is 85, he may leave remaining payments to charity.
35-year period annuity
Mr. Blue: Mr. Blue can spend $500 each month until he is 100 years old in addition to social
security. When he turns 100, he will have no additional money left to spend. However, if he dies
before he is 100, he may leave remaining payments to charity.
Consol bond
Mr. Green: Mr. Green can spend $400 each month for as long as he lives in addition to social
security. When he dies, he may leave remaining payments, which will continue forever, to
charity.
Savings account
Mr. Gray: Mr. Gray can choose an amount to spend each month in addition to social security.
How long his money lasts depends on how much he spends. If he spends only $400 per month,
he has money for as long as he lives. When he dies, he may leave the remainder to charity. If he
spends $650 per month, he has money only until age 85. He can spend down faster or slower
than each of these options.
In Frame II, "Consumption Frame with Strong Bequest," the word "charity" was replaced with
the words "his children."

14

FRAME III: Investment Frame with Weak Bequest

Introduction
On the following screens you will be asked seven questions. In each case, two people have made
permanent decisions on how to invest a portion of their money in retirement. You are asked to
judge which person has made a better choice.
In all scenarios, each person has some savings and receives $1,000 each month in social security,
in addition to the portion of savings mentioned in each question. Each person has chosen a
different way to invest this portion ($100,000) of their savings. They have already set aside
money to leave for their children when they die. The choices are intended to be financially
equivalent and based on personal preferences for investing in retirement.
Life annuity
Mr. Red: Mr. Red invests $100,000 in an account which earns $650 each month for as long as
he lives. He can only withdraw the earnings he receives, not the invested money. When he dies,
the earnings will stop and his investment will be worth nothing.
20-year period annuity
Mr. Orange: Mr. Orange invests $100,000 in an account which earns $650 each month for 20
years. He can only withdraw the earnings he receives, not the invested money. After 20 years,
the earnings will stop and his investment will be worth nothing. However, if he dies before then,
he may leave remaining earnings to charity.
35-year period annuity
Mr. Blue: Mr. Blue invests $100,000 in an account which earns $500 each month for 35 years.
He can only withdraw the earnings he receives, not the invested money. After 35 years, the
earnings will stop and his investment will be worth nothing. However, if he dies before then, he
may leave remaining earnings to charity.
Consol bond
Mr. Green: Mr. Green invests $100,000 in an account which earns a 5% interest rate. He can
only withdraw the interest he receives, not the invested money. When he dies, he may leave the
remaining earnings, which continue forever, to charity.
Savings account
Mr. Gray: Mr. Gray invests $100,000 in an account which earns a 4% interest rate. He can
withdraw some or all of the invested money at any time. When he dies, he may leave any
remaining money to charity.
Principal-protected life annuity
Mr. Black: Mr. Black invests $100,000 in an account which earns $625 each month for as long
as he lives. He can only withdraw the earnings he receives, not the invested money. If he dies
before he has received $100,000 in total payments, he may leave the difference to charity.
In Frame IV, "Investment Frame with Strong Bequest," the word "charity" was replaced with
the words "his children."
15

