                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WHAT DO ECONOMISTS KNOW ABOUT CRIME?

                                          Angela K. Dills
                                         Jeffrey A. Miron
                                         Garrett Summers

                                       Working Paper 13759
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13759


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2008




We thank Steve Levitt, John Donohue, Mark Duggan, and John Lott for providing data. Larry Katz,
Caroline Hoxby and Sebastian Edwards provided valuable comments on a previous draft. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Angela K. Dills, Jeffrey A. Miron, and Garrett Summers. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Do Economists Know About Crime?
Angela K. Dills, Jeffrey A. Miron, and Garrett Summers
NBER Working Paper No. 13759
January 2008
JEL No. K0

                                                ABSTRACT

In this paper we evaluate what economists have learned over the past 40 years about the determinants
of crime. We base our evaluation on two kinds of evidence: an examination of aggregate data over
long time periods and across countries, and a critical review of the literature. We argue that economists
know little about the empirically relevant determinants of crime. Even hypotheses that find some support
in U.S. data for recent decades are inconsistent with data over longer horizons or across countries.
This conclusion applies both to policy variables like arrest rates or capital punishment and to less conventional
factors such as abortion or gun laws. The hypothesis that drug prohibition generates violence, however,
is generally consistent with the long times-series and cross-country facts. This analysis is also consistent
with a broader perspective in which government policies that affect the nature and amount of dispute
resolution play an important role in determining violence.


Angela K. Dills                                         Garrett Summers
Stetson School of Business and Economics                Department of Economics
Mercer University                                       Harvard University
1400 Coleman Avenue                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
Macon, GA 31201                                         gsummers@fas.harvard.edu
dills_ak@mercer.edu

Jeffrey A. Miron
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
miron@fas.harvard.edu
I. Introduction

         Since Gary Becker’s (1968) seminal article on the economic model of crime, economists

have devoted considerable effort to determining its empirical validity. Much of this research

examines deterrence, the idea that policy can reduce crime by raising the expected costs. This

literature focuses in particular on arrest and incarceration rates, policing levels, and punishments

like the death penalty. Considerable additional research, while not directly focused on deterrence,

considers hypotheses derived from economic models and uses statistical techniques commonly

employed by economists. Such hypotheses include, among others, the roles of abortion

legalization, gun laws, guns, lead, and drug prohibition in causing crime.

         In this paper we evaluate what economists have learned over the past 40 years about the

determinants of crime. We consider both the policy variables related to deterrence and the more

unconventional factors examined by economists. We rely on two kinds of evidence: an

examination of aggregate data over long time periods and across countries, and a critical review

of the literature.

         Our empirical strategy consists mainly of plots that, one-by-one, compare crime rates

with potential determinants; that is, we examine the univariate, “non-instrumented,” relation

between crime and possible explanatory factors. This approach suffers two large defects: the

right model of crime is undoubtedly multifactorial, and the raw correlation between crime and a

potential determinant can be misleading in the presence of endogeneity.

         We nevertheless argue that examining the data in this fashion sheds considerable light on

which determinants of crime are empirically important. This approach shows that the

correlations in the data are frequently the wrong sign relative to standard models or claims. This

does not prove a multivariate, “instrumented” analysis would not uncover a different effect, but it

suggests this outcome is not especially likely and that any instrument would have to be powerful

to overcome the raw correlation. We show, moreover, that a multivariate approach (admittedly,

one that is not well-identified) fails to display the “correct” correlations in the vast majority of


2
cases.

         Based on this evaluation, we argue that economists know little about the empirically

relevant determinants of crime. This conclusion applies both to policy variables like arrest rates

or capital punishment and to indirect factors such as abortion or gun laws. The reason is that

even hypotheses that find some support in U.S. data for recent decades are inconsistent with data

over longer horizons or across countries. Thus, these hypotheses are less persuasive than a focus

on recent U.S. evidence might suggest.

         The hypothesis that drug prohibition generates violence, however, is consistent with the

long time-series and cross-country facts. Previous research has considered this hypothesis; we

focus on a broader set of data and show the potentially large role that drug prohibition plays in

determining violence. The evidence we present is only suggestive, but it indicates this hypothesis

deserves further exploration. This analysis is also consistent with a general perspective in which

government policies that affect the amount and nature of dispute resolution play an important role

in determining violence.

         The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we present basic facts about crime over the

past century in the Unites States and other countries. Section 3 examines whether individual

deterrence variables appear to explain crime. Section 4 considers alternative determinants of

crime, while Section 5 considers the role of drug prohibition, still focusing on explanatory

variables one by one. Section 6 presents OLS regressions that potentially account for multiple

determinants of crime. Section 7 concludes.



2. Stylized Facts

         Recent research on crime typically uses the past several decades of U.S. data. This is in

part because data on crime and its possible determinants are more readily available for this

period, in part because crime data for other countries are less readily available or difficult to

compare to U.S. data. This focus also occurs because crime has fluctuated substantially during


3
the past several decades in the U.S., making it is an inherently interesting period.

         It is nevertheless possible and interesting to consider longer time series and, in some

cases, data from other countries. Crime varies substantially across time and space, so a broader

perspective can support or refute hypotheses of interest. We begin, therefore, by establishing key

facts about crime over the long run and across countries.

         Figure 1 presents the violent crime and property crime rates in the U.S. over the period

1932-2006. The data are from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports. All data are in per capita

terms.

         Violent crime began to rise in the mid-1960s and increased overall until the early 1990s,

when it began a persistent decline. The decline was substantial, but even by 2006 violent crime

was still well above its level in the 1940s and 1950s. Some of the upward trend might reflect

changes in crime reporting, so the measured difference between 2006 and the 1950s may

overstate the true change.

         Property crime behaves similarly to violent crime. Property crime increased beginning in

the mid-1960s and remained substantially higher from the 1970s through the present compared to

the 1940s and 1950s. Violent crime and property crime differ somewhat after 1970, with

property crime peaking in 1980 rather than in the early 1990s. Property crime did increase during

the latter half of the 1980s, but less so than violent crime.

         Figure 2 presents the murder rate and the homicide rate. The murder rate is from the

same source as the violent and property crime rates; the homicide rate is from vital statistics

sources and is available for a longer time period.1    Murder behaves similarly to the overall

violent crime rate. The murder rate increased substantially in the 1960s and early 1970s,

displayed a marked increase in the 1980s, and a dramatic decline in the 1990s. The murder rate

declined during the 1930s – 1950s, however, while the violent crime rate did not. More

1
  Data for the early years are problematic due to changes in the coverage area and underreporting of
homicide, so we employ an adjusted series for 1900-1932 (Eckberg 1995).



4
importantly, the decline in the murder rate during the 1990s returned the rate to virtually its 1960s

level, while violent crime remains well above its 1960s levels. The decline in the murder rate

also appears to have abated by the end of the sample. The homicide rate behaves similarly to the

murder rate, but the pre-1950s decline is more apparent.2 In addition, the homicide rate displays

a persistent increase over the first three decades of the century and an enormous decline during

the 1930s.

           What these data show is that U.S. crime exhibited substantial variation well before the

1980s and 1990s, with fluctuations in both directions. The homicide rate does not show an

overall upward trend, although this might reflect changing medical technology in the treatment of

gun shots and other serious injuries.3 A convincing explanation of crime can ideally account for

all of this variation, not just the past two decades.

           We turn next to data for other countries. We focus on vital statistics measures of the

homicide rate, since this series is more accurately and consistently reported than most crime

statistics.

           Figure 3 shows homicide rates for Canada, the U.K. and Australia over time. The

average level of homicide has been substantially lower in these three countries than in the U.S.

over the same period. Homicide nevertheless displays substantial variation, and this variation is

broadly similar to that in the United States. Homicide rates rose during the 1960s and early 1970s

but then declined over the remaining part of the sample. This similarity raises doubt about US-

specific explanations for the major fluctuations in crime.

           Table 1 compares homicide rates across countries. Among OECD countries, the U.S. is a

major outlier, with a homicide rate in 2001 of 7.06 compared to the OECD average of 1.62.

Compared to a broader set of countries, however, the U.S. homicide rate is less unusual. The

2
    Deaths resulting from the 9/11 terrorist attacks are recorded as homicides but not as murders.
3
  See Harris et al. (2002). This decline in murder would tend to increase reported assaults since some of
those assaulted do not die.



5
average for all countries in the sample is 6.28, and 19 countries have rates in excess of the U.S.

rate, sometimes by substantial amounts. The most extreme case is Colombia, where the homicide

rate is 62.38.

        A convincing account of the determinants of homicide, therefore, should explain not only

the fluctuations over recent decades in the U.S. but also longer term fluctuations in the U.S. and

in other countries. Likewise, a complete account should explain the differences in homicide

across countries. In particular, this account should explain why the U.S. has a higher rate than

most “similar” countries but a lower rate than a broad range of other countries.



3. Determinants of Crime: Deterrence Variables

        In this section we explore the crime-reducing effect of deterrence variables like the arrest

or incarceration rate. These variables are in principle controllable by policy, and they affect

crime either by raising the expected cost of crime or by incapacitating criminals. We consider

these variables in the context of the stylized facts above.4

        The first variable of interest is arrests per capita, which is a proxy for the probability that

a criminal offender is caught by the criminal justice system and subjected to punishment. Other

things equal, a higher probability of arrest should imply a lower incidence of crime. The ideal

proxy would be arrests per crime, and part of the literature considers this measure. Given the

likelihood of measurement error in both crime and arrest counts, however, arrests per crime and

crime per capita almost certainly show a strong negative correlation due to “ratio bias,” regardless

of the true relation. We focus, therefore, on arrests per capita.

        Figures 4a–4c show arrest rates over time for violent crime, property crime, and murder,

along with the related crime rate. The first-order fact is that arrest rates and crime correlate

positively, contrary to what should occur if the main operative mechanism is that higher arrest

4
  For an early attempt to develop and test the implications of the deterrence model, see Ehrlich (1973). For
reviews of the literature and related work on deterrence, see Cameron (1988), Benson, Kim, and
Rassmussen (1994), Ehrlich (1996), Nagin (1997), Freeman (1999), and Levitt (2004).


6
probabilities reduce crime. This positive correlation does not prove the arrest probability has no

deterrent effect, nor does it imply that higher arrests increase crime. Instead, it likely indicates

that a third factor is simultaneously driving both crime and arrests. For example, political

economy considerations could cause arrest rates to respond positively to crime rates.

Alternatively, the strong positive relation might be a reporting effect, since recording of crime

and arrests tends to go together. The fact that the correlation is positive, however, raises doubt as

to whether arrests have a major deterrent effect, and it suggests that an appropriate instrument

would have to be powerful to overcome the inherent endogeneity in the arrest rate.

           A second key deterrence variable is the size of the police force. Though it might seem

obvious that police should reduce crime, this implication is not immediate. The standard model

of crime identifies the probabilities of arrest and conviction, along with the expected punishment,

as the primary deterrence variables. If these are held constant, police per se should have no

additional impact. In practice, comparing police and crime makes sense for several reasons.

Counting the number of police is easier than assessing arrest probabilities, and the probability of

arrest is plausibly increasing in the size of the police force. Also, the relation between police and

crime does not suffer from ratio bias. Despite the plausibility of the hypothesis, however, a long

literature has found it difficult to confirm an effect of police on crime.5 This is plausibly because

jurisdictions with high crime rates tend to hire more police. In principle one can address this by

finding an appropriate instrument, but in practice such instruments are rare.6

           Figure 5 plots police personnel and police officers per capita in the U.S. from 1934 to

2006. The number of police crept upward in the early part of the period, increased more rapidly

in the late 1960s, flattened out in the 1970s, and increased through 1999. The number of police


5
    See the discussion in Cameron (1988), Cronwell and Trumbell (1994), or Moody and Marvell (1996).
6
  Levitt (1997) attempts to solve the endogeneity problem using the timing of mayoral and gubernatorial
election cycles and finds a strong negative impact of police on crime. The results are sensitive, however, to
a coding error (McCrary 2002).



7
officers increased less rapidly than police employees although a similar peak occurs in 1999. The

steady, slight increase in police occurred simultaneously with large fluctuations in crime rates.

Police and crime both increase in the 1960s; declines in crime begin years before the decline in

police at the turn of the 21st century. Thus, the overall correlation between police and crime is the

opposite of what is implied by the deterrence hypothesis.

           The perverse correlation does not prove deterrence is wrong or that police increase crime.

These data, however, make clear the hurdle any structural estimation must overcome: the

dominant variation in the data is in the wrong direction, so any instrument would need to be

powerful to find a negative effect of police on crime. The perverse correlation also suggests

skepticism about the effectiveness of this aspect of the deterrence hypothesis.

           A third key “deterrence” variable is the incarceration rate. Incarceration can affect crime

through several channels. First, the threat of incarceration can raise the expected punishment for

crime. Second, persons in prison cannot commit crimes against the non-prison population. Both

channels imply that greater incarceration leads to less crime. A possibly offsetting effect is that

incarceration might make some persons more criminogenic due to lost human capital, peer effects

(hardening), or increased criminal capital.7 Thus, the magnitude and possibly the sign of any

incarceration effect can only be determined empirically.

           Much of the literature suggests a small, crime-reducing effect of incarceration on net, but

some research suggests a zero or even perverse effect.8 One possible interpretation is that the true

effect is negative but reverse causation biases the coefficient toward zero, since a higher crime

rate likely implies more incarcerations. As in the arrests and police literature, the key empirical




7
    Chen and Shapiro (2004), for example, provide evidence of a hardening effect.
8
  See Johnson and Raphael (2006) for a recent review of the literature. Abrams (2006) provides evidence
based on add-on gun laws that incarceration deters crime, while Kessler and Levitt (1999) document both a
deterrent and an incapacitation effect based on sentence enhancements. Webster, Doob, and Zimring
(2006) critique Kessler and Levitt (1999); Levitt (2006) responds.



8
issue is therefore whether an appropriate instrument exists.9

         Figure 6 presents the incarceration rate for the U.S. over 1925-2006. After fluctuating in

a relatively narrow range from 1925 – 1970, the incarceration rate began increasing in the early

1970s at a steady rate and has now reached a level almost 5 times the average rate over the pre-

1970 period.10

         This figure poses a challenge for the view that incarceration reduces crime. Starting

around 1990, the incarceration rate climbs while the crime rate falls drastically, which is

consistent with the view that incarceration reduces crime. During the early part of the sample,

however, crime fluctuated substantially while the incarceration rate did not. In the 1970s and

early 1980s, both rates climbed simultaneously, the opposite of what deterrence and

incapacitation imply. The average level of the incarceration rate, moreover, is much higher in the

past several decades, so even a small causal effect of incarceration in reducing crime implies

much lower crime than now observed.

         Further evidence on the relation between incarceration and crime comes from cross-

country comparisons. Figures 7a-c show scatter plots of homicide and incarceration rates for

several groups of countries. The first consists of the 58 countries with available data on both

incarceration rates and homicide.11 This figure suggests a positive correlation between

incarceration rates and homicide rates, but it is dominated by a few countries that plausibly differ

across multiple dimensions from the remaining countries. The second figure shows data for the



9
  Levitt (1996) uses lagged judicial decisions to circumvent this problem. This instrument does not satisfy
the exclusion restriction, however, if the error term is serially correlated. Also, the first stage F-statistics
are well below 10 in many cases. Johnson and Raphael (2006), using a different identification scheme, find
evidence consistent with Levitt but show the effect of incarceration has become much weaker in recent
years.
10
  The average incarceration rate from 1925-1969 is 108 prisoners per 100,000. The incarceration rate in
2006 was 497 per 100,000. The average incarceration rate from 1970-2006 is 280.
11
  Walmsley (2004) provides incarceration rates for 205 independent countries and dependent territories
and reports that 62.5% of countries have incarceration rates below 150 per 100,000.



9
OECD countries. These again suggest a strong positive relation between homicide and

incarceration, but the U.S. is an extreme outlier. The third figure excludes the U.S. and still

shows a significant, positive correlation. Yet again one cannot draw a structural conclusion, but

the strong, perverse correlation between homicide and incarceration should make one cautious in

accepting the proposition that increased incarceration reduces crime.

         A final deterrence variable that economists link to crime, especially homicide, is capital

punishment. According to the deterrence model, imposing capital punishment rather than life

imprisonment increases the expected cost of crime, thereby reducing crimes like murder. Initial

empirical work based on aggregate U.S. data appeared to suggest that capital punishment reduces

homicide (Ehrlich 1975, 1977), but subsequent work raised doubts about this conclusion (e.g.,

Passell and Taylor, 1977).12 Due to the Supreme Court’s re-instatement of the death penalty in

1976 and the subsequent increase in executions during the 1980s and 1990s, as well as renewed

political interest in the death penalty, several papers have re-examined the issue using post-

moratorium, state-level data. Most of these papers claim to find a significant deterrent effect, but

many of the results are not robust to reasonable modifications of the statistical specification.13

More broadly, Donohue and Wolfers (2005) argue that the evidence does not support a

substantial deterrent effect of the death penalty.

         We review here the first-order facts related to capital punishment. Figure 8 plots the


12
   The single most important critique is that the results are highly sensitive to sample period and/or
functional form. This is because the last few years of the sample had zero executions. If one excludes
these, as seen below, the correlation between executions and homicide is positive. If one includes these in
a linear specification, the correlation is still positive. The original Ehrlich paper, however, used the log of
executions and assumed a small number of executions to avoid taking the log of zero.
13
   See, for example, Dezhbakhsh, Rubin, Shepherd (2003), Mocan and Gittings (2003), Shepherd (2004a)
and Dezhbakhsh and Shepherd (2006). Dezhbakhsh, Rubin, and Shepherd and Shepherd fail to use state
trends and/or clustered standard errors. Dezhbakhsh and Shepherd’s results are sensitive to measuring
executions in levels rather than adjusted for population. Mocan and Gittings results are sensitive to the
assumed lag between executions and murders. Mocan and Gittings (2006) argue that the theoretically
sound assumption about this lag supports an effect of the death penalty, but their case for the assumed lag is
not persuasive. Katz, Levitt, and Shustorivich (2003) fail to find an economically or statistically significant
effect of the death penalty.



10
number of executions in the U.S. against the homicide rate.14 In some sub-periods the correlation

is negative, as implied by deterrence hypothesis, but in other sub-periods the correlation is

positive. For example, executions increased rapidly while murder fell during the 1990s, but from

1900 to the early 1960s executions and homicide moved together. During the moratorium period,

murder fluctuated considerably even though the number of executions was zero.15

           Figure 9a graphs similar data for Canada from 1926 through 2005. The first 40 years

showed substantial variation in the number of executions while the homicide rate remained

relatively stable. The correlation for 1926-2005 is significantly negative (-0.59, p-value 0.00),

consistent with a deterrent effect of capital punishment. For the time period 1926-1962, however,

the correlation is significantly positive (0.34, p-value = 0.039.)16 In the last 40 years, homicide

has fluctuated substantially while the execution rate has been constant at zero. Thus, the overall

negative correlation is an artifact of two very different regimes; in one the correlation is perverse,

and in the other it is zero.

           Figure 9b demonstrates a similar result for the U.K. Homicides per capita fluctuated

substantially over the past 40 years despite an almost complete absence of executions. Thus, the

data provide little affirmative evidence that is consistent with the standard deterrence story.



           Discussion

           The results above present a challenge to key aspects of the deterrence model of crime.

An important feature of this model is the implication that policy can reduce crime by

manipulating variables such as arrest rates, policing levels, and so on. The aggregate data do not

provide much confirmation for this perspective, at least not in a simplistic, “more X, less crime”

14
     For the homicide rate we use vital statistics homicides, adjusted by Eckberg (1995).
15
   For 1900-2005 (full sample) the correlation is -0.11, p-value = 0.28); for 1900-1955 it is 0.34, p-
value=0.012); and for 1956-2005 it is -0.60, p-value=0.000).
16
     For the time period 1926-1966, the correlation becomes an insignificant 0.24, p-value = 0.128.



11
kind of way.

        This conclusion in no way suggests that criminals are not rational or that they fail to

respond to incentives. On the one hand, the analysis above is too “broad brush” to support such

a specific claim. On the other hand, numerous analyses do find that criminals respond to

incentives in roughly rational ways; this research, however, focuses on responses that are local or

in response to specific and unambiguous changes or differences in the incentives faced by

criminals.17 So, we do not mean to throw out the baby with the bath water by arguing against the

deterrence model at a general level or minimizing its usefulness as an organizing device. We are

instead focusing on specific, policy-relevant implications, and we are addressing the naïve, “if we

hire more police, or make more arrests, or lock more people up, that will necessarily reduce

crime” perspective. This application of the deterrence model is not supported by the data. A key

question, then, is why we do not find more evidence of deterrence with respect to these variables.

        One possibility is that data limitations make it difficult to test these hypotheses in the

settings where they are most relevant. For example, it could be that going from no police force to

some police force indeed reduces crime, but the observed variation in the size of modern police

forces is over a range where diminishing returns have set in so that additional police have little

impact. Thus, our evidence cannot rule out the possibility that adding more police is unlikely to

lower crime, but substantially reducing police might increase crime.

        A different hypothesis is that most existing analyses, even those using city or state level

data, are too aggregated with respect to time period, place, type of crime, and type of police effort

to uncover a number of effects that might operate in practice. Thus, while putting more police on

the street in a specific neighborhood and instructing them to target a particular kind of crime

might indeed reduce that kind of crime in that neighborhood, especially in the short term, simply

hiring more police who sit behind desks pushing paper is unlikely to reduce any kind of crime.

17
 See, for example, Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2004), Klick and Tabarrok (2005), Draca, Machin, and
Witt (2007).



12
         A third hypothesis is that deterrence variables might have counterproductive effects as

well as some beneficial effects. Some expansions of police might increase crime, as discussed

below, because the police work at enforcing drug prohibition or other counter-productive

activities.18 In the case of capital punishment, the reality might be that criminals pay

considerable attention to the expected costs but that executions are rare, so it is approximately

rational to ignore the possibility of being executed.19 Regarding the effect of incarceration via

deterrence, it might be that some criminals do not regard prison as worse than life outside or view

the negative impacts on their future lives once released as small. Kling (2006), for example,

finds that incarceration has minimal impact on post-incarceration employment and earnings.

         A different reason the key policy variables in the deterrence model may have small

effects on crime is that the underlying behavioral parameters of criminals do not imply a big

response. Criminals may be people with high discount rates and/or myopic preferences, in which

case the threat of future punishment should play a relatively small role.20

         Thus, while one interpretation of our deterrence results is that economists do not have the

right data to find these effects, an alternative, reasonable interpretation is that increases in the

standard deterrence variables have small or perverse effects over the relevant range.



4. Alternative Determinants of Crime

         Perhaps due to the difficulties in establishing links between policy variables and crime,

economists have considered a number of alternative explanations. In this section we examine


18
   For example, Iyengar (2007) finds that laws mandating arrest for reports of domestic violence increase
intimate homicides, plausibly because the laws reduce reporting of initial violent acts.
19
  In the U.S. in recent years, the number of executions per year has been in the less than 100 while the
number of homicides has been over 20,000.
20
   Lee and McCrary (2005) provide evidence consistent with this view. Lochner (2003) finds that
individual beliefs about the probability of arrest are substantially idiosyncratic and not responsive to local
neighborhood conditions. These beliefs do adjust in response to individual arrest experience, however, and
these beliefs do correlate with criminal behavior.



13
several that have received significant attention in recent years. Our assessment is that none

provides a convincing explanation for a substantial fraction of the variation in crime.

           In a provocative paper, Lott and Mustard (1997) (LM) argue that laws protecting the right

to carry a concealed gun (RTC laws) increase concealed carry and therefore reduce crime by

causing criminals to worry their intended targets might be armed. LM also suggest that RTC

laws cause criminals to substitute away from crimes against persons, like murder, rape, robbery,

and assault, to crimes “against” property, like burglary, larceny, and auto theft. The original LM

analysis appeared to find that RTC laws reduce violent crime and increase property crime,

consistent with the a priori considerations. Subsequent research, however, has raised questions

about the LM conclusions, while Lott has defended these conclusions.21

           We re-consider the LM hypothesis using long-run, aggregate data. Figure 10 shows the

fraction of the U.S. population living under RTC laws in each year since 1900. The fraction rose

steadily and substantially starting in the mid-1980s, yet violent crime does not fall until the

1990s. Despite an enormous change in the fraction of the population living in a state covered by

an RTC law, crime has neither sky-rocketed nor plummeted over the sample. The homicide rate,

in particular, shows no particular trend, and this is a crime category that is most plausibly affected

by RTC laws. Thus neither the view that RTC laws increase crime, nor the view that RTC laws

decrease crime, receives obvious support from the aggregate data.

           In contrast to the hypothesis that gun laws reduce crime, a different literature considers

whether guns themselves cause crime.22           We again confront this hypothesis with aggregate level

data. Figure 11 shows the stock of guns over time in conjunction with the violent crime rate.

Crime declines numerous times, including a major decline from 1990 onward, despite a large and

ever-increasing stock of guns. This makes it implausible that guns per se play a large role in

21
  For critiques of the LM analysis, see Black and Nagin (1998), Ayres and Donohue (2003a, 2003b), and
Helland and Tabarrok (2004). For responses, see Lott (1998, 2003) and Plassmann and Whitley (2003).
22
     For a recent summary and critique of this literature, see National Research Council (2005).



14
causing crime, although it does not rule out some role.

         A different hypothesis that has received enormous attention is that legalization of

abortion in the early 1970s caused a substantial fraction of the decline in crime during the 1990s

(Donohue and Levitt 2001). The logic is that access to legal abortion allows women to have

children in environments less likely to produce future criminals. Thus, cohorts born after

legalization should have a lower propensity to commit crime. Further, crime should have begun

falling about 15 years after legalization and continued falling as successive cohorts born after

legalization entered their high crime years. Donohue and Levitt (2001) provide evidence that

appears consistent with their hypothesis, stating in particular that “legalized abortion appears to

account for as much as 50 percent of the recent drop in crime” (p.379). Several authors, however,

have disputed the DL conclusion, while DL have responded with evidence that claims to validate

their original position.23

         We revisit this issue using aggregate and cross-country data. Figures 12a-c compare the

abortion rate in the U.S. lagged 20 years with the violent crime, property crime, and homicide

rates. The figures show visually what we know from history: no legal abortions occurred before

1970, and the legalization in 70-73 could not have affected crime rates before the late 1980s.

Nevertheless, major fluctuations in crime occurred before 1990. This does not mean abortion

legalization played no role in the declines in the past two decades, but the magnitude of legalized

abortion’s impact on crime is likely modest or confined to only the most recent period.24

         Figure 13 shows the homicide rates in a number of other countries that have legalized or

substantially liberalized abortion access. The evidence from these countries provides little


23
   See Joyce (2003, 2007), Lott and Whitley (2007), Foote and Goetz (2008), and Dills and Miron (2006),
for critiques, and Donohue and Levitt (2004, 2008) for responses.
24
   We note that Donohue and Levitt emphasize the role of abortion legalization in explaining the decline in
crime in the 1990s; they do not assert that abortion policy explains the longer time series. They do claim
that legalization explains as much as half of the decline in the 1990s. Our view is therefore that if several
other substantial declines in crime have occurred, during periods when abortion legalization could not have
played a role, this should introduce some caution about the quantitative importance during recent decades.



15
support for hypothesis that legalizing abortion reduces crime. While the data from some

countries are consistent with the DL hypothesis (e.g. Canada, France, Italy), several countries’

data show the opposite correlation (e.g. Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Poland). In other cases

crime was falling before legalization and does not decline any more quickly (20 years) after

legalization (e.g. Japan, Norway).

        A final hypothesis recently advanced to explain the variation in homicide rates is

exposure to lead through paint or gasoline. According to this hypothesis, this exposure generates

aggressive, anti-social behavior and violent tendencies later in life. Reyes (2007) and Nevin

(2007) argue that laws restricting the use of lead have reduced this exposure and contributed to

the recent decline in violent crime.

        Figure 14 plots the U.S. murder rate and a measure of environmental lead exposure

lagged 20 years for 1961 through 2005. During some parts of the sample, the correlation is

positive, consistent with the Reyes/Nevin hypothesis, but in other time periods, especially the late

1960s to the mid-1980s, the correlation is negative or zero. 25 Further, lead exposure falls to

virtually nil by the end of the sample, yet crime appears to have leveled off. This makes the case

for the lead hypothesis highly dependent upon the time period examined.

        Figure 15 shows alternative measurements of lead exposure based on motor vehicle or

motor fuel data. All proxies for lead increased dramatically from around 1910 through 1970. If

the lead hypothesis is correct, then crime should have displayed a measurable increase between

1925 and 1985. The U.S. murder rate, however, decreased between the 1930s and 1950s. The

murder rate does rise from the 1960s through the mid-1970s, but much unexplained variation

remains between the mid-1970s and mid-1980s.

        Our bottom line assessment on all these hypotheses is therefore as follows: each may

contain an element of truth, and nothing we have done proves they are false. Any claim that


25
  For 1961-1974, the correlation is -0.5762 (p-value = 0.0310). Between 1975 and 1992 the correlation is
0.2181 (p-value = 0.3846) and between 1993 and 2005 the correlation is 0.3331 (p-value = 0.2661).


16
these hypotheses explain large components of the fluctuations in crime, however, does not seem

consistent with the aggregate data.



5. Drug Prohibition

        The analysis above leaves a puzzle: why has crime fluctuated over the past several

decades, and why are crime rates so different across countries? One possibility is that reporting

conventions differ over time and place, and this undoubtedly plays a role for many crime

categories and perhaps even for the most consistently reported crime series, homicide. The

differences across time and space, however, seem too dramatic for this to be the main story.

        We believe instead that a different mechanism, in both a general and a specific form,

explains much of the variation in crime—especially violent crime—both over time and across

countries. This hypothesis is that violence is more common when and where mechanisms for

non-violent dispute resolution are not readily available. This view has two implications.

        At a general level, countries with weak systems for defining and enforcing property rights

are likely to see elevated violence because market participants cannot use courts or non-violent

adjudication methods backed up by the courts. This is consistent with the fact that many former

Soviet republics and some developing economies have high homicide rates. In these countries

the rules are not always clear, and the government system for enforcing the rules is not effective.

Countries with weak systems for defining and enforcing property rights are plausibly also ones in

which property crimes like theft would be common.

        At a specific level, the view that violence occurs when alternative dispute resolution

mechanisms are not available implies that if government forces a market underground,

participants substitute violence for other dispute-resolution mechanisms. The best example is

drug prohibition; by forcing drug markets underground, prohibition encourages the use of

violence to resolve disputes. In particular, greater enforcement of prohibition makes it harder for

suppliers and demanders to circumvent the prohibition legally (for example, by obtaining the


17
prohibited goods through medical channels). Enforcement also re-allocates property rights and

upsets reputations, so the ability of private parties to establish non-violent dispute resolution

diminishes with greater enforcement, while the number of disputes likely increases. Thus, more

enforcement means a larger black market and more scope for violent dispute resolution.26

           This hypothesis is related to, but partially distinct from, the “crack cocaine” hypothesis

advanced in Fryer, Heaton, Levitt and Murphy (2005) (FHLM). FHLM suggest that the major

upturn in violence in the 1980s and the subsequent decline in the 1990s resulted from crack’s

introduction and spread. When crack arrived in cities beginning in the early 1980s, the property

rights to distribution (e.g., street corners) were not assigned, and since crack dealers could not use

advertising or lawsuits to capture market share or property rights, they used violence instead.

Over time, according to FHLM, these property rights evolved (de facto), so violence subsided.

           We agree with this hypothesis as far as it goes, but we argue it is incomplete. First,

disputes arise in markets for many reasons beyond the initial assignment of property rights, and

these disputes would presumably continue as long as a market operates. Second, the FHLM

hypothesis does not explain fluctuations in violence outside the sample of the 1980s and early

1990s, or in other countries.

           The “drug enforcement-generates-violence” hypothesis, however, potentially explains

differences in crime across a broad range of time and space. Drug and alcohol prohibition

enforcement have varied substantially over the past 80 years, which might explain fluctuations in

U.S. violence over that time period. Similarly, prohibition enforcement differs across countries in

ways that potentially explain differences in violence.

           Drug enforcement might also explain variation in crime categories other than murder and

assault. An increase in drug prices from increased enforcement may cause income-generating

crime such as robbery, larceny, burglary, or auto theft. If increased police effort to enforce drug



26
     See Goldstein (1985), Goldstein et al. (1989) and Miron (2001) for further discussion.


18
prohibition comes at the expense of other activities, deterrence for non-drug crimes might decline

as enforcement increases. Further, increased incarceration of drug prisoners might overcrowd

prisons and cause early release of non-drug prisoners, implying additional non-drug crime.

Finally, incarceration of drug prisoners might cause people with generally low criminal proclivity

to become more criminogenic.27

           Figure 16 presents data on expenditure for enforcement of alcohol and drug prohibition

over time in the United States.28 These data are broadly consistent with the view that differences

in violence and perhaps other crime as well, result to a significant degree from differences in

enforcement of alcohol and drug prohibition. The variations over time correlate well with the

murder and homicide rates and, to a lesser degree, with the overall violent and property crime

rates.     The relatively high rate of homicide in the U.S. compared to Europe is consistent with the

fact that European countries enforce drug prohibition to a far lesser degree (Miron 2001). The

relatively high homicide rates in various drug source countries (Colombia, Mexico) is further

evidence consistent with the enforcement hypothesis.29




6. An Accounting Exercise

           The discussion so far has considered potential crime determinants one by one, and it has

relied on raw rather than “instrumented” correlations. In this section we address the first of these


27
  An effect might also operate in the other direction; locking up people who commit both drug crime and
non-drug crime might lower general crime (Kuziemko and Levitt 2004).
28
     The data are based on those in Miron (1999).
29
  Fajnzylber, Lederman, and Loayza (2002) use panel data for a large sample of developed and developing
countries to examine the determinants of violent crime. They find some evidence that being a drug
producer or having a high drug possession arrest rate is associated with more violence. Grogger and Willis
(2000) find that rise in urban crime rates in the 1980s is strongly correlated with the introduction of crack
cocaine. Some interpret this as suggesting crack has an independent, psycho-pharmacological effect in
causing crime, but the correlation is more consistent with the FHLM story (since crack remained but crime
declined). Goldstein et al (1989) provide micro evidence that crime during the crack epidemic in New
York City in 1988 resulted from disputes related to the drug trade.



19
issues by considering regressions of crime rates on a multitude of possible determinants. We

make no attempt to address the second issue because we are pessimistic that valid instruments

exist at this level of aggregation.30 Indeed, even finely tuned or clever instruments are often not

compelling in practice, either because they have low explanatory power or are not really

themselves exogenous.31 Further, calculating accurate standards error is often difficult in

standard panel regressions (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004).

           Table 2 shows regressions of various crime rates on measures of arrests, police,

incarceration, executions, RTC laws, abortion, lead, and drug and alcohol prohibition

enforcement.32 The regressions also control for several factors that we have not examined

explicitly: the age structure, economic conditions, and education. The existing literature

provides some confirmation that each of these plays a role, although this evidence is less

consistent than one might like.33 We consider two samples: a shorter one (1961-2004) that

includes all these variables, and a longer one that includes the variables available for the entire

sample of the dependent variable. This is 1932-2005 for all four series plus 1900-2005 for

homicide.



30
     Fisher and Nagin (1978) is the classic reference on the difficulty of identifying the crime function.
31
     On the problems created by weak instruments, see Staiger and Stock (1997).
32
   The regression includes a time trend, logged GNP per capita measured in 1992 dollars from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis, the fraction of the population aged 15 to 24 from the Census Bureau, and the
fraction of the population with at least a high school diploma from the Census Bureau. Most other factors
are lagged one year. These include real prohibition expenditures per capita (from the Budget of the United
States), the percent of the population covered by right to carry laws (from Grossman and Lee (forthcoming)
and the Census Bureau), the incarceration rate (from the Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics), the
arrest rate (from the FBI’s UCR from various years), police employees per capita (from the FBI’s UCR),
and the stock of handguns per capita (from Kleck, 1997). CDC abortions are included measured in
thousands and lagged 20 years. Reyes (2007) measure of lead exposure in kilotons per million population is
included lagged 20 years. In a few cases, a variable was missing data for a limited number of years. We
linearly interpolated values for these missing observations. In particular, we interpolated values for police
in 1936-1938, 1942, and 1952; for the arrest rates in 1950 and 1957; and the percent high school graduate
for 1956, 1957, 1959, 1962, and 1964. We estimate Newey-West standard errors allowing for first order
autocorrelation.
33
  On the role of the age structure, see Levitt (1999) and de Melo (2007). For recent evidence on the role of
education, see Lochner (2004).


20
        The results are consistent with the conclusions derived above from the univariate

correlations. The arrest rate enters significantly but with the wrong sign. Police per capita never

enters significantly and is typically the wrong sign. The execution rate never enters significantly

and is sometimes the wrong sign. Greater incarceration does correlate with lower crime in the

shorter sample but not in the longer samples, consistent with the graphical evidence above.

        RTC laws are consistently correlated with lower crime, but the correlation is about as

negative for property crime as for violent crime, which is not consistent with the LM hypothesis.

Guns are positively correlated with crime for all four crime series, but again the correlation is

particularly strong for property crime, which is counterintuitive. Abortion enters with the wrong

sign, sometimes significantly. Lead enters positively, consistent with the Reyes/Levin view, but

the effect is never significant. It is also largest in magnitude for property crime, which is the

opposite of the Reyes results and inconsistent with the view that lead poisoning promotes

aggression in particular.

        Enforcement of prohibition is associated with greater crime in all but one regression, and

most of the coefficients are significant. In particular, for overall violent crime and

murder/homicide in the longer samples, the coefficients are consistently positive and significant.

        As noted, one should not draw structural conclusions from these regressions, but they are

not consistent with the view that standard deterrence variables, as well as other factors recently

addressed in the economics of crime literature, are robust determinants of crime. At the same

time, they are consistent with the view that drug prohibition enforcement plays an important role,

especially for violent crime categories.




7. Conclusion

        The economic model of crime first posited in 1968 has spurred a large literature that tries

to estimate the empirically relevant determinants of crime. This paper has examined aggregate



21
data for first-order evidence on these determinants; these data, however, provide little

confirmation that these determinants have a significant impact on long-run trends or major

differences across countries. While this does not mean these theories are wrong, we believe that

any estimation finding a strong effect not seen in the aggregate data deserves careful scrutiny.

        We do find one theory that is consistent with the aggregate time series and cross-country

data on crime: the view that enforcement of drug prohibition encourages violent dispute

resolution.

        This perspective is also consistent with phenomena beyond those typically labeled

“crime.” Acts of terrorism, civil unrest, and civil war can be thought of as dispute resolution.

These activities are more likely when, on the one hand, more disputes exist because of policies

that provide the basis for such disputes (e.g., laws mandating one religion or language). These

activities are also more likely when, on the other hand, groups that disagree with government

policies have few non-violent mechanisms for expressing their grievances. Thus, an alternative

perspective to the deterrence model, at least for much violent crime, is one that examines how

policies affect both the amount and nature of dispute resolution.




22
References

Abrams, David S. (2006), “More Guns, More Time: Using Add-On Gun Laws to Estimate the
      Deterrent Effect of Incarceration on Crime,” manuscript, University of Chicago Law
      School.

Ayres, Ian and John J. Donohue, III (2003a), “Shooting Down the ‘More Guns, Less Crime’
        Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, 55, 1193-1312.

Ayres, Ian and John J. Donohue, III (2003b), “The Latest Misfires in Support of the ‘More Guns,
        Less Crime’ Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, 55, 1371-1398.

Becker, Gary S. (1968), “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political
        Economy, 76(2), 169-217.

Benson, Bruce L., Iljoong Kim, and David W. Rasmussen (1994), “Estimating Deterrence
       Effects: A Public Choice Perspective on the Economics of Crime Literature,” Southern
       Economic Journal, 61,

Black, Dan A. and Daniel S. Nagin (1998), “Do Right-to-Carry Laws Deter Violent Crime?”
        Journal of Legal Studies, XXVII, 209-219.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004), “How Much Should We
        Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1),
        249-275.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, available on-line at:
       http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook/

Cameron, Samuel (1988), “The Economics of Crime Deterrence: A Survey of Theory and
      Evidence,” Kyklos, 41(2), 301-323.

Center for Disease Control (various years), “Abortion Surveillance,” Morbidity and Mortality
        Weekly Report.

Center for Disease Control/National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System,
        Mortality data (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/datawh/statab/unpubd/mortabs/hist290a.htm).

Chen, M. Keith and Jesse M. Shapiro (2004), “Does Prison Harden Inmates? A Discontinuity-
       Based Approach,” manuscript, Harvard University [University of Chicago; National
       Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cowles Foundations Discussion Paper N.1450.].

Cronwell, Christopher and William N. Trumbell (1994), “Estimating the Economic Model of
      Crime with Panel Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(2), 360-366.

de Mello, Joao M.P. and Alexandre Schneider (2007), “Age Structure Explaining a Large Shift in
       Homicides: The Case of the State of Sao Paolo,” in Crime, Institutions, and Policies,
       Sebastian Edwards, Rafael Di Tella, and Ernesto Schargrodsky, eds., Chicago: University
       of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Dezhbakhsh, Hashem, Paul H. Rubin, and Joanna M. Shepherd (2003), “Does Capital



23
        Punishment Have a Deterrent Effect? New Evidence from Postmoratorium Panel Data,”
        American Law and Economics Review, 5(2), 344-376.

Dezhbakhsh, Hashem, and Shepherd, Joanna M. (2006), “The Deterrent Effect of Capital
      Punishment: Evidence from a ‘Judicial Experiment,’” Economic Inquiry, 44(3), 512-535.

Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2004), “Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using
        the Allocation of Police Forces after a Terrorist Attack,” The American Economic
        Review, 94(1), 115-133.

Dills, Angela K. and Jeffrey A. Miron (2006), “A Comment on Donohue and Levitt’s (2006)
        Reply to Foote and Goetz (2005),” manuscript, Department of Economics, Harvard
        University.

Donohue, John J., III and Steven D. Levitt (2001), “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI(2), 379-420.

Donohue, John J., III and Steven D. Levitt (2004), “Further Evidence that Legalized Abortion
      Lowered Crime: A Reply to Joyce,” Journal of Human Resources, 39(1), 29-49.

Donohue, John J., III and Steven D. Levitt (2008), “Measurement Error, Legalized Abortion, and
      the Decline in Crime: A Response to Foote and Goetz,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      forthcoming.

Donohue, John J., III, and Justin Wolfers (2005), “Uses and Abuses of Empirical Evidence in the
      Death Penalty Debate,” Stanford Law Review, 58, 791-846.

Draca, Mirko, Stephen Machin, and Robert Witt (2007), “Panic on the Streets of London: Police,
       Crime and the July 2005 Terror Attacks,” in Crime, Institutions, and Policies, Sebastian
       Edwards, Rafael Di Tella, and Ernesto Schargrodsky, eds., Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Eckberg, Douglas Lee (1995), “Estimates of Early Twentieth-Century U.S. Homicide Rates: an
       Econometric Forecasting Approach,” Demography, 32(1), 1-16.

Ehrlich, Isaac (1973), “Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical
        Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 81(3), 521-565.

Ehlrich, Isaac (1975), “The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: A Question of Life and
        Death,” American Economic Review, 65(3), 397-417.

Ehrlich, Isaac (1977), “Capital Punishment and Deterrence: Some Further Thoughts and
        Additional Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 85(4), 741-788.

Ehrlich, Isaac (1996), “Crime, Punishment, and the Market for Offenses,” Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 10(1), 43-67.

Espy, M. Watt, and John Ortiz Smykla (2004), Executions in the United States, 1608-2002: The
       Espy File [Computer file]. 4th ICPSR ed. Compiled by M. Watt Espy and John Ortiz
       Smykla, University of Alabama. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
       Political and Social Research [producer and distributor].



24
Fajinzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman, and Norman Loayza (2002), “What Causes Violent
        Crime?,” European Economic Review, 46, 1323-1357.

Federal Bureau of Investigation (various years), Crime in the United States. Recent issues
        available on-line at http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm

Fisher, Franklin M. and Daniel Nagin (1978), “On the Feasibility of Identifying the Crime
        Function in a Simultaneous Model of Crime Rates and Sanction Levels,” in Deterrence
        and Incapacitation: Report of the Panel on Research on Deterrent and Incapacitative
        Effects, Assembly of Behavioral and Social Sciences, ed. A. Blumstein et al., Washington,
        D.C.: National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences.

Foote, Christopher L. and Christopher F. Goetz (2008), “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on
        Crime: A Comment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Freeman, Richard B. (1999), “The Economics of Crime,” Handbook of Labor Economics, Orley
       Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Fryer, Roland G., Jr., Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy (2005),
        “Measuring the Impact of Crack Cocaine,” NBER WP #11318.

Goldstein, Paul J. (1985), “The Drugs/Violence Nexus: A Tripartite Conceptual Framework,”
        Journal of Drug Issues, Fall, 493-506.

Goldstein, Paul J., Henry H. Brownstein, Patrick J. Ryan, and Patricia A Bellucci (1989), “Crack
        and Homicide in New York City, 1988: A Conceptually Based Event Analysis,”
        Contemporary Drug Problems, Winter, 651-687.

Grogger, Jeff and Michael Willis (2000), “The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in
       Urban Crime Rates,” Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXVI(4), 519-529.

Grossman, Richard S. and Stephen A. Lee (forthcoming), “May Issue vs. Shall Issue: Explaining
      the Pattern of Concealed Carry Gun Laws, 1960-2001,” Contemporary Economic Policy.

Harris, A. R., Thomas, S. H., Fisher, G.A., Hirsch, D. J. (2002) “Murder and Medicine: The
        Lethality of Criminal Assault 1960-1999.” Homicide Studies 6(2):128-166.

Helland, Eric and Alexander Tabarrok (2004), “Using Placebo Laws to Test ‘More Guns, Less
       Crime’,” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1), 1-7.

Iyengar, Radha (2007), “Does the Certainty of Arrest Reduce Domestic Violence? Evidence form
        Mandatory and Recommended Arrest Laws,” NBER WP #13186.

Johnson, Rucker and Steven Raphael (2006), “How Much Crime Reduction Does the Marginal
       Prisoner Buy?,” manuscript, Goldman School of Public Policy, University of California,
       Berkeley.

Joyce, Ted (2003), “Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?,” Journal of Human Resources,
        38(1), 1-37.

Joyce, Ted (2007), “A Simple Test of Abortion and Crime,” Review of Economics and Statistics,



25
        forthcoming.

Katz, Lawrence, Steven D. Levitt, and Ellen Shustorovich (2003), “Prison Conditions, Capital
        Punishment, and Deterrence,” American Law and Economics Review, 5(2), 318-343.

Kessler, Daniel and Steven D. Levitt (1999), “Using Sentence Enhancements to Distinguish
        Between Deterrence and Incapacitation,” Journal of Law and Economics, 42(1, part 2),
        343-363.

Kleck, Gary (1997). Targeting Guns: Firearms and their Control. Hawthorne, N.Y.: Aldine de
        Gruyter..

Klick, Jonathan and Alexander Tabarrok (2005), “Using Terror Alert Levels to Estimate the
        Effect of Police on Crime,” Journal of Law and Economics, XLVIII(1), 267-280.

Kling, Jeffrey R. (2006), “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings,” NBER WP #12003.

Kuziemko, Ilyana and Steven D. Levitt (2004), “An Empirical Analysis of Imprisoning Drug
      Offenders,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, 2043-2066.

Lee, David S. and Justin McCrary (2005), “Crime, Punishment, and Myopia,” NBER WP
       #11491.

Levitt, Steven (1996), “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from
         Prison Overcrowding Litigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 319-352.

Levitt, Steven D. (1997), “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of
         Police on Crime,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 270-290.

Levitt, Steven D. (1999), “The Limited Role of Changing Age Structure in Explaining Aggregate
         Crime Rates,” Criminology, 37(3), 581-597.

Levitt, Steven D. (2004), “Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain
         the Decline and Six that Do Not,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 163-190.

Levitt, Steven D. (2006), “The Case of the Critics Who Missed the Point: A Reply to Webster et
         al.,” Crime and Public Policy, 5(3), 449-460.

Lochner, Lance (2003), “Individual Perceptions of the Criminal Justice System,” NBER Working
       Paper #9474.

Lochner, Lance (2004), “Education, Work and Crime: A Human Capital Approach,” NBER
       Working Paper #10478.

Lott, John R., Jr. (2003) The Bias Against Guns: Why Almost Everything You’ve Heard about
        Gun Control is Wrong. Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing, Inc.

Lott, John R., Jr. and David B. Mustard (1997), “Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry
        Concealed Handguns,” Journal of Legal Studies, XXVI, 1-68.

Lott, John R., Jr. (1998), “The Concealed-Handgun Debate,” Journal of Legal Studies, XXVII(1),
        221-243.


26
Lott, John R., Jr. and John Whitley (2007), “Abortion and Crime: Unwanted Children and Out-of-
        Wedlock Births,” Economic Inquiry, 45(2), 304-324.

McCrary, Justin (2002), “Using Electoral Cycles in Police hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police
      on Crime: Comment,” American Economic Review, 92(4), 1236-1243.

Miron, Jeffrey A. (1999), “Violence and the U.S. Prohibitions of Drugs and Alcohol,” American
        Law and Economics Review, 1-2, 78-114.

Miron, Jeffrey A. (2001), “Violence, Guns, and Drugs: A Cross-Country Analysis,” Journal of
        Law and Economics, XLIV(2, pt. 2), 615-634.

Mocan, H. Naci and R. Kaj Gittings (2003), “Getting Off Death Row: Commuted Sentences and
       the Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment,” Journal of Law and Economics, XLVI, 453-
       478.

Mocan, H. Naci and R. Kaj Gittings (2006), “The Impact of Incentives on Human Behavior: Can
       We Make it Disappear? The Case of the Death Penalty,” NBER WP #12631.

Moody, Carlisle and Thomas B. Marvell (1996), “Police Levels, Crime Rates, and Specification
       Problems,” Criminology, 24, 606-646.

Nagin, Daniel (1997), “Criminal Deterrence Research: A Review of the Evidence and a Research
       Agenda for the Outset of the Twenty-First Century,” manuscript, Carnegie-Mellon
       University.

National Research Council (2005), Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review, Washington, D.C.:
       The National Academies Press.

Nevin, Rick (2007) “Understanding international crime trends: the legacy of preschool lead
       exposure,” Environmental Research, 104, 315-336.

Office of Management and Budget (various years), Budget of the United States Government,
        Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2007), OECD Factbook 2007:
       Economic, Environmental and Social Statistics.

Passell, Peter and John B. Taylor (1977), “The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: Another
         View,” American Economic Review, 67(3), 445-451.

Plassmann, Florenz and John Whitley (2003), “Confirming ‘More Guns, Less Crime,’” Stanford
       Law Review, 55, 1313-1369.

Reyes, Jessica (2007), “Environmental Policy as Social Policy? The Impact of Childhood Lead
        Exposure on Crime,” NBER WP #13097.

Shepherd, Joanna M. (2004a), “Murders of Passion, Execution Delays, and the Deterrence of
       Capital Punishment,” Journal of Legal Studies, 33, 283-321.

Social Science Federation of Canada and Statistics Canada (1983) Historical Statistics of
        Canada, second edition, available from Statistics Canada at:


27
        http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/11-516-XIE/sectiona/toc.htm.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock (1997), “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
         Instruments,” Econometrica, 65(3), 557-586.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975) Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to
       1970, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Walmsley, Roy (2004), World Prison Population List (Fifth edition), Home Office Findings 234,
      available on-line at http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs2/r234.pdf

Webster, Cheryl Marie, Anthony N. Doob, and Franklin E. Zimring (2006), “Proposition 8 and
       the Crime Rate in California: The Case of the Disappearing Deterrent Effect,” Crime and
       Public Policy, 5(3), 417-448.

World Health Organization Mortality Database, available at:
       http://www.who.int/healthinfo/morttables/en/index.html




28
Table 1: Homicides per 100,000 population, Various Countries, around 2001

United States           7.06

OECD Countries
 Australia              1.57     Hungary            2.43      New Zealand                  1.43
 Austria               0.95      Iceland            0.70      Norway                       0.73
 Belgium               1.74      Ireland            1.04      Poland                       1.72
 Canada                 1.49     Italy              0.97      Portugal                     1.30
 Czech Republic        1.32      Japan              0.58      Slovakia                     2.06
 Denmark                1.26     Korea              1.59      Spain                        1.03
 Finland               2.97      Luxembourg         2.04      Sweden                       0.97
 France                 0.83     Mexico            10.10      Switzerland                  1.13
 Germany               0.68      Netherlands        1.26      UK                           0.40
 Greece                1.05
OECD Average           1.62

Other countries
  Albania                7.17    Croatia             1.96     Romania                       3.49
  Argentina              6.93    Cuba                5.38     Russian Federation           29.85
  Armenia                1.76    Estonia            15.17     Serbia and Montenegro         2.92
  Azerbaijan              2.59   Georgia             3.92     Singapore                     0.75
  Bahamas               20.79    Hong Kong           0.77     Slovenia                      0.80
  Barbados              10.47    Israel              5.64     Tajikistan                    2.47
  Belarus               11.23    Kazakhstan         15.52     Macedonia                     6.44
  Brazil                26.37    Kuwait              1.74     Thailand                      5.65
  Bulgaria               3.08    Kyrgyzstan          6.72     Trinidad and Tobago           8.52
  Cayman Islands        11.51    Latvia             12.31     Turkmenistan                  7.07
  Chile                  9.98    Lithuania          10.23     Ukraine                      12.65
  China                  1.98    Malta               2.29     Uruguay                       5.54
  Colombia              62.38    Mauritius           2.78     Uzbekistan                    3.13
  Costa Rica              6.05   Moldova            11.21     Venezuela                    26.23
Other Average            9.37
Source: WHO. Most figures constructed from WHO Mortality database. Data for Mauritius and
Denmark are for 2000; data for China for 1999; data for Belgium (1997). Some figures
constructed from Table 1 of WHOSIS these include Mexico, New Zealand (2000), Argentina,
Bahamas (2000), Barbados (2000), Brazil (2000),Cayman Islands (2000), Chile, Colombia (1999),
Costa Rica, Cuba, Thailand (2000), Trinidad and Tobago (1998), Turkmenistan (1998), Uruguay
(2000), Uzbekistan (2000), and Venezuela (2000). No data were available for a nearby year for
Turkey. Population for the Cayman Island's from the CIA World Factbook.




                                                                                             29
Table 2: Multivariate Regressions of U.S. Crime Rates on Potential Determinants
                                               (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)       (5)              (6)       (7)           (8)            (9)
                                                 Property Crime             Violent Crimes                  Murders                      Homicides
                                         1961-2004        1932-2005   1961-2004 1932-2005         1961-2004      1932-2005   1961-2004   1932-2005        1900-2005
trend                                        0.0317          0.0369      0.0546          0.0448      0.0276         0.0178     0.0248       0.0241          0.0316
                                             (1.49)          (9.64)      (1.81)          (6.90)      (0.94)         (3.05)      (0.77)      (4.06)          (3.32)
ln(GNP per capita)                           0.2625         -0.3541      0.8808         -0.4337      0.7434        -0.1787     0.8491      -0.6114         -1.1302
                                             (0.52)          (2.83)      (1.45)          (2.01)      (1.41)         (0.98)      (1.48)      (3.52)          (3.16)
% aged 15-24                                 1.2754          5.6154     -3.7314          4.3692     -5.7484         5.2577     -6.7234      7.9815          5.6972
                                             (0.51)          (6.07)      (1.44)          (2.85)      (2.09)         (4.76)      (2.30)      (6.75)          (3.86)
prohibition expenditures per capitat-1      3.2995          7.5471      -0.1931        21.6664       9.8620        15.6705      2.7608    14.6486          21.3226
                                             (0.81)          (1.55)      (0.04)          (2.56)      (2.14)         (2.62)      (0.48)      (2.27)          (3.51)
% covered by right to carryt-1              -0.3932         -1.7027     -0.2082         -2.4350     -0.4089        -1.6177     -0.4830     -1.8579         -2.2918
                                             (1.53)          (5.79)      (0.69)          (4.52)      (1.19)         (3.53)      (1.15)      (2.70)          (4.64)
incarceration ratet-1                       -0.0036         -0.0002     -0.0061         -0.0004     -0.0066        -0.0008     -0.0060      0.0001
                                             (2.22)          (0.31)      (3.80)          (0.42)      (3.89)         (0.92)      (3.10)      (0.13)
executions per capitat-1                  -441.6479        -43.7983   -263.9329        80.5164    -531.6189       158.1099   -376.5246    123.3264
                                             (1.79)          (0.66)      (0.71)          (0.67)      (1.76)         (1.46)      (1.02)      (1.16)
abortion (thousands)t-20                  0.000304                     0.000364                    0.000525                   0.000624    0.000022
                                             (1.69)                      (1.83)                      (2.76)                     (2.65)      (0.08)
arrest ratet-1                              0.0005                       0.0030                     0.0468                     0.0417
                                             (2.36)                      (3.15)                      (3.51)                     (2.68)
police per capitat-1                        -0.0168                      0.0304                      0.0127                    0.0835
                                             (0.10)                      (0.16)                      (0.07)                     (0.52)
guns per capitat-1                          0.0052                       0.0035                     0.0068                     0.0012
                                             (2.47)                      (1.54)                      (2.46)                     (0.27)
% high school graduate or more              -0.0309                     -0.0320                     -0.0448                    -0.0094
                                             (1.27)                      (1.33)                      (1.92)                     (0.34)
leadt-20                                    0.1091                       0.0707                     0.0503                     0.0526
                                             (1.10)                      (0.55)                      (0.43)                     (0.43)
Constant                                   -56.1936        -62.1396   -108.3916        -78.9484    -56.8818       -32.3040    -53.4762   -40.9172         -50.2325
                                             (1.37)          (9.45)      (1.92)          (7.02)      (1.06)         (3.20)      (0.91)    (3.95)           (3.28)
Observations                                   44              74          44              74          44             74          44        74              105
Newey-West t statistics in parentheses




                                                                                                                                                     30
                Figure 1: Violent and Property Crime Rates per 100,000, 1932-2006

  6000                                                                                                                     800

                                                                                                                           700
  5000
                                                                                                                           600
  4000
                                                                                                                           500

  3000                                                                                                                     400

                                                                                                                           300
  2000
                                                                                                                           200
  1000
                                                                                                                           100

     0                                                                                                                     0
         1932   1937   1942   1947    1952    1957   1962   1967   1972   1977      1982    1987   1992      1997   2002

                              Property Crime per 100,000                         Violent Crime per 100,000
Source: FBI Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) (various years).




31
                Figure 2 Vital Statistics Homicide and UCR Murder Rate per 100,000, 1900-2005

     12.0

     10.0

      8.0

      6.0

      4.0

      2.0

      0.0
        00

        06

        12

        18

        24

        30

        36

        42

        48

        54

        60

        66

        72

        78

        84

        90

        96

        02
      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      19

      20
                                               homicide rate            murder rate
Souce: Vital Statistics, Eckberg (1995), FBI UCR




32
            Figure 3: Cross-Country Homicides per 100,000, 1950-2005
 3.5


     3


 2.5


     2


 1.5


     1


 0.5


     0
         1950    1955      1960      1965      1970     1975      1980   1985        1990   1995   2000

                                         Canada            U.K.          Australia
Source: World Health Organization (WHO)




33
        Figure 4a: Crime Rates and Arrest Rates for Violent Crimes in Cities with over 2,500,
        1935-2006



      400                                                                                                 800
      300                                                                                                 600
      200                                                                                                 400
      100                                                                                                 200
        0                                                                                                 0
            1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                   City Violent Crime Arrest Rate            US Violent Crime Rate



                 Figure 4b: Crime Rates and Arrest Rates for Property Crimes in Cities with over
                                               2,500, 1935-2006




 1500                                                                                                 6000
 1000                                                                                                 4000
     500                                                                                              2000
       0                                                                                              0
           1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                City Property Crime Arrest Rate                 US Property Crime Rate



                Figure 4c: Crime Rates and Arrest Rates for Murder in Cities with over 2,500, 1935-
                                                      2006


 12
 10
  8
  6
  4
  2
  0
      1935 1940 1945 1950         1955 1960 1965       1970 1975 1980 1985        1990 1995 2000 2005
                     City Murder Arrest Rate                             US Murder Rate


Source: FBI UCR (various years)




34
                                 Figure 5: Police Employees per 1,000 and the Index I Crime Rate, 1934-2006
                          3.50                                                                                                     7000


                          3.00                                                                                                     6000


                          2.50                                                                                                     5000
     Police per 100,000




                                                                                                                                          Crime Rate
                          2.00                                                                                                     4000


                          1.50                                                                                                     3000


                          1.00                                                                                                     2000


                          0.50                                                                                                     1000


                          0.00                                                                                                     0
                                 1934 1939 1944 1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004
                                                                                 Year

                                               police employees per 1,000         police officers per 1,000   Index I Crime Rate

Sources: FBI UCR (various years).




35
                     Figure 6: Incarceration Rate per 100,000 and Index I Crime Rate, 1925-2006

                  7000                                                                                          600

                  6000                                                                                          500

                  5000




                                                                                                                      Incarceration Rate
                                                                                                                400
     Crime Rate




                  4000
                                                                                                                300
                  3000
                                                                                                                200
                  2000

                  1000                                                                                          100


                     0                                                                                          0
                         1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
                                                                       Year

                                                Index I Crime Rate               Incarceration Rate

Sources: Index I Crime Rate - FBI UCR (various years). Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics Online
(www.albany.edu/sourcebook/wk1/t628.wk1)




36
                                               Figure 7a: Homicides per Capita and Prisoners per capita, 2001
                        30
                                                                                                           Russian F.
                        25

                        20
 homicides per capita




                                                                                                 Kazakhstan
                        15
                                                                                 Estonia
                                                                                Latvia Ukraine
                                                                           Moldova                  Belarus
                        10                                             Lithuania
                                                                                    KyrgyzstanTurkmenistan
                                5                                                                                   USA
                                                    Albania
                                                   SerbiaBulgaria
                                                  Northern and    Romania
                                                                 Georgia
                                                             Ireland
                                                               Uzbekistan
                                                 Macedonia
                                                 Croatia
                                                  Finland
                                              Iceland  China Hungary
                                                         Armenia    Azerbaijan
                                                            Tajikistan
                                                             IsraelMauritius
                                                                    Poland
                                                             Slovakia
                                                         Scotland
                                                         Korea
                                                   Luxembourg
                                                       Australia
                                                       Canada
                                                     Kuwait
                                                 Norway
                                                 Denmark
                                                   Greece
                                                     Netherlands
                                                     Italy
                                                Slovenia
                                                  Sweden
                                                  Malta
                                                   Ireland
                                                    France    Czech
                                                            New
                                                          Spain
                                                     Austria
                                                  Montenegro
                                                          England
                                                     Germany
                                                  Switzerland  Hong
                                                          Portugal   Republic
                                                                  Zealand
                                                                      Kong
                                                                    and Wales        Singapore
                                0               Japan
                                        0        100        200         300         400       500    600         700       800
                                                                          prisoners per capita




                                            Figure 7b: OECD Homicides per Capita and Prisoners per Capita, 2001
                                    8

                                    7                                                                              United States

                                    6
         Homicides per Capita




                                    5

                                    4

                                    3            Finland
                                                            Hungary
                                    2              Luxembourg
                                                          KoreaPoland
                                                        Australia
                                                        Canada
                                                             New Zealand
                                                                   Czech Republic
                                                 Denmark  Portugal
                                                     Netherlands
                                                  Switzerland
                                    1             SwedenSpain
                                                   Ireland
                                                   Greece
                                                     Italy
                                                    Austria
                                                   France
                                                 NorwayIceland
                                                      Germany
                                                Japan United Kingdom
                                    0
                                        0         100        200         300        400        500   600         700        800
                                                                            Prisoners per Capita




37
                                  Figure 7c: OECD Homicides per Capita and Prisoners per Capita
                                                   excluding the U.S., 2001
                            3.5
                             3                      Finland
     Homicides per Capita



                            2.5                                               Hungary
                             2                           Luxembourg
                                                                                    Poland
                            1.5                                         Korea
                                                                    Australia
                                                                    Canada    New
                                                                        Portugal   Zealand Czech Republic
                                                    Denmark  Netherlands
                                                       Switzerland
                             1                          Greece
                                                        Ireland
                                                      Sweden Italy Spain
                                                          Austria
                                                        France
                                                    Norway        Iceland
                                                 Japan       Germany
                            0.5                                       United Kingdom
                             0
                                   0           50             100       150             200       250
                                                          Prisoners per Capita


Sources: International prisoners data from OECD Factbook 2007: Economic, Environmental and
Social Statistics and Walmsley (2004). Homicides from WHO.




38
                        Figure 8: Executions and Homicide Rate per 100,000, 1900-2005
                  250                                                                                                   12.0


                                                                                                                        10.0
                  200

                                                                                                                        8.0




                                                                                                                               Homicide Rate .
     .




                  150
     Executions




                                                                                                                        6.0

                  100
                                                                                                                        4.0

                   50
                                                                                                                        2.0


                   0                                                                                                    0.0
                    00

                    05

                    10

                    15

                    20

                    25

                    30

                    35

                    40

                    45

                    50
                    55

                    60

                    65

                    70

                    75

                    80

                    85

                    90

                    95

                    00

                    05
                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19
                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  19

                  20

                  20
                                       executions                     Year              homicides per 100,000

Source: Espy, M. Watt, and John Ortiz Smykla. EXECUTIONS IN THE UNITED STATES, 1608-2002: THE ESPY FILE [Computer file]. 4th
ICPSR ed. Compiled by M. Watt Espy and John Ortiz Smykla, University of Alabama. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research [producer and distributor], 2004. Vital Statistics Homicides adjusted by Eckberg (1995).




39
                                     Figure 9a: Canada: Homicides per 100,000 and Executions, 1926-2005

                     3.5                                                                                  25

                      3
                                                                                                          20
                     2.5




                                                                                                               Executions .
     Homicide Rate




                                                                                                          15
                      2

                     1.5
                                                                                                          10

                      1
                                                                                                          5
                     0.5

                      0                                                                                   0
                       1926 1931 1936 1941 1946 1951 1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001
                                                                    Year

                                                 homicides per 100,000               executions




40
                                                  Figure 9b: U.K. Homicides per Capita and Executions, 1950-2005
                            1.6                                                                                                    30

                            1.4
                                                                                                                                   25
                            1.2
     .




                                                                                                                                   20
     Homicides per capita




                                                                                                                                        .
                             1




                                                                                                                                        Executions
                            0.8                                                                                                    15

                            0.6
                                                                                                                                   10
                            0.4
                                                                                                                                   5
                            0.2

                             0                                                                                                     0
                                  1950   1955   1960    1965       1970    1975    1980     1985       1990   1995   2000   2005
                                                                               Year

                                                               homicides                  executions
Sources: Canadian executions: 1926-1960 from Historical Statistics of Canada; 1961-1962 from XXX geocities dot com then forward slash
richard.clark32@btinternet.com/canada.htm. Extended time series of homicides for Canada also from the Historical Statistics of Canada. UK
executions from http://www.murderfile.net




41
                                   Figure 10: Fraction of U.S. population covered by Shall-Issue Laws and Homicide Rate, 1900-2006
                             0.7                                                                                                     12.0

                             0.6
                                                                                                                                     10.0
  Fraction of Population .




                             0.5
                                                                                                                                     8.0




                                                                                                                                            Homicide Rate .
                             0.4
                                                                                                                                     6.0
                             0.3
                                                                                                                                     4.0
                             0.2

                             0.1                                                                                                     2.0


                              0                                                                                                      0.0
                               00

                               05

                               10

                               15

                               20

                               25

                               30

                               35

                               40

                               45

                               50

                               55

                               60

                               65

                               70

                               75

                               80

                               85

                               90

                               95

                               00

                               05
                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             19

                             20

                             20
                                                                                Year

                                                Fraction of Population Covered by Shall-Issue Laws      Homicide Rate
Source: Grossman and Lee (forthcoming) and annual state population estimates from the Census Bureau. Vital Statistics homicides adjusted by
Eckberg (1995).




42
                                                Figure 11: Stock of Handguns in the U.S. and the Violent Crime Rate, 1946-2006
                            400                                                                                                         800

                            350                                                                                                         700

                            300                                                                                                         600
     .
     Handguns per 100,000




                            250                                                                                                         500




                                                                                                                                              Crime Rate
                            200                                                                                                         400

                            150                                                                                                         300

                            100                                                                                                         200

                             50                                                                                                         100

                              0                                                                                                         0
                                  1946   1951   1956     1961    1966    1971    1976    1981    1986    1991     1996   2001    2006
                                                                                 Year

                                                       Stock Handguns per 1,000 pop          Violent Crime Rate

Sources: Gun data from Kleck, Gary (1997). Targeting Guns: Firearms and their Control. Hawthorne, N.Y.: Aldine de Gruyter. (updated with
additional data from author). FBI UCR (various years) for the Index Crime Rate




43
                       Figure 12a: U.S. Violent Crime Rate and Abortions lagged 20 years, 1932-2006
                    1600000                                                                                    800




                                                                                                                        .
                    1400000                                                                                    700




                                                                                                                        Violent Crime Rate
                    1200000                                                                                    600
     .


                    1000000                                                                                    500
     Abortions




                     800000                                                                                    400
                     600000                                                                                    300
                     400000                                                                                    200
                     200000                                                                                    100
                          0                                                                                    0
                              1932 1937 1942 1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002
                                                                  Year
                                     CDC abortions lagged 20 years               Violent Crime Rate

                     Figure 12b: U.S. Property Crime Rate and Abortions lagged 20 years, 1932-2006


                    1600000                                                                                6000




                                                                                                                     Property Crime Rate .
                    1400000                                                                                5000
                    1200000
                                                                                                           4000
        Abortions




                    1000000
                     800000                                                                                3000
                     600000                                                                                2000
                     400000
                     200000                                                                                1000
                          0                                                                                0
                              19321937 1942 1947 19521957 1962 19671972 1977 1982 19871992 1997 2002
                                                                Year
                                      CDC abortions lagged 20 years            Property Crime Rate


                      Figure 12c: U.S. Murder Rate and Abortions lagged 20 years, 1932-2006

                    1600000                                                                                      12
                    1400000                                                                                      10
                    1200000
                                                                                                                                             Murder Rate



                                                                                                                 8
        Abortions




                    1000000
                     800000                                                                                      6
                     600000                                                                                      4
                     400000
                     200000                                                                                      2
                          0                                                                                      0
                              1932 1937 1942 1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002
                                                                  Year
                                         CDC abortions lagged 20 years                Murder Rate
Source: CDC abortions figures from "Abortion Surveillance" (various years) published in various
issued of the MMWR.




44
     Figure 13: Homicide Rate Time Series and Legalization of Abortion




45
46
            0
                0.5
                        1
                                1.5
                                        2
                                            2.5
                                                  3
                                                                        0
                                                                            0.5
                                                                                    1
                                                                                        1.5
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                               3.5
                                                                                                                                 19




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                                                                                    56                                       3
     1951                                                        1951                                                            19
                                                                                                                                    60
     1955                                                        1955                                                            19
                                                                                                                                    64
     1959                                                        1959                                                            19
                                                                                                                                    68
     1963                                                        1963                                                            19
                                                                                                                                    72
     1967                                                        1967
                                                                                                                                 19
     1971                                                                                                                           76
                                                                 1971
                                                                                                                                 19
     1975                                                        1975                                                               80




                                                        Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                   Greece




                                                                                                                       Iceland
                                                                                                                                 19
     1979                                                        1979                                                               84
                                                                                                                                 19
     1983                                                        1983                                                               88
                                                                                                                                 19
     1987                                                        1987                                                               92
     1991                                                                                                                        19
                                                                 1991                                                               96
     1995                                                                                                                        20
                                                                 1995                                                               00
     1999                                                        1999

     19                                                         19




            0
                  0.5
                            1
                                      1.5
                                            2
                                                  2.5
                                                                        0
                                                                              0.5
                                                                                        1
                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                              2.5

                                                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                   3.5
                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                             4.5




       47                                                          50                                                              55
     19                                                         19                                                               19
       52                                                          55                                                              59
     19                                                                                                                          19
       57                                                       19                                                                 63
                                                                   60
     19                                                                                                                          19
       62                                                       19                                                                 67
                                                                   65                                                            19
     19                                                                                                                            71
       67                                                       19
                                                                   70                                                            19
     19                                                                                                                            75
       72                                                       19                                                               19
     19                                                            75                                                              79




                                                        Japan
       77                                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                                     Ireland




                                                                19
                                                                                                                                                                                   Hungary




     19                                                            80                                                              83
       82                                                       19                                                               19
                                                                   85                                                              87
     19
       87                                                                                                                        19
                                                                19                                                                 91
     19                                                            90                                                            19
       92                                                                                                                          95
                                                                19
     19                                                            95                                                            19
       97                                                                                                                          99
     20                                                                                                                          20
       02                                                                                                                          03
47
Note: Black vertical line indicates legalization of abortion; red vertical line indicates 20 years
later.
Sources: Homicide figures from WHO.




48
                                     Figure 14: Lead Lagged 20 years and Murders per 100,000, 1961-2006
                                  1.400                                                                                                      12.0


                                  1.200
                                                                                                                                             10.0
     .




                                  1.000
     ktons lead per million pop




                                                                                                                                                    murders per 100,000
                                                                                                                                             8.0

                                  0.800
                                                                                                                                             6.0
                                  0.600

                                                                                                                                             4.0
                                  0.400

                                                                                                                                             2.0
                                  0.200


                                  0.000                                                                                                      0.0
                                          1961   1966       1971       1976        1981          1986     1991     1996     2001      2006
                                                                                          Year
                                                    Gasoline Lead (ktons per million population) lagged 20 years      Murders per 100,000
Sources: Aggregate lead data from Reyes, Jessica “Environmental Policy as Social Policy? The impact of childhood lead exposure on Crime,”
NBER WP#13097, May 2007.




49
                                               Figure 15: Alternate Measures of Lead Exposure lagged 20 years, 1920-2006

                                               120000                                                                                         1.4
  thousands of vehicles/millions of gallons.




                                                                                                                                              1.2
                                               100000
                                                                                                                                                                              passenger car sales




                                                                                                                                                    ktons per million pop .
                                                                                                                                              1
                                                80000                                                                                                                         motor trucks and buses
                                                                                                                                                                              sales
                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                              total vehicle registrations
                                                60000
                                                                                                                                              0.6                             automobile registrations
                                                40000
                                                                                                                                              0.4                             motor-fuel usage total
                                                                                                                                                                              (mil gal)
                                                20000                                                                                                                         lead
                                                                                                                                              0.2

                                                     0                                                                                        0
                                                     20
                                                     25
                                                               30
                                                               35
                                                                         40
                                                                         45
                                                                                   50
                                                                                   55
                                                                                             60
                                                                                             65
                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                       75
                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                 85
                                                                                                                           90
                                                                                                                           95
                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                     05
                                                   19
                                                         19
                                                              19
                                                                   19
                                                                        19
                                                                             19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                       19
                                                                                            19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                19
                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                  Year

Sources: Automobile/fuel usage data are from the Historical Statistics of the United States.




50
                                     Figure 16: Expenditures on Prohibitions per capita and Homicides per 100,000, 1900-2006

                       12.0                                                                                                            0.06


                       10.0                                                                                                            0.05




                                                                                                                                              Expenditures per capita .
                        8.0                                                                                                            0.04
     Homicide Rate .




                        6.0                                                                                                            0.03


                        4.0                                                                                                            0.02


                        2.0                                                                                                            0.01


                        0.0                                                                                                            0
                              1900   1910      1920    1930     1940     1950     1960       1970     1980      1990     2000
                                                                              Year

                                            Homicide Rate                            per capita prohibition enforcement expenditures

Sources: Homicide Rate from FBI UCR (various years). Projected prohibition enforcement expenditures based on Miron (1999) with data from the
Budget of the United States Government (various years).




51
