                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE EFFECT OF CORPORATE TAXES ON INVESTMENT AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                           Simeon Djankov
                                             Tim Ganser
                                           Caralee McLiesh
                                            Rita Ramalho
                                            Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 13756
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13756


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




The authors are from the World Bank, Harvard University, World Bank, World Bank, and Harvard
University, respectively. We are grateful to Mihir Desai for considerable help at the early stages of
this project, to Fritz Foley and especially James Hines for help at the later stages, and to Joel Slemrod
for extensive comments. We are also grateful to Robert Barro, Bruce Bolnick, Raj Chetty, Laurence
Kotlikoff, Rafael La Porta, Gregory Mankiw, James Poterba, Lawrence Summers, and Matt Weinzierl
for helpful comments. Shleifer thanks the Kauffman Foundation for support of this research, and
Nicholas Coleman for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Simeon Djankov, Tim Ganser, Caralee McLiesh, Rita Ramalho, and Andrei Shleifer. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Corporate Taxes on Investment and Entrepreneurship
Simeon Djankov, Tim Ganser, Caralee McLiesh, Rita Ramalho, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 13756
January 2008, Revised April 2009
JEL No. G38,H25

                                               ABSTRACT

We present new data on effective corporate income tax rates in 85 countries in 2004. The data come
from a survey, conducted jointly with PricewaterhouseCoopers, of all taxes imposed on "the same"
standardized mid-size domestic firm. In a cross-section of countries, our estimates of the effective
corporate tax rate have a large adverse impact on aggregate investment, FDI, and entrepreneurial activity.
 For example, a 10 percent increase in the effective corporate tax rate reduces aggregate investment
to GDP ratio by 2 percentage points. Corporate tax rates are also negatively correlated with growth,
and positively correlated with the size of the informal economy. The results are robust to the inclusion
of controls for other tax rates, quality of tax administration, security of property rights, level of economic
development, regulation, inflation, and openness to trade.


Simeon Djankov                                        Rita Ramalho
The World Bank                                        The World Bank
1818 H Street                                         1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433                                  Washington, DC 20433
sdjankov@worldbank.org                                rramalho@worldbank.org

Tim Ganser                                            Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Harvard University                                    Harvard University
Littauer Center                                       Littauer Center M-9
1805 Cambridge Street                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   and NBER
tganser@fas.harvard.edu                               ashleifer@harvard.edu

Caralee McLiesh
The World Bank
1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433
cmcliesh@worldbank.org
           The effect of corporate taxes on investment and entrepreneurship 1



                                      Fourth Draft, March 2009



     Simeon Djankov, Tim Ganser, Caralee McLiesh, Rita Ramalho, Andrei Shleifer




                                                Abstract

         We present new data on effective corporate income tax rates in 85 countries in

2004. The data come from a survey, conducted jointly with PricewaterhouseCoopers, of

all taxes imposed on “the same” standardized mid-size domestic firm. In a cross-section

of countries, our estimates of the effective corporate tax rate have a large adverse impact

on aggregate investment, FDI, and entrepreneurial activity. Corporate tax rates are

correlated with investment in manufacturing but not services, as well as with the size of

the informal economy. The results are robust to the inclusion of many controls.




1
  The authors are from the World Bank, Harvard University, World Bank, World Bank, and Harvard
University, respectively. We are grateful to Mihir Desai for considerable help at the early stages of this
project, to Fritz Foley and especially James Hines for help at the later stages, and to Joel Slemrod for
extensive comments. We are grateful to Kevin Hassett and Aparna Mathur for sharing their data and
helping us to understand the differences between their and our tax variables. We are also grateful to Robert
Barro, Bruce Bolnick, Raj Chetty, Laurence Kotlikoff, Rafael La Porta, Gregory Mankiw, James Poterba,
Lawrence Summers, Matt Weinzierl, the editor, and three anonymous referees for helpful comments.
Shleifer thanks the Kauffman Foundation for support of this research, and Nicholas Coleman for excellent
research assistance.


                                                                                                          1
I. Introduction

        The effect of corporate taxes on investment and entrepreneurship is one of the

central questions in both public finance and development. This effect matters not only

for the evaluation and design of tax policy, but also for thinking about economic growth

(see Barro 1991, DeLong and Summers 1991, and Baumol, Litan, and Schramm 2007).

        Starting with Jorgenson (1963) and Hall and Jorgenson (1967), many public

finance economists have addressed this topic. A small selection of important studies

includes Summers (1981), Feldstein, Dicks-Mireaux and Poterba (1983), Auerbach

(1983), King and Fullerton (1984), Slemrod (1990), Auerbach and Hassett (1992), Hines

and Rice (1994), Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1996), Devereux, Griffith, and

Klemm (2002), and Desai, Foley, and Hines (2004b).         Auerbach (2002), Gordon and

Hines (2002), Hasset and Hubbard (2002), and Hines (2005) survey aspects of this

literature. Generally speaking, this research finds adverse effects of corporate income

taxes on investment, although studies offer different estimates of magnitudes.

        In this paper, we present new cross-country evidence on the effects of corporate

taxes on investment and entrepreneurship. The evidence comes from a newly constructed

data base of corporate income tax rates for 85 countries in 2004. We seek to contribute

to the literature in four ways.

        First, we use new data for a large cross-section of countries. Most cross-country

studies focus on either some or all of the OECD countries (see especially King and

Fullerton 1984 and Devereux et al. 2002, 2003), and hence do not provide much

information about the developing world. Hassett and Mathur (2006) use a large data set

of tax rates for 72 countries over 22 years to investigate the effects of taxes, including




                                                                                        2
corporate taxes, on wages rather than investment.                Their data come from the AEI

International Tax Database, which relies on summaries of tax rates produced by

accounting firms, including PricewaterhouseCoopers, as well as the International Bureau

of Fiscal Documentation 2 . Hassett and Mathur have time series data, which we do not.

On the other hand, we have more complete information on depreciation and the treatment

of labor taxes in the calculation of corporate tax rates 3 .

        Second, we construct a new database of corporate (and other) tax rates that are

comparable across countries.            Our data, assembled jointly by the World Bank,

PricewaterhouseCoopers, and Harvard University, come from a computation of all

relevant taxes applicable to the same standardized domestic enterprise, called

TaxpayerCo, operating in each country.             In many instances, these rates differ sharply

from statutory corporate tax rates.             The methodology of computing taxes for a

standardized enterprise may provide a different perspective on corporate tax rates than

just working with the statutes, although it is necessarily limited by the representativeness

of case facts. Furthermore, we do not collect information on taxes paid by individuals 4 .

        Third, in addition to standard data on aggregate investment and foreign direct

investment (FDI), we put together new data on entrepreneurship. These data come from

the relatively new World Bank Entrepreneurship Survey, which seeks to produce

comparable business registration data for a large number of countries. We use this

survey to construct measures of business density and formal entry.


2
  PwC has previously published tax rates for multiple countries, which have been used by Hassett and
Mathur and others. Their rates have also been published by the World Bank’s Doing Business reports.
These reports cover more countries than we do, but do not contain as detailed information as we use.
3
  The correlation between the rates we compute and the Hassett-Mathur rates is only about .5. We return
to their measures later in the paper.
4
  We check the robustness of our results to the inclusion of personal tax rates, but do not pursue an
integrated analysis of personal and corporate taxes (see, e.g., Auerbach 1979 and Graham 2003).


                                                                                                          3
       Fourth, as pointed out by Davis and Henrekson (2004), corporate income taxes

might differentially affect investment in different sectors, as well as influence the

allocation of resources between the formal and the informal sector.       To address these

issues, we use the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys to construct separate machinery

investment measures for manufacturing and services.             We also use the Global

Competitiveness Report estimates of the size of the informal sector. We then assess the

impact of corporate taxes on investment in manufacturing and services separately, as well

as on the size of the informal economy.

       Research in public finance has developed elaborate constructs of corporate tax

rates that are relevant to particular investment decisions. In some instances, statutory

rates measure the correct marginal tax rates. Hall and Jorgenson (1967) started an

extensive literature on how to compute the economically correct marginal tax rates using

assessments of profitability of future projects. But average rates might also be relevant

for investment decisions if firms are credit constrained or if they make discrete

investment choices (Devereux and Griffith 2003). In this paper, we remain agnostic as to

which is the correct rate, and present a variety of measures and their effect on investment.

       The principal corporate income tax measure we use is the effective tax rate that

TaxpayerCo pays if it complies with its country’s laws, defined as the actual corporate

income tax owed by the company relative to pre-tax profits.           Unlike much of the

literature, we can actually compute that rate under our case facts. Since TaxpayerCo is a

new company, we compute both the 1st year effective tax rate, and the 5-year tax rate

taking account of the present value of depreciation and other deductions. Our data reveal

a consistent and large adverse effect of corporate taxes on both investment and




                                                                                          4
entrepreneurship. A 10 percentage point increase in the 1st year effective corporate tax

rate reduces the aggregate investment to GDP ratio by about 2 percentage points (mean is

21%), and the official entry rate by 1.4 percentage points (mean is 8 %).

        To check the robustness of our results, we consider several additional potential

determinants of investment and entrepreneurship. These include other taxes, including

additional taxes imposed on the firm as well as the VAT and the personal income tax,

measures of the cost of tax compliance, estimates of tax evasion, security of property

rights, economic development, regulation, trade openness, inflation, and seignorage.

Some of these factors affect some measures of investment and entrepreneurship, but they

do not eliminate the large adverse effect of corporate taxes.

        Finally, our data enable us to ask, in a cross-country context, whether corporate

taxes encourage debt as opposed to equity finance (see Modigliani and Miller 1958,

Auerbach 1979, Miller 1977, Graham 1996, Mackie-Mason 1990, Desai, Foley, and

Hines 2004a). We find a large and significant positive association between the effective

corporate tax rate and the aggregate debt to equity ratio.

        The next section of the paper describes our data. Section 3 presents summary

statistics.   Section 4 presents the basic results on corporate taxation, investment, and

entrepreneurship. Section 5 concludes.



II. Data

        We collect our data from PricewaterhouseCoopers accountants and tax lawyers.

We describe a standardized business and ask them essentially to fill out its tax return, as

well as to provide supporting information and relevant tax schedules. Two rounds of this




                                                                                         5
exercise were conducted, in January 2005 and 2006. This paper uses data covering the

tax system effective in fiscal year 2004 5 .

        The sample consists of 85 countries covered by Djankov et al. (2002). It includes

27 high income, 19 upper-middle income, 21 lower-middle income, and 18 low income

countries. In addition to 22 rich OECD countries, 10 are in East Asia, 17 are in Eastern

Europe, 13 in Latin America, 6 in the Middle East, 14 in Africa, and 3 in South Asia.

        The data are constructed using a standardized case study of a business called

“TaxpayerCo.” TaxpayerCo is a taxable corporation operating in the most populous city

in the country. It is liable for taxes charged at the local, state/provincial, and national

levels. It is 100% domestically and privately owned and has 5 owners, none of whom is

a legal entity. TaxpayerCo performs general industrial/commercial activities: it produces

ceramic flower pots and sells them at retail. It does not engage in foreign trade or handle

products subject to a special tax regime. Ceramic pots were chosen because they are

made in every country, and face no industry-specific tax regime.

        TaxpayerCo employs 60 people: 4 managers, 8 assistants and 48 workers 6 . All

are nationals and were hired on January 1st. One of the managers is also an owner.

Employees of the same hierarchical status earn the same wage. All employees are

younger than 40 years and all workers are younger than 26 years. All employees worked

and earned the same salary the year before and none of the employees is disabled.

Managers became subject to social security taxes prior to 1993 while assistants and

workers only became subject to social security taxes after 1993.


5
  The survey presents respondents with financial statements for calendar year 2004. We always consider
the data for calendar year 2004, even when fiscal year is different from calendar year.
6
  Sixty employees is a somewhat arbitrary number for a mid-size firm, which was chosen because it is the
world-wide average employment in firms in the World Bank’s Enterprise Survey.


                                                                                                           6
       The company started operations on January 1st 2004. On the same date, it bought

all the assets. It owns one plot of land, a building, machinery, one truck, 10 computers

and other office equipment. The building is used for production, storage and offices. It

has 10,000 square feet of floor space on a 6,000 square foot land plot. The machinery is

classified as light machinery for tax purposes. The value of computer assets is equally

divided between hardware and software. Other office equipment is composed of standard

office tables, chairs, one copier, one fax machine, one scanner and 10 phones.

       We created TaxpayerCo’s financial statements as if TaxpayerCo were operating

in a tax free world. All variables in these financial statements were simple multiples of

the country’s income per capita in local currency (from the World Bank). The statements

as well as the case of the U.S. using the actual values are presented in Table 1. Panel A

describes the balance sheet, and Panel B the profit and loss statement. The multiples

were chosen to be typical for a mid-size manufacturing firm.           We specified that

TaxpayerCo keeps 50% of after-tax profits as retained earnings and distributes the other

50% as dividends. In a tax-free world, retained earnings are then half of pre-tax earnings

(equal to 79 times GNI per capita per Table 1), or 39.5 times GNI per capita. However,

the actual amount of retained earnings is a function of the tax system and, therefore, is

not included in the pre-tax Table 1.

       We sent these statements to the PricewaterhouseCoopers office in Washington,

D.C., from which they were distributed to the country offices.        One response was

prepared per country.      PwC respondents in each country calculated the taxes that

TaxpayerCo must pay in its first year of operation. Respondents also provided the full




                                                                                        7
tax schedules for corporate income taxes 7 , labor taxes 8 for which the statutory incidence

is on the employer, property tax, asset and capital tax, turnover tax, business license tax,

financial transactions tax, but also VAT and sales taxes. Respondents further described

all applicable deductions and exemptions. They informed us of the full depreciation

schedules for all assets, so we could compute depreciation allowances for TaxpayerCo.

Respondents also recorded the deductibility of advertising expenses, machinery repair

expenses, interest expenses, and of each applicable tax. Taxes at all levels of government

were included. Our analysis focuses on corporate income taxes, although we use the

additional tax and compliance cost data provided by PwC for robustness checks 9 .

         For each tax, PwC respondents described the frequency and the process for

payment, e.g., whether the tax could be paid electronically or required payment in person.

The time it took to prepare, file and pay TaxpayerCo’s taxes was also recorded.

         All data thus collected was subsequently discussed and checked with PwC

personnel in the sample countries 10 . The data was also double-checked with information

provided by the International Bureau for Fiscal Documentation. Discrepancies were then

addressed through further discussions with PwC country offices.




7
  All taxes levied on corporate income are considered corporate income taxes for the purposes of this
analysis, regardless of the name given to them.
8
  All charges levied on labor for which the statutory incidence is on the employer are considered labor
taxes, whether they are called labor taxes, social security contributions, or something else, whether they are
requited or unrequited, and whether they are paid to a public or private agency. We try to unbundle the
mandatory accident insurance contribution from the labor taxes. Wherever we can obtain information on
the contribution rate for the mandatory accident insurance contribution, we do not include it in the labor
taxes to be consistent across countries. Many countries only mandate that employers have an accident-at-
work insurance in place for their employees, but we could not find rates applicable to TaxpayerCo.
9
  We do not have enough information to integrate personal income and dividend taxes with corporate
income taxes. We do not consider minor taxes, such as waste collection and vehicle taxes. Taxes on real
estate transactions and capital gains taxes are not included because they do not come up in the case facts.
10
   Data for the Kyrgyz Republic and Mongolia were provided by PwC’s Kazakhstan office.


                                                                                                             8
Tax variables

         Table 2 describes the main variables. We start with the tax variables, and divide

their presentation into three groups: corporate income tax measures, other tax measures,

and tax administration measures. We compute three corporate income tax rate variables:

the first is the traditional statutory corporate income tax rate, while the remaining two are

based on the actual taxes owed by TaxpayerCo as computed from survey responses.

Appendix A presents the values of tax variables for all of the sample countries.

         1. Statutory corporate tax rate. This is the tax rate a company has to pay on

marginal income assuming that it is in the highest tax bracket, taking into account federal,

state, and local rates. We account for the deductibility of some taxes for the purposes of

calculating the tax base. In Switzerland and the U.S., for example, state income taxes are

deducted from the federal income tax base 11 .

         2. 1st year effective corporate tax rate. This is the actual first year corporate

income tax liability of TaxpayerCo relative to pre-tax earnings (79 times GNI per capita

per Table 1), taking account of all available deductions. Appendix B illustrates the exact

steps used in the calculation of this tax variable, and the next, for the case of Argentina.

         3.   5-year effective corporate tax rate.                This rate takes account of actual

depreciation schedules going 5 years forward.                 The numerator is the present value of

actual corporate tax liabilities of TaxpayerCo over 5 years, where only depreciation




11
   It is possible that TaxpayerCo faces a lower statutory tax rate than the maximum. We computed the
statutory corporate income tax rate applicable to TaxpayerCo. Worldwide, it is 1.5 percentage points lower
on average than the maximum rate, but across countries is very highly correlated with the highest statutory
rate. We have run our regressions using the statutory rate applicable to TaxpayerCo, and they are generally
weaker than those for other rates. A plausible interpretation of this is that it is the maximum statutory rate
that is relevant for aggregate investment, which is what we use as the dependent variable. We therefore do
not discuss the marginal rate applicable to TaxpayerCo any further in the paper.


                                                                                                            9
deductions change over time. The denominator is the present value of pre-tax earnings,

assumed to be the same every year. We discount both taxes and profits at 8 percent 12 .

         The effective corporate tax rate, both in its 1st year and 5-year versions, does not

fully reflect all the complexities that public finance theory suggests are relevant to

corporate decision-making (see, e.g., King and Fullerton 1984). Our measures have the

advantage of extreme simplicity and transparency, and may plausibly correspond to what

profit-maximizing entrepreneurs look at when they evaluate investments. We present the

basic ingredients of the computation of corporate taxes for a large number of countries, to

see whether, in their simplest form, they influence investment and entrepreneurship.

         In addition to the corporate taxes, we use four other tax rates in our analysis, the

first three of which come from our survey, and the last from other PwC data:

         4. Labor tax. This is the sum of all labor-related taxes payable by TaxpayerCo,

including payroll taxes, mandatory social security contributions, mandatory health

insurance, mandatory unemployment insurance, and any local contributions that depend

on the payroll or number of employees.                   The denominator is pre-tax earnings of

TaxpayerCo. Because our research design focuses on firms and not on their workers (or

shareholders), only taxes with statutory incidence on the employer are included. We use

the first year of operations. We do not have data on taxes paid by individuals, even if

they are withheld by TaxpayerCo.

         5. Other taxes. This is the sum of all taxes payable by TaxpayerCo in the first

year of operation that enter the profit and loss statement where the statutory incidence is

on the firm, other than corporate income and labor tax. It is the sum of all property taxes,

12
  In our main calculation of the 5-year effective tax rate, we do not take inflation into account. However,
in our robustness checks, we both control for inflation and consider the effect of non-indexation of
depreciation deductions, emphasized by Auerbach and Jorgenson (1980).


                                                                                                          10
business license taxes, financial transactions and asset and capital taxes payable by

TaxpayerCo. The denominator is pre-tax earnings of TaxpayerCo.

       6. VAT and Sales Tax. This is the sum of all consumption tax rates for taxes

payable or collected by TaxpayerCo, including the value added tax, the sales tax, the

turnover tax, and any related surtaxes. 82 of the 85 countries in our sample have VAT.

For countries that have multiple VAT rates, we use the rate applicable to TaxpayerCo,

i.e., to ceramic goods. Only 5 countries in our sample have a sales tax collected by

TaxpayerCo, and that is what we use.

       7. Personal Income Tax. This is the highest bracket marginal personal income

tax rate in 2004. We only include the tax at the national level. This tax rate, obtained

from PwC and other sources, is used as a control; it does not come from the main survey.

       In addition to these seven tax rates, we use two measures of the burden of tax

administration. The first is the number of tax payments made by TaxpayerCo in a fiscal

year. The tax payments indicator reflects the actual number of taxes paid, the method of

payment, the frequency of payment, and the number of agencies involved for

TaxpayerCo during the second year of operation. It covers payments made by the

company on consumption taxes, such as sales tax or value added tax (which are

traditionally withheld on behalf of the consumer), as well as profit, labor, property and

other tax payments. Where full electronic filing is allowed, the tax is counted as paid

once a year even if the payment is more frequent. In Hong Kong, TaxpayerCo pays 4

times per year; in Mali, it pays 60 times per year.

       The second measure of tax administration is the time to comply, recorded in hours

per year. The indicator measures the time to prepare, file and pay (or withhold) three




                                                                                      11
major types of taxes: the corporate income tax, value added or sales tax, and labor taxes,

including payroll taxes and social security contributions. Preparation time includes the

time to collect all information necessary to compute the tax payable.                        If separate

accounting books must be kept — or separate calculations must be made — for tax

purposes, the time associated with these activities is included. Filing time includes the

time to complete all necessary tax forms and make all necessary calculations. Payment

time is the hours needed to make the payment online or at the tax office. When taxes are

paid in person, the time includes delays while waiting. In Armenia, it takes TaxpayerCo

1120 hours per year to fulfill all tax requirements; in Ireland, it takes 76 hours per year.



Outcome Variables

        We primarily analyze the effect of corporate taxes on aggregate investment and

entrepreneurship. We use two measures of investment: gross fixed capital formation and

Foreign Direct Investment, both as a percentage of GDP, from the World Bank

Development Indicators.           Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is the net inflows of

investment to acquire a lasting management interest (10 percent or more of voting stock)

in an enterprise operating in an economy other than that of the investor. Although

foreign firms in some countries receive tax holidays, those tend to be relatively short

term, and the rates that apply to domestic firms are probably correlated with those on

foreign ones. We use the average of the two investment to GDP ratios over 2003-2005 13 .

We also check our findings on FDI using estimates from the OECD for a smaller sample.


13
   World Banks’ FDI numbers include considerable financial flows. Also, to the extent that these are net
inflows, they are lower for countries that make significant investments abroad, such as Ireland. Because
Ireland is a strong outlier in the data, we tried to replace the World Bank value for Ireland with OECD
value. Our results only became stronger.


                                                                                                       12
       We also examine two measures of entrepreneurship: the number of business

establishments and the rate of new business registration. These data are collected by the

World Bank’s Entrepreneurship Survey from national business registries whenever

possible, and other sources when not. For each country, the Survey measures the existing

stock and the registration rate of limited liability corporations (or their equivalent in other

legal systems). The total number of registered firms is available for more countries than

the entry rate. The Survey seeks to assure comparability across countries, as well as to

avoid shell corporations with no employees established for tax purposes. The data cover

the period from 2000 to 2004. The business density measure is defined as the number of

registered limited liability corporations per 100 members of the working-age population

as of 2004; business registration (“entry”) is defined as the average 2000-2004 ratio of

registrations over the number of limited liability corporations.

       The Entrepreneurship Survey does not cover sole proprietorships. For example,

there are 7.2 million registered businesses in the United States that employ at least one

worker. Another 15.1 million businesses do not employ a single worker other than the

owner. The latter are not included in the density measure.         In many sample countries,

such businesses are not required to register with the company registrar, making it

impossible to collect comparable data. They also usually face a different tax regime.

       The fact that we use aggregate measures of investment and entrepreneurship leads

to two conceptual problems. First, the rates we compute might be different from those

faced by firms undertaking the bulk of aggregate investment (which are surely older and

larger). Presumably, if the tax rates facing the largest firms were uncorrelated with those

we compute, we would find nothing in our data.




                                                                                            13
           Second, many entrepreneurial firms might be smaller than TaxpayerCo, and not

even organized as corporations, which would again point to a mismatch between our tax

and entrepreneurship variables (see for example Goolsbee 1998). We have gone back

and checked whether the tax measures we compute apply to other legal forms. Here we

summarize what we have found; see Appendix C for details. For 50 of the 85 countries

in the sample, we could confirm that the answer is yes. We have verified that our results

on the effects of taxes hold in this sub-sample, and are similar to those for the whole

sample. For another 19 countries, tax treatment of TaxpayerCo might differ depending

on its legal status. We do not have the ability to make tax computations for alternative

organizational forms for these 19 countries. Our results for these 19 countries only hold

for FDI, which is indeed concentrated in the corporate sector. Finally, for 16 countries,

we could not verify whether the same tax rules apply to other legal forms, but our basic

results actually hold for that sub-sample, especially for the effective tax rates. It is best to

interpret our evidence, then, as applying to investment and entrepreneurship by limited

liability companies.

           In addition to looking at the aggregate measures of investment and

entrepreneurship, we consider the effects of corporate taxes on investment in

manufacturing and services separately.                Corporate taxes might reduce investment in

manufacturing because most manufacturing firms operate in the formal sector, but shift

activity from the formal to the informal sector in services, where informality is more

prevalent (Davis and Henrekson 2004).                It turns out that sectoral investment data are

difficult to obtain for most countries 14 . Accordingly, we built up limited manufacturing



14
     There is some data from the United Nations, but we had difficulty making sense of the numbers.


                                                                                                      14
and services investment variables from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, which

survey formal firms with more than 5 employees in many countries.

           To construct the investment numbers (for manufacturing and services in each

country separately), we compute the median over all the firms with available data of

“Purchases of New Machinery and Equipment” as a percentage of the establishment’s

“Total Sales.” This is a much narrower measure than aggregate investment, since it does

not include other kinds of private investment or public investment. We use the median

because there are many outliers in these data15 . We have been able to construct these

sectoral investment numbers for 32 countries for manufacturing and 20 for services.

           In addition, we use an estimate of the size of the informal sector as a percentage

of the total economy from the Global Competitiveness Report for 2005-2006 and 2006-

2007. Several additional measures of the informal economy are available. A prominent

estimate is Schneider’s (2005), but it is computed using the ratio of tax collections to

GDP. One can also construct estimates using Enterprise Surveys (La Porta and Shleifer

2008), but these are based on tax evasion. The advantage of the Global Competitiveness

Report estimates is that they are not directly influenced by tax variables.

           Finally, we use the average debt to equity ratio from the IMF. The IMF uses

international financial databases of publicly traded companies to compute these averages

from these national samples of traded firms.



Control Variables

           We are principally interested in the effects of our four measures of corporate

income tax on investment and entrepreneurship. Since we estimate simple cross-country
15
     Similar results obtain if we eliminate 10% of highest and lowest observations, and take the mean.


                                                                                                         15
regressions, there is always a risk that the correlations we document are spurious.                        To

partially address this risk, we control for many factors in the regressions. These include

the additional tax and tax compliance variables described above, but also other variables.

We define those in Table 2, but summarize the economic issues here.

         First, since our sample is dominated by developing countries, tax enforcement

might be an important factor influencing investment.                      We use an estimate of the

magnitude of tax evasion from the 2001-2002 Global Competitiveness Report. This

measure is available for 64 countries, and is constructed independently of the tax rates.

Second, one might worry that the overall quality of institutions affects investment and

entrepreneurship. To address this concern, we control in the robustness checks for lagged

per capita income and the property rights index from the Heritage Foundation. Third,

recent research suggests that government regulations, such as those of entry (Djankov et

al. 2002) and labor markets (Botero et al. 2004), affect investment and

entrepreneurship 16 .      We check the robustness of our results to the inclusion of these

variables.        Fourth, theory predicts that inflation might influence investment, partly

through its impact on the cost of capital (Auerbach and Jorgenson 1980), and partly

because the government might use seignorage as a substitute for taxes. To get at these

issues, we control for the average 10-year inflation as a measure of long-run inflation, as

well as for seignorage as a share of GDP.               Finally, a country’s openness to trade may

influence investment and FDI; we check if it does.




16
  Examples of studies examining the effects of these measures of regulation on unemployment, labor
reallocation, investment, and firm entry include Alesina et al. 2005, Haltiwanger et al. 2006, Klapper et al.
2006, and Ciccone and Papaioannou 2006.


                                                                                                           16
III. A look at the data

       Table 3 presents the means of tax,              tax   administration,   investment,

entrepreneurship, and other outcome variables by income group.        Several interesting

findings emerge from these data. First, the world-wide average statutory corporate tax

rate is about 29%, and does not vary much across income groups. Nonetheless, there is

large variation among countries. The statutory rate is 12.5% for Ireland, 15% for Latvia,

Lithuania, and Lebanon, and over 40% for Pakistan, Japan, and the United States.

       Second, in our sample, the world average 1st year effective corporate tax rate, at

17.5%, is 11.5% lower than the average statutory tax rate.         Upper middle income

countries have lower 1st year effective rates than other groups, but otherwise variation

across income groups is small. Again, there is significant variation among countries. In

the first year of operation, TaxpayerCo faces zero effective corporate tax rate in Hong

Kong and Mongolia, but 31% in Pakistan and nearly 40% in Bolivia.

       Third, the 5-year effective corporate tax rate is only about 2 percentage points

higher than the first year one, on average, with similar patterns across income groups.

We no longer have zero rates, but Mongolia has 6.6% and Lithuania 7.3%.

       Our data are probably least appropriate for measuring the labor tax, since we have

data on taxes paid by firms but not by individuals. At the corporate level, the world-wide

labor tax is around 15%, with low income countries having somewhat lower rates. Other

taxes are under 2% on average, and do not vary significantly by income level. However,

they are as high as 17.6% in Bolivia and 14.5% in Argentina.

       The combined VAT and sales tax rate averages at 17%, and does not vary much

across income groups. It hits the low of zero in Hong Kong, and the high of 73.5% in




                                                                                       17
Brazil, although the second highest country is Hungary at 27.2%. The highest personal

income tax rate averages 33.5% in the world, and is sharply higher in the rich than in the

middle income countries. The rate is as high as 60% in Vietnam and 59% in Denmark,

and as low as zero in Uruguay and 11.5% in Switzerland.

        Our measures of tax administration for TaxpayerCo vary hugely by income level.

The average annual number of all corporate tax payments is 35, ranging from 16 for high

income countries to 48 for lower middle income countries, and 44 for poor countries.

Norway has 3 tax payments a year, Hong Kong has 4, but Romania has 89 and the

Ukraine 98. Some of the higher number of payments is related to the greater number of

“other taxes” and the absence of electronic payments.

        When it comes to the amount of time TaxpayerCo spends to comply with taxes,

the world-wide average is 406 hours per year, but it varies from 229 hours for rich

countries to 640 hours for lower middle income countries (and 425 hours for poor

countries).     TaxpayerCo in Singapore would spend 30 hours a year complying with

taxes; TaxpayerCo in Switzerland would spend 63. The corresponding numbers are 2185

hours in the Ukraine and 2600 hours in Brazil. Part of the burden of taxation in poorer

countries clearly comes from administration, and not just rates 17 .

        Over 2003-2005, the world-wide average investment to GDP ratio is about 21%,

and is not substantially different across income groups. There is significant variation

across countries: investment to GDP ratio is above 30% in Jamaica, Mongolia, Vietnam,

and of course China (40.8%). In contrast, investment to GDP ratio is the lowest, at below

15%, in Uruguay, Bolivia, Malawi, and the Kyrgyz Republic. Relatively little of that

17
  The high correlation of our measures of tax compliance with per capita income and legal origins (see
below) raises the concern that these measures reflect the quality of government more broadly rather than
merely the costs of tax compliance (see La Porta et al. 1999).


                                                                                                           18
investment is FDI, although several authors consider FDI numbers to be more accurate

than overall investment numbers. The World Bank ratio of Foreign Direct Investment to

GDP averages to 3.36% between 2003 and 2005, and appears to be somewhat higher for

the middle income than for the rich and the poor countries. Ireland, Denmark, and

Bolivia have the lowest FDI numbers, Lebanon, Singapore, and Hong Kong the highest.

       Business density relative to working-age population is a somewhat unusual

measure of entrepreneurship, but might be a reasonable one. The variable plausibly

declines from 7.63 incorporated businesses per 100 workers for high income countries to

1.08 for low income countries, which might reflect both fewer businesses at lower levels

of development, and presumably fewer official businesses.         The data point to .004

businesses per 100 workers in Burkina Faso, .04 in Senegal, but rising all the way to 15

in Malaysia and 16 in Sweden. The rise of business density with income is statistically

significant. This measure of entrepreneurship is available for 80 countries.

       Entry is defined as the number of newly registered limited liability corporations,

as a percentage of the stock of such firms, for 62 countries (averaged over 2000-2004).

The world-wide average entry rate is about 8.1%, and tends to be somewhat higher for

the rich and upper middle income countries (8.8% and 9.1%, respectively) than for the

lower middle income and poor countries (7.3% and 6.4%, respectively). The difference

in entry rates between the high and the low income countries is statistically significant.

The entry rates are as low as 2% in the Philippines, 3% in Peru, Sri Lanka, and Japan, and

as high as 15% in Kazakhstan and 16% in New Zealand.

       In addition to the aggregate measures of investment and entrepreneurship, we also

consider resource allocation within and between sectors, although in smaller samples.




                                                                                       19
For both manufacturing and services, median investment to sales ratios in the Enterprise

Survey sample are around 1%, much lower than the aggregate Investment to GDP ratios.

As we indicated, this is in part because we have sufficient data only to estimate

investment in new machinery, in part because public investment is excluded, and in part

because Enterprise Surveys may exclude the largest firms. Informal economies are huge,

reaching around 35 percent in lower middle and low income countries.         Finally, ratios of

debt to equity are much higher in the richer than in the poorer countries.

       Table 4 presents the same variables as Table 3, except it organizes them by legal

origin of national commercial laws rather than per capita income. In earlier work, legal

origin has been found to be a strong predictor of national regulatory strategies, with civil

law (particularly French civil law) countries providing less market-friendly regulation

than common law countries (see LaPorta et al. 2008 for an overview). Here we check

whether our variables vary significantly by legal origin.

       There is no evidence that statutory corporate tax rates vary by legal origin,

although there is some evidence that German legal origin countries (several of which are

in East Asia and Eastern Europe) have lower 1st year effective rates. There is also weak

evidence that, for the 5-year effective corporate tax rates, common law countries have 3%

higher rates, on average, than French civil law countries. The labor tax is higher in civil

law countries, although this might merely reflect the fact that these countries impose

labor taxes on firms rather than individuals.      French legal origin countries also have

higher levels of “other taxes,” although the difference is not statistically significant. Civil

law countries also have a higher rate of VAT and sales taxes than common law countries

do. Highest bracket personal income tax rates do not vary much by legal origin.




                                                                                            20
       For tax administration, French legal origin countries exhibit sharply higher

numbers of tax payments and time to comply with taxes than other legal traditions

(particularly common law). This result is consistent with the finding of higher formalism

and burden of government regulation in the French legal origin countries (Djankov et al.

2002, 2003, La Porta et al. 2008). There is not much difference in overall investment,

FDI, or entrepreneurship rates among legal origins. Finally, there is some evidence that

French civil law countries have larger informal economies than do common law ones.



IV. Results

       We first show the basic relations between corporate taxes and investment and

entrepreneurship, then check their robustness to controls and alternative specifications.



Basic Results

       Table 5 presents our main findings; Figures 1-4 illustrate them. We use the four

measures of investment and entrepreneurship as dependent variables, and the three

corporate tax rates as independent variables, for a total of 12 specifications. In Table 5,

we use no controls. The results for the statutory tax rate are similar to those for effective

rates in both the magnitude and the statistical significance (except for aggregate

investment). Also, the results for the 1st year and 5-year effective corporate income tax

rates are very similar (the two rates are correlated at .92). As we indicated in the

introduction, we do not believe that, given our data, we can distinguish the relative

importance of marginal and effective tax rates. For these reasons, we focus the results

using the 1st year effective tax rate even though the statutory rate is often significant.




                                                                                             21
        The results show no statistically significant effect of the statutory tax rate on

investment but a large effect of that rate on FDI. The effects of effective rates on both

investment and FDI are statistically significant and large. The estimates indicate that

raising the 1st year effective tax rate by 10 percentage points reduces the investment rate

by 2.2 percentage points (average investment rate is 21.5%) and FDI rate by 2.3

percentage points (average FDI rate is 3.36%) 18 . We have confirmed these FDI results

using data from the OECD (see Appendix D). We also collected information from the

Bureau of Economic Analysis on US direct investment in foreign countries. Our results

on the relationship between taxes and investment are not statistically significant for these

US numbers. However, the US FDI represents only 3% of the world’s total.

        The effects of taxes on entrepreneurship are large and statistically significant, and

show up with both the statutory and the effective tax rates. A 10 percentage point

increase in the 1st year effective corporate tax rate reduces business density by 1.9 firms

per 100 people (average is 5), and the average entry rate by 1.4 percentage points

(average is 8) 19 .

        Before checking the robustness of these findings, we report the results of running

these specifications with Hassett-Mathur (2006) data. The overlap of the two samples is

64 observations.       The correlation of our 1st year effective tax rate with their Effective

Average Tax Rate (EATR) is .56, and with their Effective Marginal Tax Rate (EMTR) is

.48. Both correlations are highly statistically significant.             Neither of the two Hassett-


18
   Our estimates are larger, but in the same ballpark, than those of Desai, Foley, and Hines (2004b), who
use a different methodology. We also examined the effects of taxation on the aggregate capital labor ratio,
updating Caselli and Feyrer (2007) to 2003 and 2004. We did not find any significant results. We
attempted to build up new estimates of the capital labor ratio from the World Bank’s Enterprise Survey, but
the Survey is much less suited for this than for constructing the investment measure.
19
   Some studies examine the effect of personal income taxes on entrepreneurial activity in the United
States, and find significant effects. See, e.g., Gentry and Hubbard (2000) and Cullen and Gordon (2007).


                                                                                                        22
Mathur rates significantly predicts aggregate investment. EMTR predicts FDI at the 10%

significance level, and the coefficient is roughly half of that on our 1st year effective tax

rate. The EATR (but not EMTR) is also a statistically significant predictor of the two

entrepreneurship variables, with coefficients roughly two thirds of ours. Hassett-Mathur

variables thus point in the same direction as ours, but not as strongly.



Robustness

           The magnitude of the effects documented in Table 5 is large, and raises obvious

questions about spuriousness. In this subsection, we add one at a time a variety of

variables to the specifications in Table 5 to verify whether the results are robust 20 .

           First, we add other tax variables.                 Labor taxes do not enter statistically

significantly, and do not affect the coefficients on corporate tax variables (results not

presented). As Table 5a shows, “other taxes” have large adverse effects on investment

and business density, especially in specifications with the statutory corporate tax rate.

The addition of these tax rates to the regressions marginally reduces but far from

eliminates the adverse effects of corporate income tax. One possible reason that “other

taxes” matter so much is that the countries that have trouble collecting ordinary taxes,

perhaps for reasons of administrative failure, impose them at higher rates.

           Table 5b adds VAT and sales tax to the regressions. The effect is negative but

relatively small, and only significant for the FDI regressions. Table 5c adds the highest

national rate of personal income tax. The variable does not have much of an effect on

corporate income tax coefficients. Personal income tax does not enter significantly into

the entrepreneurship regressions, enters negatively and significantly the FDI regressions
20
     One observation that looks very influential in Figures 1-4 is Bolivia. The results are robust to omitting it.


                                                                                                               23
(although with small coefficients), and surprisingly enters positively and significantly for

aggregate investment.     The last result is a fluke caused by China and Vietnam, which

have both very high personal tax rates and investment rates. Without them, there is no

relationship. Overall, our main findings on corporate income taxes are robust to the

inclusion of any of the additional tax rates we have considered.

       When we add the logarithm of time to comply with taxes, it only adversely affects

business density (not presented). This result does not survive the additional inclusion of

per capita income (both business density and time to comply with taxes are highly

correlated with the level of development). The logarithm of the number of tax payments

in Table 5d has no effect on investment and FDI, but it does negatively affect both

business density and entry (and the entry result survives the inclusion of per capita

income). These findings show that administrative burdens, or perhaps the low quality of

government more generally, deter formal entrepreneurship. The coefficients on corporate

income tax variables are not significantly affected by these additional controls.

       Investment and entrepreneurship might be affected by the quality of tax

enforcement or, conversely, tax evasion. The Global Competitiveness Report presents a

measure of Tax Evasion for 64 of the countries in our sample, with higher scores

corresponding to less evasion. As Table 5e shows, this measure is uncorrelated with

aggregate investment, but is a strong positive predictor of FDI, business density, and the

entry rate.    Better tax enforcement is thus associated with more investment and

entrepreneurship, although it is hard to say whether this survey measure captures tax

enforcement per se or better institutions generally. Importantly, the coefficients on our

tax variables fall only by a quarter, and remain statistically significant.




                                                                                         24
       Next, we control for institutions more generally. We do this in three ways: lagged

per capita income, which might also capture other sources of heterogeneity, security of

property rights, and regulation. Table 5f presents the results of including the log of 2003

per capita income, which has no effect on investment or FDI, but does have a large and

positive effect on entrepreneurship.      It does not, however, materially affect the

coefficients on corporate tax rates. Table 5g alternatively controls for the IEF Property

Rights Index. Greater perceived security of property rights has a positive effect on our

two measures of entrepreneurship, but none on our two measures of investment.          The

coefficients on corporate tax rates do not change much. Several other perception-based

measures of the quality of the legal system and property right protection yield similar

results. Controlling for property rights does not change our findings on corporate taxes.

       In Table 5h, we control for the number of procedures it takes to start a business

from the Doing Business update of Djankov et al. (2002). The impact of the 1st year

effective corporate tax rate on investment and entrepreneurship is not materially affected

by this control. Entry regulation does not affect investment, but has a significant adverse

effect on the entry rate and business density. An extra procedure reduces the entry rate

by roughly .32 percentage points, so going from barely regulated to most regulated

countries would reduce the entry rate by as much as 5 percentage points per year.

       In Table 5i, we control for a measure of another regulation that might deter

investment and entrepreneurship, namely the employment rigidity index from the Doing

Business update of Botero et al. (2004). Including the index has a minor influence on the

magnitude of tax effects.    At the same time, employment regulation adversely affects

FDI and to a lesser extent business density and entry.




                                                                                        25
       Another potentially important omitted variable is inflation. Inflation may have an

adverse effect on investment, in part because depreciation deductions are not indexed in

most countries (e.g., Auerbach and Jorgenson 1980, Summers 1981).                Moreover,

countries that have difficulty collecting taxes might finance their budgets, including

capital budgets, by printing money. In Table 5j we add the average 1995-2004 inflation

as a control. This long run measure of inflation has a mildly significant adverse effect on

investment and business density, and none on FDI or entry. The inflation variable does

not materially affect the coefficients on the measures of corporate income tax. In Table

5k, we try 2004 seignorage as a measure of government reliance on the printing press.

Seignorage has a huge positive effect on investment, probably because of the direct effect

of printing money on government capital expenditures. Seignorage has no effect on FDI

and large negative and statistically significant effects on the entrepreneurship variables.

The inclusion of seignorage does not impact the tax coefficients, however.

       As an additional check, we have computed the 5-year effective corporate tax rate

allowing TaxpayerCo’s revenues and costs, but not depreciation deductions, to rise with

inflation (regardless of whether the law allows for indexation of depreciation deductions).

This inflation-adjusted 5-year effective corporate tax rate was correlated with the not

inflation-adjusted one at 99%. The results using this rate were virtually identical, and so

are not reported. In this time of low world-wide inflation and this cross-country context,

then, we do not find evidence that inflation has much influence on investment.

       One might also argue that investment and entrepreneurship are influenced by a

country’s openness to trade. In Table 5l, we include the Economic Freedom of the World

freedom to trade internationally index in the regressions. The index does not matter for




                                                                                        26
investment, but has a positive effect on FDI, business density, and entry. The inclusion

of the index does not materially affect the large adverse effects of corporate taxes on FDI

and entry, although it does eliminate the significance of the effect on business density.

       So what is the bottom line of these robustness checks? Our empirical design can

never entirely eliminate the concern that some other factor correlated with the corporate

tax rate influences investment. However, having tried a range of possible theories, we

have not found what that factor might be. While several of the many factors we consider

affect investment and/or entrepreneurship, none substantially diminishes the influence of

the effective corporate tax rate. According to the evidence we have presented, corporate

taxes have a substantial adverse effect on investment and entrepreneurship.



Allocation

       In Table 6, we look at the influence of corporate taxes on different sectors, using

the World Bank Enterprise Survey’s estimates of new machinery investment in

manufacturing and services. The samples now are much smaller, especially for services.

The results show that 1st and 5-year Effective Tax Rates have an adverse effect on

investment in manufacturing but not in services. Even with a very small sample, the

coefficients for manufacturing are roughly half of what we obtained with aggregate data.

This evidence is consistent with Davis and Henrekson (2004), who suggest that the

relevant margin of distortion for services might be informality rather than reduction in

formal investment. Alternatively, we might just have bad data for investment in services.

       In the same spirit, we look at the effect of corporate taxes on the size of the

informal economy, since one of the principal ways in which taxes might deter official




                                                                                            27
entry or official investment is by keeping firms in the informal sector. A 10 percentage

point increase in the 1st year effective tax rate raises the informal economy as a share of

economic activity by nearly 2 percentage points. This result is robust to the inclusion of

the Global Competitiveness Report measure of tax evasion, suggesting that the tax rates,

rather than tax administration more generally, influence informality 21 . Consistent with

Johnson, Kaufmann, and Shleifer (1997), Davis and Henrekson (2004), Schneider (2005),

and La Porta and Shleifer (2008), taxes are an important reason firms stay unofficial.

         These results have important implications for our findings on the large adverse

effects of corporate income taxation on investment and entrepreneurship.                    The measures

of investment, FDI, business density, and entry we use all reflect formal economic

activity. Corporate taxes might affect these measures either by reducing total activity or

by keeping it informal. The finding on the informal economy suggests that at least part

of the adverse effect of taxes is to keep economic activity, such as investment and new

business formation, informal, rather than to eliminate activity altogether.

         The impact of corporate taxes is not just that on informality, however. Corporate

taxes have a large adverse effect on FDI, virtually all of which is formal. Also relevant is

the adverse effect on manufacturing investment in the Enterprise Survey, which deals

only with formal firms. It seems likely, then, that corporate income taxation diminishes

aggregate investment and entrepreneurship, and not only influences formality.

         In Table 7, we ask whether corporate taxes encourage debt finance, since interest

payments are universally tax-deductible. We control for the logarithm of 2003 GDP per

21
   The picture with other controls is more mixed. The coefficient on the 1st Year Effective Tax rate
remains significant if we control for the VAT and sales tax, the top marginal tax rate, the property rights
index, employment rigidity, and inflation. It loses significance (without falling much in magnitude) if we
control for the number of tax payments, the number of procedures to start a business, seignorage, and
freedom to trade internationally.


                                                                                                          28
capita, as well as the ratio of equity market capitalization to GDP. The control variables

suggest that firms in richer countries have higher debt to equity ratios, but that the size of

the equity market does not matter. Taxes, however, do. A 10 percentage point increase

in the 1st year effective corporate tax rate raises the debt to equity ratio by highly

statistically significant 40 percentage points (the mean is 111%). In our data, countries

with higher effective (as well as statutory) tax rates use sharply more debt. This result is

consistent with most theories of optimal capital structure (Graham 2003).



V. Conclusion

       This paper presents basic statistical relationships between corporate taxes,

investment, and entrepreneurship using new data on effective 1st year and 5-year

corporate income tax rates for 85 countries. We present cross-country evidence that

effective corporate tax rates have a large and significant adverse effect on corporate

investment and entrepreneurship. This effect is robust if we control for other tax rates,

including personal income taxes and the VAT and sales tax, for measures of

administrative burdens, tax compliance, property rights protection, regulations, economic

development, openness to foreign trade, seignorage, and inflation.          Higher effective

corporate income taxes are also associated with lower investment in manufacturing but

not in services, a larger unofficial economy, and greater reliance on debt as opposed to

equity finance. In these new data, corporate taxes matter a lot, and in ways consistent

with basic economic theory.




                                                                                           29
                                      References

Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, Giuseppe Nicoletti, and Fabio Schiantarelli. 2005.
       “Regulation and Investment,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
       3(4): 791-825.

Auerbach, Alan. 1979. “Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 93(3): 433-446.

Auerbach, Alan. 1983. “Corporate Taxation in the United States,” Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity 1983(2): 451-513.

Auerbach, Alan. 2002. “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy,” in Alan Auerbach and
      Martin Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. III, 1251-1292,
      Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Auerbach, Alan, and Kevin Hassett. 1992. “Tax Policy and Business Fixed Investment in
      the United States.” Journal of Public Economics 47(2): 141–170.

Auerbach, Alan, and Dale Jorgenson. 1980. “Inflation-Proof Depreciation of Assets,”
      Harvard Business Review, September/October: 113-118.

Barro, Robert. 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 106(2): 407-443.

Baumol, William, Robert Litan, and Carl Schramm. 2007. Good Capitalism, Bad
     Capitalism, and the Economics of Growth and Prosperity. New Haven, CT: Yale
     University Press.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
       Shleifer. 2004. “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       119(4): 1339-1382.

Caselli, Francesco, and James Feyrer. 2007. “The Marginal Product of Capital,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2): 535-568.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou. 2006. “Red tape and delayed entry.” C.E.P.R.
      Discussion Paper 5996.

Cullen, Julie Berry, and Roger Gordon. 2007. “Taxes and Entrepreneurial Risk-Taking:
       Theory and Evidence in the U.S.,” Journal of Public Economics 91(7-8): 1479-
       1505.

Cummins, Jason, Kevin Hassett, and Glenn Hubbard. 1996. “Tax Reforms and
     Investment: A Cross-Country Comparison,” Journal of Public Economics 62 (1-
     2): 237-273.



                                                                                       30
Davis, Steven, and Magnus Henrekson. 2004. “Tax Effects on Work Activity, Industry
       Mix, and Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from Rich-Country Comparisons,”
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10509.

DeLong, Bradford, and Lawrence Summers. 1991. “Equipment Investment and
     Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2): 445-502.

Desai, Mihir, Fritz Foley, and James Hines. 2004a. “A Multinational Perspective on
       Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets,” Journal of Finance 59(6):
       2451-2487.

Desai, Mihir, Fritz Foley, and James Hines. 2004b. “Foreign Direct Investment in a
       World of Multiple Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics 88(12): 2727-2744.

Devereux, Michael, and Rachel Griffith. 2003. “Evaluating Tax Policy for Location
      Decisions,” International Tax and Public Finance 10, 107-126.

Devereux, Michael, Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm. 2002. “Corporate Income
      Tax Reforms and International Tax Competition,” Economic Policy 17(35): 449-
      495.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
      2002. “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1): 1-37.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
      2003. “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2): 453-517.

Feldstein, Martin, Louis Dicks-Mireaux, and James Poterba. 1983. “The Effective Tax
       Rate and the Pretax Rate of Return,” Journal of Public Economics 21(2): 129-
       158.

Gentry, William, and Glenn Hubbard. 2000. “Tax Policy and Entrepreneurial Entry,”
       American Economic Review 90(2): 283-287.

Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. “Taxes, Organizational Form, and the Deadweight Loss of the
      Corporate Income Tax,” Journal of Public Economics 69(1): 143-152.

Gordon, Roger, and James Hines. 2002. “International Taxation,” in Alan Auerbach and
      Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. IV, 1935-1995,
      Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Graham, John. 1996. “Debt and the Marginal Tax Rate,” Journal of Financial Economics
      41(1): 41-73.

Graham, John. 2003. “Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review.” Review of Financial
      Studies 16 (4): 1075-1129.



                                                                                      31
Gwartney, James, Robert Lawson, and William Easterly. 2006. Economic Freedom of
      the World 2006 Annual Report. Vancouver, CA: The Fraser Institute.

Hall, Robert, and Dale Jorgenson. 1967. “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,”
       American Economic Review 57 (3): 391-414.

Haltiwanger, John, Stefano Scarpetta, and Helena Schweiger. 2006. “Assessing Job
       Flows Across Countries: The Role of Industry, Firm Size, and Regulations,” The
       World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4070, Washington: World Bank.

Hassett, Kevin, and Glenn Hubbard. 2002. “Tax Policy and Business Investment,” In
       Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol.
       III, 1293-1343. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Hassett, Kevin, and Aparna Mathur. 2006. “Taxes and Wages,” American Enterprise
       Institute Working Paper #128.

Heritage Foundation. 2004. 2004 Index of Economic Freedom, Washington, D.C.:
       Heritage Foundation and The Wall Street Journal.

Hines, James. 2005. “Corporate Taxation and International Competition,” Mimeo.

Hines, James, and Eric Rice. 1994. “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American
       Business,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(1): 149-182.

Johnson, Simon, Daniel Kaufmann, and Andrei Shleifer. 1997. “The Unofficial Economy
      in Transition,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1997(2): 159-239.

Jorgenson, Dale. 1963. “Capital Theory and Investment Behavior,” American Economic
       Review 53, 247-259.

King, Mervyn, and Don Fullerton, eds. 1984. The Taxation of Income from Capital,
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.

Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. 2006. “Entry Regulation as a Barrier
      to Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Financial Economics 82(3): 591-629.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997.
       “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52(3): 1131-1150.

La Porta, Rafel, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999.
       “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
       15(1): 222-279.




                                                                                     32
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “Economic
       Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature 46(2): 285-332.

La Porta, Rafael, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Unofficial Economy and Economic
       Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, forthcoming.

Mackie-Mason, Jeffrey, 1990. “Do Taxes Affect Corporate Financing Decisions?”
      Journal of Finance 45 (5): 1471-1493.

Miller, Merton. 1977. “Debt and Taxes,” Journal of Finance 32 (2): 261-275.

Miller, Merton, and Franco Modigliani. 1958. “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance
        and the Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review 48(3): 261-297.

Schneider, Friedrich. 2005. “Shadow Economies around the World: What Do We Really
       Know?” European Journal of Political Economy 21(3): 598-642.

Slemrod, Joel. 1990. “Tax Effects on Foreign Direct Investment in the United States:
      Evidence from a Cross-Country Comparison,” in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod
      (eds.) Taxation in the Global Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 79-
      117.

Summers, Lawrence. 1981. “Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory Approach,”
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1981(1): 67–127.

World Economic Forum. 2005. The Global Competitiveness Report 2005-2006. Geneva:
      Palgrave Macmillan.

World Economic Forum. 2006. The Global Competitiveness Report 2006-2007. Geneva:
      Palgrave Macmillan.




                                                                                    33
                               Table 1. Pre-tax financial statements

A - Information provided in the balance sheet

Assets
          Category                  Multiplication Factor        Values for the U.S.
Net Cash                                     20                               755,600
Inventory                                    35                             1,322,300
Accounts Receivable                          50                             1,889,000
Land                                         30                             1,133,400
Building                                     40                             1,511,200
Machinery                                    60                             2,266,800
Truck                                         5                               188,900
Computers                                     5                               188,900
Office Equipment                              5                               188,900
Total Assets                                 250                            9,445,000

Liabilities
          Category                  Multiplication Factor        Values for the U.S.
Short Term Debt                              55                             2,077,900
Accounts Payable – Trade                     50                             1,889,000
Long Term Debt                               43                             1,624,540
Equity
          Category                  Multiplication Factor        Values for the U.S.
Paid-in Capital                              102                            3,853,560
Total Liabilities and Equity                 250                            9,445,000


B - Information provided in the profit and loss statement

    Category Multiplication                Factor                Values for the U.S.
Sales                                       1050                          39,699,000
Cost of Goods Sold                           875                          33,057,500
Managers                         9 (= 2.25 per manager * 4)                   340,020
Assistants                       10 (= 1.25 per assistant * 8)                377,800
Workers                          48 (= 1.00 per worker * 48)                1,813,440
Administrative expenses                      10                               377,800
Advertising Expenses                        10.5                              396,690
Machinery Repair Expenses                     3                               113,340
Interest Expense                             5.5                              207,790
                                                       Table 2. Variable Definitions

Variable name                       Source                                    Definition
Tax Variables
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate (%)    Authors' calculations                     The tax rate for the highest bracket of all taxes on corporate income. We take
                                                                              into account the deductibility of any of these taxes from the tax based used for
                                                                              calculating pre-tax corporate income.
1st Year Effective Tax Rate (%)     Authors' calculations                     The tax rate obtained by dividing the total corporate tax TaxpayerCo pays by its
                                                                              pretax earnings.
5-year Effective Tax Rate (%)       Authors' calculations                     The tax rate obtained by dividing the present-discounted value of the total
                                                                              corporate tax TaxpayerCo pays over five years by the present-discounted value
                                                                              of the pretax earnings in these five years.
Labor Tax (%)                       Authors' calculations                     The sum of all labor-related taxes payable by TaxpayerCo, including payroll
                                                                              taxes, mandatory social security contributions, mandatory health insurance,
                                                                              mandatory unemployment insurance, worker's compensation insurance
                                                                              contributions, and any local contributions that are proportional to payroll or
                                                                              number of employees. It is expressed as a percentage of pretax earnings.

Other taxes (%)                     Authors' calculations                     The sum of all taxes payable TaxpayerCo other than corporate income taxes
                                                                              and labor taxes where the statutory incidence is on the firm. It is the sum of all
                                                                              property tax, business license tax, financial transactions tax, turnover tax, and
                                                                              asett and capital tax payable by TaxpayerCo. It is expressed as a percentage of
                                                                              pretax earnings.
VAT and Sales tax                   Authors' calculations                    The sum of all consumption tax rates payable or collected by TaxpayerCo,
                                                                             including value added tax rate, sales tax rate, and turnover tax rate, and and
                                                                             related surtaxes.
PIT top marginal rate               World Bank (World Development            The tax rate for the highest bracket of tax on personal income. Only taxes at the
                                    Indicators), PricewaterhouseCoopers, and national level are included.
                                    IBFD
Number of tax payments              World Bank (Doing Business data)         The tax payments indicator reflects the total number of taxes paid, the method
                                                                             of payment, the frequency of payment, and the number of agencies involved for
                                                                             this standardized case during the second year of operation. It includes
                                                                             payments made by the company on consumption taxes, such as sales tax or
                                                                             value added tax.
Time to comply with taxes (in hours) World Bank (Doing Business data)         Time is recorded in hours per year. The indicator measures the time to prepare,
                                                                              file and pay (or withhold) three major types of taxes: the corporate income tax,
                                                                              value added or sales tax, and labor taxes, including payroll taxes and social
                                                                              security contributions.
Outcome variables
Investment 2003-2005 as % of GDP World Bank (World Development                Gross fixed capital formation (formerly gross domestic fixed investment)
                                 Indicators)
FDI 2003-2005 as % of GDP        World Bank (World Development                Foreign direct investment is the net inflows of investment to acquire a lasting
                                 Indicators)                                  management interest (10 percent or more of voting stock) in an enterprise
                                                                              operating in an economy other than that of the investor.
FDI 2002-2004 as % of GDP           OECD (International Direct Investment     The Foreign direct investment measured by the OECD is the sum of the direct
                                    Statistics)                               investment by all countries made in each OECD member country receiving the
                                                                              investment (as published in the international direct investment statitics). The
                                                                              authors then measured this sum as a percentage of the total GDP in the
                                                                              receiving country. (Total GDP is published by the World Bank (World
                                                                              Development Indicators).) For each country, these percentages were averaged
                                                                              over the years 2002 to 2004.


Business density per 100 people     Authors' data, collected from business    The number of limited liability corporations (or their country-specific equivalent)
(2003/2004)                         registries                                legally registered divided by the working-age population (total population aged
                                                                              15 to 64). Only businesses with at least one employee that are not
                                                                              soleproprietorships are included. The variable is scaled to measure the number
                                                                              of businesses per 100 people in the working-age population.

Average entry rate 2000-2004 (%)    Authors' data, collected from business    The average number of limited liability corporations (or their country-specific
                                    registries                                equivalent) that were registered per year between 2000 and 2004. Only
                                                                              businesses with more than one employee that are not soleproprietorships are
                                                                              included. The variable is scaled to measure the number of businesses per 100
                                                                              people in the working-age population.
Median manufacturing sector firm    World Bank (Enterprise Surveys)           The country median of the firm level investments in new machinery and
investment                                                                    equipment as a percentage of total sales of the firm.
                                                        Table 2. Variable Definitions
Median service sector firm investmentWorld Bank (Enterprise Surveys)          The country median of the firm level investments in new machinery and
                                                                              equipment as a percentage of total sales of the firm.
Size of the informal sector 2005-2007 World Economic Forum (Global            Average of the size of the informal sector as a percentage of economic activity
                                      Competitiveness Report 2005-2006 and    in 2005-2006 and 2006-2007. Computed using the scale provided in sections
                                      2006-2007)                              6.17 (2005-2006) and 6.30 (2006-2007), which report measures on informal
                                                                              sector activity.

Debt to equity ratio                IMF (International Financial Statistics   Average of the country's companies' debt (book value) as a percentage of
                                    Database)                                 companies' equity (book value) weighted by the companies' market caps. This
                                                                              ratio is computed using the IMF's Corporate Vulnerability Utility which uses firm
                                                                              level data from Datastream and Worldscope.

Control variables
Tax evasion                         World Economic Forum (Global              Executives' assessment of how important tax evasion is in their country (the
                                    Competitiveness Report 2001/2002)         lower the measure the more rampant is tax evasion). Based on table 6.11.

GDP per capita 2003                 World Bank (World Development             GDP per cpaita is gross domestic product divided by midyear population. Data
                                    Indicators)                               are in constant U.S. dollars.
IEF Property Rights Index           The Heritage Foundation (Index of         The property rights index is an assessment of the ability of individuals to
                                    Economic Freedom)                         accumulate private property, secured by clear laws that are fully enforced by the
                                                                              state.
Procedures to start a business      World Bank (Doing Business data)          This variable includes all procedures that are officially required for an
                                    Updates of Djankovet al. (2002)           entrepreneur to start up and formally operate an industrial or commercial
                                                                              business.
Employment rigidity index           World Bank (Doing Business data)          The average of three subindices: a difficulty of hiring index, a rigidity of hours
                                    Updates of Botero et al. (2004)           index, and a difficulty of firing index.
Average inflation 1995-2004         World Bank (World Development             Inflation as measured by the annual growth rate of the GDP implicit deflator
                                    Indicators)                               shows the rate of price change in the economy as a whole, averaged over the
                                                                              period 1995-2004. The GDP implicit deflator is the ratio of GDP in current local
                                                                              currency to GDP in constant local currency. World Bank national accounts data
                                                                              and OECD national accounts data files.

Seignorage                          IMF (International Financial Statistics  Currency in circulation outside banks as percentage of total GDP. The data on
                                    Database)                                currency comes from IFS line 14 A.
EFW Freedom to Trade Inter-         The Fraser Institute (Economic Freedom ofThis index measures taxes on international trade, regulatory trade barriers, size
nationally Index                    the World)                               of the trade sector relative to expected, black-market exchange rates, and
                                                                             international capital market controls.
Other variables
Income group                        World Bank (World Development             Economies are divided according to 2004 GNI per capita, calculated using the
                                    Indicators)                               World Bank Atlas method. The groups are: low income, $905 or less; lower
                                                                              middle income, $906 - $3,595; upper middle income, $3,596 - $11,115; and
                                                                              high income, $11,116 or more.
Legal origin                        La Porta et al. (2008)                    A dummy variable that identifies the legal origin of the Company law or
                                                                              Commercial Code of each country. The four origins are English, French,
                                                                              German, and Nordic.
                                                                Table 3. Averages by income group
Corporate tax rates
                                                                               T-test                           T-test                            T-test
                                                            Upper middle High vs. Upper       Lower middle High vs. Lower                      High vs. Low
                                            High income       income      middle income         income      middle income       Low income        income        Grand Total
Obs.                                                  27               19                                21                               18                             85
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate                       30.63            24.48          2.897 a            28.69           0.982            31.86          -0.651          29.04
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                        18.08            13.53          2.421 b            18.99          -0.481            18.79          -0.366          17.44
5-year Effective Tax Rate                          20.49            15.39          3.003 a            20.16           0.185            21.57          -0.636          19.50

Other tax rates
                                                                               T-test                           T-test                            T-test
                                                            Upper middle High vs. Upper       Lower middle High vs. Lower                      High vs. Low
                                            High income       income      middle income         income      middle income       Low income        income        Grand Total   Obs.
Labor Tax                                          14.67            18.05          -1.122             16.73          -0.710            10.69            1.479         15.09    85
Other Taxes                                         1.02             2.18          -1.545              2.20          -1.525             1.69           -1.397          1.71    85
VAT and Sales tax                                  15.56            17.91          -1.234             18.46          -0.982            16.98           -0.753         17.10    85
PIT top marginal rate                              38.51            30.79           2.178 b           28.45           3.197 a          34.72            1.096         33.50    85

Tax administration
                                                                               T-test                           T-test                            T-test
                                                            Upper middle High vs. Upper       Lower middle High vs. Lower                      High vs. Low
                                            High income       income      middle income         income      middle income       Low income        income        Grand Total   Obs.
Number of tax payments                                16               38          -4.625 a              48          -6.926 a            44            -6.911 a          35    85
Time to comply with taxes (in hours)                 229             378           -2.275 b            640           -3.063 a           425            -2.526 b         406    85

Investment and entrepreneurship
                                                                              T-test                            T-test                             T-test
                                                            Upper middle High vs. Upper       Lower middle High vs. Lower                      High vs. Low
                                            High income       income      middle income         income      middle income       Low income        income        Grand Total   Obs.
Investment 2003-2005 as % of GDP                   21.14            20.55           0.526             22.49          -1.005            21.67           -0.394         21.46    85
FDI 2003-2005 as % of GDP                           3.03             3.94          -0.842              4.02          -0.927             2.45            0.527          3.36    84
Business density per 100 people (2003/04)           7.63             6.35           1.231              3.02           4.817 a           1.08            6.813 a        5.05    80
Average entry rate (%) 2000-2004                    8.79             9.09          -0.281              7.34           1.279             6.41            2.141 b        8.11    62

Other dependent variables
                                                                               T-test                           T-test                            T-test
                                                            Upper middle High vs. Upper       Lower middle High vs. Lower                      High vs. Low
                                            High income       income      middle income         income      middle income       Low income        income        Grand Total   Obs.
Size of the informal sector 2005-07                18.02            27.36          -5.062 a           32.26          -9.146 a          35.78          -11.742 a       27.29    83
Debt to equity ratio                              147.00            73.74           2.869 a           81.50           2.422 b          58.07            1.833 c      111.69    51
Manufacturing Investment (Median)                      --            1.75               --             0.82               --            0.97                --         1.11    31
Service Investment (Median)                            --            0.97               --             0.68               --            1.68                --         1.08    20
                                                            Table 4. Averages by legal origin
Corporate tax rates
                                                                                                                               T-test
Legal Origin                                English      French        German       Nordic        Grand Total            English vs. French
Obs.                                               24            40            17            4               85
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate                    30.99         29.35         25.62        28.75           29.04                          0.962
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                     18.68         18.76         12.72        16.80           17.44                         -0.045
5-year Effective Tax Rate                       22.45         19.69         14.85        19.66           19.50                          1.891 c

Other tax rates
                                                                                                                               T-test
Legal Origin                                English      French        German       Nordic        Grand Total     Obs.   English vs. French
Labor Tax                                         7.43        17.83         19.62        14.44           15.09     85                   -5.356 a
Other Taxes                                       1.55          2.25         0.95          0.55            1.71    85                   -0.881
VAT and Sales tax                                13.83        18.52         16.78        24.00           17.10     85                   -2.101 b
PIT top marginal rate                            33.54        32.74         35.44        32.55           33.50     85                    0.284

Tax administration
                                                                                                                               T-test
Legal Origin                                English      French        German       Nordic        Grand Total     Obs.   English vs. French
Number of tax payments                           30.92        41.63         30.18        11.25           34.88     85                   -1.809 c
Time to comply with taxes (in hours)           281.96        505.80        403.88       152.00          405.56     85                   -1.984 c

Investment and entrepreneurship
                                                                                                                               T-test
Legal Origin                                English      French        German       Nordic        Grand Total     Obs.   English vs. French
Investment 2003-2005 as % of GDP                 21.18        20.45         24.96        18.30           21.46     85                    0.681
FDI 2003-2005 as % of GDP                         3.15          3.50         3.91          1.03            3.36    84                   -0.417
Business density per 100 people (2003/04)         5.35          3.73         6.80          8.96           5.05     80                    1.597
Average entry rate (%) 2000-2004                  8.50          7.51         8.07          9.92            8.11    62                    0.952

Other dependent variables
                                                                                                                               T-test
Legal Origin                                English      French        German       Nordic        Grand Total     Obs.   English vs. French
Size of the informal sector 2005-07              26.70        30.54         23.55        15.83           27.29     83                   -1.666 c
Debt to equity ratio                             97.14       130.83        109.97        75.66          111.69     51                   -1.318
Manufacturing Investment (Median)                 0.82          0.98         3.86     --                   1.11    31                   -0.276
Service Investment (Median)                       1.77          0.71         0.68     --                   1.08    20                    1.182
                           Table 5. Taxes, Investment and Entrepreneurship

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
                                          Investment 2003-05                   FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate            -0.072                        -0.195***
                                       (0.076)                          (0.046)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                     -0.217***                        -0.226***
                                                  (0.074)                          (0.045)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                 -0.247***                          -0.223***
                                                            (0.080)                            (0.050)
Constant                             23.547*** 25.239*** 26.269***     9.044***   7.292***    7.718***
                                       (2.274)    (1.385)   (1.627)     (1.378)    (0.845)     (1.023)
Observations                                85         85        85          84         84          84
R-squared                                 0.01       0.09      0.10        0.18       0.23        0.20


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density         Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate          -0.153**                      -0.127**
                                       (0.063)                       (0.060)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                     -0.193***                    -0.137**
                                                  (0.062)                     (0.057)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                 -0.200***                      -0.136**
                                                            (0.068)                       (0.061)
Constant                              9.473*** 8.394*** 8.913*** 11.812*** 10.452*** 10.771***
                                       (1.864)    (1.162)   (1.375)  (1.790)  (1.048)     (1.262)
Observations                                80         80        80       62       62          62
R-squared                                 0.07       0.11      0.10     0.07     0.09        0.08

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                              Table 5a. Other Taxes

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.045                            -0.189***
                                   (0.074)                           (0.047)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.163**                            -0.231***
                                             (0.079)                             (0.049)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.192**                              -0.224***
                                                       (0.084)                               (0.054)
Other Taxes                        -0.479** -0.346*    -0.337*       -0.112      0.033       0.006
                                   (0.183)   (0.191)   (0.189)       (0.114)     (0.119)     (0.121)
Constant                           23.579*** 24.893*** 25.778***     9.049***    7.325***    7.727***
                                   (2.197)   (1.380)   (1.629)       (1.378)     (0.858)     (1.045)
Observations                       85        85        85            84          84          84
R-squared                          0.09      0.13      0.14          0.19        0.23        0.20


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.136**                          -0.123**
                                   (0.062)                           (0.060)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.160**                         -0.140**
                                              (0.067)                          (0.062)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.164**                            -0.138**
                                                       (0.072)                             (0.067)
Other Taxes                        -0.313** -0.210     -0.224        -0.083    0.021       0.010
                                   (0.155)    (0.165)  (0.164)       (0.136)   (0.146)     (0.147)
Constant                           9.487*** 8.178*** 8.592***        11.864*** 10.474*** 10.788***
                                   (1.829)    (1.170)  (1.388)       (1.802)   (1.068)     (1.296)
Observations                       80         80       80            62        62          62
R-squared                          0.12       0.13     0.12          0.08      0.09        0.08

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                         Table 5b. VAT and Sales Tax

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.071                            -0.196***
                                   (0.076)                           (0.045)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.224***                           -0.233***
                                             (0.074)                             (0.044)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.271***                             -0.247***
                                                       (0.080)                               (0.049)
VAT and Sales Tax                  -0.074    -0.087    -0.109*       -0.069*     -0.082**    -0.101***
                                   (0.062)   (0.060)   (0.060)       (0.038)     (0.036)     (0.037)
Constant                           24.802*** 26.868*** 28.612***     10.246***   8.828***    9.923***
                                   (2.500)   (1.767)   (2.052)       (1.508)     (1.068)     (1.272)
Observations                       85        85        85            84          84          84
R-squared                          0.03      0.12      0.14          0.21        0.28        0.26


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.153**                          -0.133**
                                   (0.063)                           (0.061)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.195***                        -0.140**
                                              (0.063)                          (0.057)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.208***                          -0.150**
                                                        (0.069)                            (0.063)
VAT and Sales Tax                  -0.010     -0.022    -0.037       -0.051    -0.044      -0.068
                                   (0.051)    (0.050)   (0.051)      (0.072)   (0.070)     (0.072)
Constant                           9.640*** 8.810*** 9.713***        12.859*** 11.232*** 12.182***
                                   (2.065)    (1.501)   (1.764)      (2.315)   (1.643)     (1.956)
Observations                       80         80        80           62        62          62
R-squared                          0.07       0.11      0.11         0.08      0.09        0.09

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                          Table 5c. Personal Income Tax Top Marginal Rate

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.119                            -0.175***
                                   (0.078)                           (0.048)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.235***                           -0.214***
                                             (0.073)                             (0.044)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.263***                             -0.213***
                                                       (0.078)                               (0.049)
PIT top marginal rate              0.102**   0.097**   0.095**       -0.044      -0.060**    -0.063**
                                   (0.047)   (0.043)   (0.043)       (0.029)     (0.026)     (0.027)
Constant                           21.512*** 22.301*** 23.400***     9.902***    9.087***    9.610***
                                   (2.415)   (1.882)   (2.055)       (1.480)     (1.148)     (1.286)
Observations                       85        85        85            84          84          84
R-squared                          0.06      0.15      0.15          0.20        0.28        0.25


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.165**                          -0.135**
                                   (0.066)                           (0.065)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.195***                        -0.137**
                                              (0.063)                          (0.058)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.200***                          -0.135**
                                                        (0.068)                            (0.062)
PIT top marginal rate              0.023      0.008     0.003        0.015     0.001       -0.006
                                   (0.041)    (0.038)   (0.038)      (0.042)   (0.039)     (0.039)
Constant                           9.035*** 8.162*** 8.810***        11.556*** 10.427*** 10.935***
                                   (2.028)    (1.634)   (1.802)      (1.940)   (1.549)     (1.718)
Observations                       80         80        80           62        62          62
R-squared                          0.07       0.11      0.10         0.07      0.09        0.08

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                  Table 5d. Log Number of Tax Payments

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                  (1)       (2)       (3)               (4)          (5)        (6)
                                    Investment 2003-05                           FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate  -0.076                                 -0.194***
                              (0.077)                                (0.047)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate             -0.226***                                -0.226***
                                        (0.075)                                  (0.046)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                         -0.250***                                  -0.222***
                                                  (0.080)                                    (0.050)
Log of number of tax payments 0.359     0.576     0.422              -0.093      0.023       -0.152
                              (0.688)   (0.660)   (0.652)            (0.418)     (0.406)     (0.412)
Constant                      22.480*** 23.496*** 24.938***          9.322***    7.222***    8.199***
                              (3.066)   (2.433)   (2.628)            (1.866)     (1.497)     (1.662)
Observations                  85        85        85                 84          84          84
R-squared                     0.01      0.10      0.11               0.18        0.23        0.20


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)  (2)       (3)               (4)       (5)         (6)
                                      Business Density                  Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate  -0.133**                               -0.119**
                              (0.058)                                (0.055)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate              -0.161***                             -0.121**
                                         (0.059)                               (0.052)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                          -0.184***                               -0.134**
                                                   (0.062)                                 (0.056)
Log of number of tax payments -2.005*** -1.896*** -2.015***          -1.652*** -1.594*** -1.680***
                              (0.525)    (0.522)   (0.514)           (0.471)   (0.470)     (0.467)
Constant                      15.495*** 14.072*** 15.237***          16.915*** 15.312*** 16.137***
                              (2.334)    (1.901)   (2.048)           (2.194)   (1.729)     (1.884)
Observations                  80         80        80                62        62          62
R-squared                     0.22       0.24      0.25              0.23      0.24        0.24

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                         Table 5e. Tax Evasion (GCR)

                                                            Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                        FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.075                              -0.159***
                                   (0.088)                             (0.054)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.167*                               -0.190***
                                             (0.090)                               (0.055)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.214**                                -0.182***
                                                       (0.095)                                 (0.059)
Tax evasion (GCR)                  0.204     0.102     0.251           0.674**     0.580*      0.748**
                                   (0.533)   (0.525)   (0.514)         (0.324)     (0.319)     (0.322)
Constant                           22.712*** 23.831*** 24.547***       5.529***    4.576***    4.221**
                                   (3.282)   (2.619)   (2.597)         (1.995)     (1.588)     (1.624)
Observations                       64        64        64              63          63          63
R-squared                          0.01      0.06      0.08            0.19        0.22        0.20


                                                       Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
                                              Business Density            Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.079                              -0.149**
                                   (0.066)                             (0.061)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                      -0.154**                        -0.131**
                                                 (0.067)                         (0.062)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                   -0.158**                         -0.157**
                                                            (0.072)                          (0.065)
Tax evasion (GCR)                  1.303***      1.203***   1.347***   0.859**   0.745*      0.866**
                                   (0.402)       (0.393)    (0.390)    (0.366)   (0.374)     (0.367)
Constant                           3.299         4.086**    3.948**    9.585*** 7.900*** 8.280***
                                   (2.464)       (1.969)    (1.968)    (2.221)   (1.847)     (1.844)
Observations                       63            63         63         51        51          51
R-squared                          0.17          0.22       0.22       0.19      0.17        0.19

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                    Table 5f. Log GDP per capita in 2003

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.073                            -0.195***
                                   (0.076)                           (0.046)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.222***                           -0.225***
                                             (0.074)                             (0.046)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.251***                             -0.223***
                                                       (0.080)                               (0.050)
Log GDP pc 2003                    -0.241    -0.293    -0.286        0.082       0.035       0.052
                                   (0.325)   (0.311)   (0.309)       (0.197)     (0.192)     (0.196)
Constant                           25.534*** 27.689*** 28.657***     8.372***    7.002***    7.282***
                                   (3.516)   (2.940)   (3.049)       (2.128)     (1.808)     (1.927)
Observations                       85        85        85            84          84          84
R-squared                          0.02      0.10      0.11          0.18        0.23        0.20


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.160***                         -0.136**
                                   (0.051)                           (0.058)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.180***                        -0.140**
                                              (0.051)                          (0.055)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.192***                          -0.138**
                                                        (0.055)                            (0.059)
Log GDP pc 2003                    1.476*** 1.428*** 1.444***        0.556**   0.528**     0.521**
                                   (0.230)    (0.227)   (0.227)      (0.247)   (0.245)     (0.247)
Constant                           -2.465     -3.575*   -3.102       7.451*** 6.091*** 6.456***
                                   (2.398)    (2.124)   (2.195)      (2.598)   (2.260)     (2.383)
Observations                       80         80        80           62        62          62
R-squared                          0.39       0.41      0.41         0.14      0.16        0.14

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                     Table 5g. IEF Property Rights Index

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.070                            -0.195***
                                   (0.077)                           (0.046)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.220***                           -0.226***
                                             (0.074)                             (0.046)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.245***                             -0.223***
                                                       (0.080)                               (0.050)
IEF Property Rights Index          -0.016    -0.019    -0.015        -0.001      -0.006      -0.001
                                   (0.022)   (0.021)   (0.021)       (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.013)
Constant                           24.338*** 26.338*** 27.041***     9.074***    7.638***    7.793***
                                   (2.541)   (1.843)   (1.973)       (1.540)     (1.129)     (1.243)
Observations                       85        85        85            84          84          84
R-squared                          0.02      0.10      0.11          0.18        0.23        0.20


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.169***                         -0.138**
                                   (0.054)                           (0.057)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.180***                        -0.133**
                                              (0.055)                          (0.055)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.212***                          -0.140**
                                                        (0.058)                            (0.059)
IEF Property Rights Index          0.085*** 0.080*** 0.085***        0.041**   0.037**     0.039**
                                   (0.016)    (0.016)   (0.016)      (0.017)   (0.016)     (0.016)
Constant                           5.244*** 3.772*** 4.487***        9.769*** 8.262*** 8.590***
                                   (1.801)    (1.384)   (1.447)      (1.900)   (1.407)     (1.520)
Observations                       80         80        80           62        62          62
R-squared                          0.32       0.32      0.34         0.16      0.16        0.16

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                 Table 5h. Procedures to start a business

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.066                            -0.197***
                                   (0.079)                           (0.047)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.222***                           -0.225***
                                             (0.077)                             (0.047)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.246***                             -0.221***
                                                       (0.081)                               (0.050)
Procedures to start a business     0.023     0.089     0.051         -0.090      -0.055      -0.099
                                   (0.151)   (0.146)   (0.144)       (0.090)     (0.089)     (0.089)
Constant                           23.202*** 24.534*** 25.815***     9.882***    7.757***    8.562***
                                   (2.557)   (1.770)   (2.010)       (1.533)     (1.075)     (1.254)
Observations                       84        84        84            83          83          83
R-squared                          0.01      0.09      0.10          0.20        0.24        0.21


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.126**                          -0.113*
                                   (0.060)                           (0.057)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.153**                         -0.110*
                                              (0.060)                          (0.055)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.177***                           -0.121**
                                                       (0.063)                             (0.058)
Procedures to start a business     -0.428*** -0.401*** -0.428***     -0.321*** -0.297** -0.319***
                                   (0.117)    (0.116)  (0.114)       (0.114)   (0.116)     (0.114)
Constant                           12.562*** 11.333*** 12.355***     14.107*** 12.494*** 13.154***
                                   (1.954)    (1.394)  (1.578)       (1.882)   (1.281)     (1.469)
Observations                       79         79       79            62        62          62
R-squared                          0.21       0.23     0.24          0.18      0.18        0.18

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                    Table 5i. Employment rigidity index

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.072                            -0.194***
                                   (0.076)                           (0.045)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.216***                           -0.223***
                                             (0.074)                             (0.044)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.261***                             -0.244***
                                                       (0.080)                               (0.048)
Rigidity of employment             -0.022    -0.020    -0.035        -0.041**    -0.040**    -0.054***
                                   (0.030)   (0.029)   (0.029)       (0.018)     (0.017)     (0.017)
Constant                           24.356*** 25.980*** 27.846***     10.501***   8.730***    10.105***
                                   (2.529)   (1.733)   (2.065)       (1.485)     (1.027)     (1.237)
Observations                       85        85        85            84          84          84
R-squared                          0.02      0.10      0.12          0.23        0.28        0.28


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.153**                          -0.136**
                                   (0.062)                           (0.058)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.191***                        -0.137**
                                              (0.062)                          (0.055)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.220***                          -0.162***
                                                        (0.067)                            (0.060)
Rigidity of employment             -0.039     -0.038    -0.051**     -0.046*   -0.042*     -0.053**
                                   (0.025)    (0.024)   (0.024)      (0.023)   (0.023)     (0.023)
Constant                           10.923*** 9.750*** 11.167***      13.712*** 11.933*** 13.141***
                                   (2.058)    (1.443)   (1.724)      (1.996)   (1.315)     (1.603)
Observations                       80         80        80           62        62          62
R-squared                          0.10       0.14      0.15         0.13      0.14        0.15

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                   Table 5j. Average Inflation 1995-2004

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.087                            -0.192***
                                   (0.077)                           (0.047)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.241***                           -0.223***
                                             (0.075)                             (0.046)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.275***                             -0.220***
                                                       (0.080)                               (0.051)
Average inflation (1995-2004)      -0.036    -0.046*   -0.047*       0.009       0.004       0.005
                                   (0.026)   (0.025)   (0.024)       (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.016)
Constant                           24.492*** 26.280*** 27.459***     8.830***    7.199***    7.594***
                                   (2.360)   (1.476)   (1.715)       (1.432)     (0.914)     (1.096)
Observations                       84        84        84            84          84          84
R-squared                          0.03      0.13      0.14          0.18        0.23        0.20


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.169***                         -0.131**
                                   (0.063)                           (0.061)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.215***                        -0.142**
                                              (0.062)                          (0.058)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.230***                          -0.141**
                                                        (0.068)                            (0.063)
Average inflation (1995-2004)      -0.044*    -0.048*   -0.052**     -0.007    -0.008      -0.007
                                   (0.025)    (0.025)   (0.025)      (0.019)   (0.019)     (0.019)
Constant                           10.397*** 9.282*** 10.044***      12.019*** 10.645*** 10.948***
                                   (1.948)    (1.238)   (1.471)      (1.896)   (1.143)     (1.357)
Observations                       79         79        79           62        62          62
R-squared                          0.10       0.15      0.15         0.07      0.09        0.08

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                           Table 5k. Seignorage 2004

                                                           Panel A - Investment
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                      FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.081                            -0.170***
                                   (0.077)                           (0.047)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.194**                            -0.206***
                                             (0.075)                             (0.046)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.232***                             -0.196***
                                                       (0.081)                               (0.051)
Seignorage 2004                    0.364**   0.302**   0.300**       0.112       0.055       0.069
                                   (0.147)   (0.144)   (0.142)       (0.089)     (0.087)     (0.090)
Constant                           21.502*** 22.918*** 24.085***     7.553***    6.551***    6.708***
                                   (2.547)   (1.819)   (2.025)       (1.550)     (1.102)     (1.274)
Observations                       81        81        81            81          81          81
R-squared                          0.09      0.15      0.16          0.16        0.23        0.18


                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
                                           Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.153**                          -0.126**
                                   (0.065)                           (0.057)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                   -0.218***                        -0.171***
                                              (0.063)                          (0.054)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.220***                          -0.166***
                                                        (0.069)                            (0.058)
Seignorage 2004                    -0.202     -0.263** -0.252**      -0.306** -0.378*** -0.361***
                                   (0.123)    (0.121)   (0.122)      (0.119)   (0.116)     (0.117)
Constant                           10.704*** 10.424*** 10.852***     13.784*** 13.489*** 13.680***
                                   (2.144)    (1.524)   (1.723)      (1.890)   (1.354)     (1.522)
Observations                       77         77        77           61        61          61
R-squared                          0.09       0.16      0.14         0.17      0.23        0.21

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                       Table 5l. EFW Freedom to Trade Internationally Index

                                                                       Panel A - Investment
                                                      (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
                                                         Investment 2003-05                 FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate                      -0.076                           -0.144***
                                                  (0.085)                          (0.049)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                                  -0.233***                       -0.188***
                                                             (0.079)                         (0.046)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                              -0.274***                       -0.176***
                                                                       (0.085)                         (0.052)
EFW Freedom to Trade Internationally Index        0.483      0.174     0.118       0.690*    0.621*    0.668*
                                                  (0.603)    (0.568)   (0.565)     (0.352) (0.334) (0.343)
Constant                                          20.326*** 24.389*** 26.082***    2.519     2.115     1.942
                                                  (5.641)    (4.685)   (4.836)     (3.286) (2.744) (2.933)
Observations                                      81         81        81          80        80        80
R-squared                                         0.03       0.12      0.13        0.19      0.26      0.22


                                                                    Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)
                                                            Business Density        Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate                      -0.043                           -0.101*
                                                  (0.061)                          (0.057)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                                  -0.088                         -0.113**
                                                             (0.059)                        (0.053)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                               -0.096                        -0.107*
                                                                        (0.064)                       (0.058)
EFW Freedom to Trade Internationally Index        2.653*** 2.517*** 2.533*** 1.153*** 1.133*** 1.140***
                                                  (0.509)    (0.504)    (0.500)    (0.408) (0.401) (0.408)
Constant                                          -12.806*** -11.531*** -11.329*** 2.603    1.737     1.835
                                                  (4.627)    (4.146)    (4.214)    (3.820) (3.307) (3.505)
Observations                                      76         76         76         60       60        60
R-squared                                         0.32       0.34       0.34       0.21     0.23      0.21

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                              Table 6. Other outcomes

           Panel A - Purchases of New Machinery and Equipment as % of Sales
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)
                                         Manufacturing Sector                 Service Sector
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate            -0.012                            0.081
                                       (0.062)                          (0.066)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                     -0.118**                            -0.054
                                                 (0.044)                           (0.071)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                 -0.125**                            -0.013
                                                           (0.051)                           (0.074)
Constant                                 1.470 3.458*** 3.806***         -1.423      2.230     1.367
                                       (1.945)   (0.925)   (1.146)      (2.089)    (1.559)   (1.745)
Observations                                31        31        31           20         20        20
R-squared                                 0.00      0.20      0.17         0.08       0.03      0.00


                               Panel B - Size of the Informal Sector
                                        (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
                                                        Size of the Informal Sector
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate            0.166*                              0.087
                                       (0.089)                            (0.090)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                        0.184**                          0.193**
                                                   (0.089)                          (0.091)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                      0.184*                        0.271***
                                                              (0.097)                         (0.095)
Log GDP pc 2003                      -4.405***   -4.372*** -4.381***
                                       (0.372)     (0.371)    (0.372)
Tax evasion (GCR)                                                       -6.286*** -6.168*** -6.342***
                                                                          (0.543)   (0.532)   (0.513)
Constant                             58.090***   59.465*** 59.155*** 44.062*** 42.802*** 41.510***
                                       (4.045)     (3.500)    (3.673)     (3.342)   (2.651)   (2.588)

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                         Table 7. Debt-to-Equity Ratio


                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)
                                                   Debt-to-Equity Ratio
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate                 4.205***
                                             (1.469)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                             3.912**
                                                        (1.630)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                          2.674
                                                                   (1.715)
Equity Market Cap in % of GDP 2003           -0.183     -0.194     -0.318*
                                             (0.183)    (0.189)    (0.184)
Log GDP pc 2003                              28.360*** 29.618*** 30.510***
                                             (8.104)    (8.253)    (8.517)
Constant                                     -257.278***-209.359***-192.678**
                                             (78.153) (74.165) (77.768)
Observations                                 50         50         50
R-squared                                    0.34       0.31       0.26

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Note that we exclude Zimbabwe from this sample as the size of the equity
market seems to be blown up due to inflation. When we include Zimbabwe,
our results get stronger.
                                                                       Figure 1

                                             1st Year Effective Tax Rate and Investment
                                                                        CHN

                 40
Investment 2003-2005 as % of GDP



                                                                              VNM
                                       MNG
                                                                                JAM
                      30




                                                                       KOR
                                                 HRV                        ESP
                                               LVA                            GHA
                                                        CZEGEO                 IND THA
                                               SVK           ARM                   AUS
                                                                         ZMB
                                                                          MAR GRC
                                                                            KAZ      LKA
                                                         IRL      SVN
                                                           SGPJOR                         MOZ
                                                                                            NZL JPN
                                                        HUN                     TUN
                                                                                 MLI
                                             LTU                      PRT ECUNGA
                                                                    ROM            SEN      DOM
                                       HKG             BGRMYS CHE   CHLMDG UGA  AUT
                                                                                IDN
                                                          LBN                         ITA
        20




                                                            UKR           TAI     CAN
                                                                                  DNK
                                                                 FRA FIN
                                                                       BEL         BFA
                                                                                   MEX    NLD
                                                               RUS
                                                             POL          TZA
                                                                           USA
                                                                           NOR     PERARG
                                                                     BRATUR VEN        COL
                                                                                      DEU ISR
                                                                        PAN
                                                                        EGY           KEN
                                                           SWE            ZAF
                                                                            GBR PHL
                                                                   ZWE                              PAK
                                                          KGZ
                                                                         MWI                               BOL
                                                                                          URY
                 10




                                   0                   10                      20               30        40
                                                                  1st Year Effective Tax Rate




                                                                       Figure 2

                                                   1st Year Effective Tax Rate and FDI
                                       HKG
                15




                                                            SGP
FDI 2003-2005 as % of GDP




                                                            LBN
                                                       BGR                BEL
                    10




                                       MNG                   GEO
                                                               JOR            JAM
                                                                       CHLPANKAZ
                                                                       ROM
                                                 HRV        ARM
           5




                                                          UKR                        COL
                                                        HUN                ECU
                                                                         TZA
                                                                          GBR           MOZ
                                               LVA       KGZ            ZMB
                                                                          VNM             DOM
                                                        CZE POL CHECHNMARUGA            NLD
                                                                                        URY
                                                                                        ISR
                                               SVK
                                             LTU          MYS        PRT                  NZL
                                                                 FRABRAEGYESP NGA
                                                                               MLI
                                                                              AUTPER
                                                                                 MEX
                                                              RUS          VENTUN   ARG
                                                                  SVNFIN
                                                                       TUR  GHA  THA
                                                                                CAN
                                                          SWE             NOR      LKA            PAK
                                                                   KOR ZAF
                                                                  ZWE    USAGRC
                                                                             IND
                                                                              IDNPHL
                                                                                 SEN
                                                                                 AUS
                                                                                 BFA
                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                    DEU
                                                                      MDG
                                                                        MWI         KEN       JPN          BOL
 0




                                                                                 DNK

                                                        IRL
                -5




                                   0                   10                      20               30        40
                                                                  1st Year Effective Tax Rate
                                                                    Figure 3

                                        1st Year Effective Tax Rate and Business Density
                                                           SWE
                                                           MYS
                 15                                         GEO
                                                                                    AUS
Business Density per 100 people


                                               SVK     CZE
                                                                                             NZL
                                                                              GRC

                                       HKG                 SGP
                    10




                                                                                      ITA
                                                                        TAI                 ISR
                                                                   KOR
                                                                     PRT
                                                        LBN                         DNK
                                                HRV    HUN
                                                                  SVNFIN       TUNMEX
                                              LVA                        ZAF
                                                                 FRA
                                                                CHEROM
                                                        IRL ARM           NOR        DEUURY
                                                                   CHLBEL
      5




                                                                               AUT
                                                      BGR    JOR     MDG  GBR CAN
                                                                      TURESP             NLD
                                                              RUS BRA
                                                                         USA
                                             LTU            POL
                                                          UKR                JAM THA
                                                                            VEN              JPN
                                       MNG                                            COL
                                                         KGZ          PANKAZ PER
                                                                                  PHLARG                      BOL
                                                                       MWIVNM NGA
                                                                        MAR    IDN LKA
                                                                    CHNZMB ECU            DOM
                                                                       EGY UGAIND SEN
                                                                                  BFA    MOZ     PAK
                 0




                                   0                  10                   20                      30        40
                                                              1st Year Effective Tax Rate


                                                                    Figure 4

                                              1st year effective tax rate and Entry rate
                 20
Average Entry Rate (%) 2000-2004




                                                                                             NZL
                          15




                                                                          KAZ
                                               SVK                        ECU
                                                                                CAN
                                                          SGP
                                             LTU       HUN
                                                      BGR
                                                       CZESWE         PAN       AUS    ISR
                                       MNG              IRL            ZMB
               10




                                                                    FIN  GBR    DNK
                                       HKG
                                                                      EGY
                                                                FRACHNMWINOR
                                                         UKR            USA
                                                                         ESP NGATHA    NLD
                                              LVA          ARM
                                                          GEO     ROM   ZAFGRC     ITA
                                                                                   ARG
                                                                 SVN BEL        MEX
                                                         MYS
                                                           POL      PRT            DEU MOZ
    5




                                                                 ZWE MAR                                      BOL
                                                                     MDG     AUT
                                                        KGZ    CHE          IND
                                                                           JAM                     JPN PAK
                                                                                  LKA
                                                                                PER
                                                                                PHL
                 0




                                   0                  10                   20                      30        40
                                                              1st Year Effective Tax Rate
                                                                       Figure 5

                                          1st year effective tax rate and Size of informal sector

                  50
                                                                            ZMB
Size of the Informal Sector 2005-07

                                                                                                                   BOL
                                                           KGZ
                             40


                                                                                     PER
                                                                     ZWEMDG
                                                                                   MLI
                                                             UKRRUS            VEN
                                                                                JAM
                                                                                     MEX MOZ
                                                                         TUR UGA
                                                                       BRA      GHA
                                                                           MAR NGA
                                                                          MWI     IDNBFA
                                                                           TZA          ARG
                                                                                        KEN DOM
                                          MNG                                 KAZ      LKA
                                                              GEO                    PHL              PAK
                                                        BGR ARM               ECU       ITA
                 30




                                                    HRV                   EGY
                                                                            ZAF IND
                                                                                         COLURY
                                                         HUN           CHN
                                                                      KORPAN GRC
                                                               POL           VNM
                                                                      ROM
                                                  LVA                    BEL         THA
                                                                                  TUN
                                                                        PRTTAI
                                                                             ESP
                                                  SVK       SWE
     20




                                                                JOR                 CAN
                                                         CZEMYS                             ISR
                                                LTU                  SVN            DNKDEU
                                          HKG             IRL               USA     AUS           JPN
                                                                    FRA
                                                                      CHL    GBR AUT
                                                                             NOR            NLD
                                                                                              NZL
                                                                   CHE FIN
                  10




                                                            SGP

                                      0                  10                   20                      30          40
                                                                 1st Year Effective Tax Rate


                                                                       Figure 6

                                            1st year effective tax rate and Debt to equity ratio
                  300




                                                                                ESP
                                                                          PRT

                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                      AUT DEU
                                                                    FRA
Debt-to-Equity Ratio




                                                                                                NLD
               200




                                                                                GBR                   JPN
                                                                                          ARG

                                                                                  GRC
                                                                                USA   AUS
                                                                        BEL        PHL
                                                                     KOR    NOR
                                                                                     LKA
100




                                                                        TUR
                                                                      BRA
                                                                     CHL EGY               NZL
                                                                                         ISR
                                                            MYS                    THA
                                                                                  CAN
                                                            SWE       CHN                                   PAK
                                                           SGP            TAI   IDN
                                                          HUN
                                                              POL              IND DNK
                                                                                   MEX
                                                  SVK              SVN
                                                                  CHE      ZAF         COL
                                          HKG                             MAR
                                                          CZE
                                                                RUS ZWEFIN VEN
                                                                                   PER
                  0




                                      0                  10                   20                      30          40
                                                                 1st Year Effective Tax Rate
Appendix A
                     Statutory 1st Year   5-Year
                     Corporate Effective Effective                     VAT and
Country              Tax Rate Tax Rate Tax Rate Labor Tax Other Taxes Sales Tax Notes
Argentina                35.00     23.54     23.80  19.51        14.51    24.00
Armenia                  20.00     11.48     12.46  16.00         0.53     20.00
Australia                30.00     21.96     23.03  11.38         0.24     10.00
Austria                  34.00     20.86     21.04  25.11         0.19     20.00
Belgium                  33.99     16.71     19.57  24.27         0.54     21.00
Bolivia                  25.00     39.87     39.87  10.18        17.58    14.94 9,10
Brazil                   34.00     15.49     15.49  31.45         4.32     73.54
Bulgaria                 19.50       8.60    10.24  26.36         1.02     20.00
Burkina Faso             35.00     22.28     22.54  13.99         4.07     18.00
Canada                   36.12     21.78     25.93    7.04        4.52     15.00
Chile                    17.00     15.09     15.09    2.04        2.17     19.00
China                    33.00     15.75     15.75  36.71         0.88     18.87
Colombia                 38.50     24.28     24.28  23.64         4.40    16.97
Croatia                  20.06       6.04    11.90  14.16         0.00     22.07    1
Czech Republic           28.00       9.29    13.00  29.68         0.02    19.00
Denmark                  30.00     21.94     24.53    0.61        1.14     25.00
Dominican Republic       25.00     26.58     26.58  10.62         0.99    13.00 9,10
Ecuador                  25.00     18.90     19.08  10.30         0.77     12.00
Egypt                    34.00     17.07     20.43  21.74         0.51     10.00    2
Finland                  29.00     16.30     18.84  18.04         0.73     22.00
France                   35.43     14.06     14.42  37.65         3.32     21.10 9,11
Georgia                  20.00     11.06     11.06  26.29         1.36     20.50
Germany                  37.07     23.50     23.60  16.75         0.04     16.00    3
Ghana                    35.00     19.55     22.48  10.60         0.01     13.54
Greece                   35.00     19.78     19.91  23.80         0.21     18.00
Hong Kong, China         17.50       0.00    12.25    3.95        0.00      0.00
Hungary                  18.00       9.48      9.62 31.01         5.26     27.20
India                    36.59     20.28     24.29  14.21         3.28     25.65
Indonesia                30.00     20.84     21.01    8.00        0.09     10.00
Ireland                  12.50       9.62      9.62   9.12        0.00     21.00
Israel                   35.00     25.72     25.98    5.04        1.19     17.17
Italy                    37.25     23.82     23.82  35.23         0.27     20.00
Jamaica                  33.33     19.67     23.42    9.75        0.95     15.00
Japan                    42.05     28.66     31.64  10.00         2.16      5.00    4
Jordan                   15.72     12.24     12.28    9.33        0.45     16.00    5
Kazakhstan               30.00     18.79     20.62  14.96         1.69     15.00
Kenya                    30.00     23.62     24.84    5.44        4.90     16.30
Korea                    26.73     14.94     18.38    5.87        0.65     10.00
Kyrgyz Republic          20.00       9.94    11.88  21.20         0.44    26.30
Latvia                   15.00       5.20      8.47 20.40         0.44     18.00
Lebanon                  15.00     10.20     10.24  18.23         0.00    10.00
Lithuania                15.00       4.14      7.25 26.21         1.08     18.48
Madagascar               30.00     16.43     19.99  14.21         1.24    20.00 9,11
Malawi                   30.00     17.32     25.07    0.85        0.00     17.50 9,10
Malaysia                 28.00     10.50     16.13    9.79        0.35     10.00
Mali                     35.00     20.97     21.23  17.73         3.33     18.00
Mexico                   33.00     22.21     22.48  18.46         0.70     15.00 9,12
Mongolia                 30.00       0.00      6.63 15.27         0.30     15.00    6
Morocco                  35.00     17.74     22.33  16.71         0.27     20.00
Mozambique               32.00     25.59     25.59    3.39        1.35    17.00
Netherlands              34.50     25.62     25.62  12.90         0.50    19.00
New Zealand              33.00     26.44     28.45    0.00        0.12    12.50
Nigeria                  32.00     20.69     21.99    6.54        0.40      5.00
Norway                   28.00     18.50     20.33  11.96         0.00     24.00
Pakistan                 41.00     31.28     32.42    9.77        0.53     15.00 9,11
Panama                   30.00     16.88     20.25  10.39         7.62      5.00
Peru                     30.00     22.03     23.57    8.27        1.83     19.00
Philippines              32.00     22.08     22.88    7.24        3.14    10.68
Appendix A
                        Statutory 1st Year   5-Year
                        Corporate Effective Effective                     VAT and
Country                 Tax Rate Tax Rate Tax Rate Labor Tax Other Taxes Sales Tax Notes
Poland                      19.00     11.54     12.47  16.01         0.98     22.00
Portugal                    27.50     16.03     16.10  20.07         0.71     19.00
Romania                     25.00     15.17     15.35  27.35         0.53    19.00
Russia                      24.00     12.62     12.98  29.41         2.30     18.00
Senegal                     33.00     22.01     22.34  15.06         5.06    18.00 9,10
Singapore                   20.00     10.25     13.17  10.68         2.18      5.00
Slovakia                    19.00       5.40      8.63 29.03         0.22     19.00
Slovenia                    25.00     14.38     15.76  14.64         0.29    20.00
South Africa                30.00     18.10     22.69    1.99        2.01     14.14
Spain                       35.00     18.52     18.61  33.23         0.18     16.00
Sri Lanka                   32.50     23.00     23.09  12.72         1.66     16.00
Sweden                      28.00     10.47     14.93  27.16         0.33     25.00
Switzerland                 24.10     13.74     16.18    8.57        0.45      7.60    7
Taiwan, China               25.00     17.83     18.01    7.73        1.87      5.00
Tanzania                    30.00     18.05     20.69  13.57         0.08     20.30
Thailand                    30.00     22.04     22.26    4.18        3.79      7.00
Tunisia                     35.00     20.63     23.45  15.27         0.00     19.24
Turkey                      30.00     16.92     16.92  22.96         0.34     18.00
Uganda                      30.00     19.42     21.94    8.48        0.43     17.50
Ukraine                     25.00     10.68     13.16  31.51         0.09     20.00
United Kingdom              30.00     18.61     21.44    8.19        1.10    17.50
United States               45.20     18.19     31.99    7.18        4.56      8.25    8
Uruguay                     30.00     25.45     25.53    3.07        0.00     26.00
Venezuela                   34.00     19.21     19.72  13.32         2.80    16.48
Vietnam                     28.00     18.37     18.79  14.42         0.17     10.00
Zambia                      35.00     17.68     25.32    4.24        0.00     17.50
Zimbabwe                    30.90     14.66     20.23    3.52        4.87     15.00    9

                 Notes The Statutory Corporate Tax Rate includes all levies on corporate income (and also
                       those that are levied on the corporate income tax itself).
                     1 There exists a Forest Contribution on Earnings before Taxes which is deductible
                       both from its own tax base and from the tax base for the Corporate Income Tax.

                     2 The State Development Duty on Earnings before Taxes in excess of EGP 18,000,
                       which is technically deductible from the tax base for the Corporate Income Tax.
                       However, the tax authorities did not allow this deduction.

                     3 The Trade Tax is deductible both from its own tax base and from the tax base for
                       the Corporate Income Tax.
                     4 The Enterprise Tax on Earnings before Taxes is deductible from its own tax base
                       and that of the Corporate Income Tax.
                     5 The Contribution to the education and vocational training support fund is deductible
                       from the tax base for the Corporate Income Tax.

                     6 There is an exemption from the Corporate Income Tax in the first year of a
                       company's operations.
                     7 The Corporate Income Tax is deductible from its own tax base.
                     8 The New York City corporation franchise tax is deductible both in the tax base of
                       the New York state corporation franchise tax and of the Federal Corporate Income
                       Tax. The New York state corporation franchise tax is deductible in the tax base of
                       the Federal Corporate Income Tax.
                     9 There exists a Minimum Tax.
                    10 The Minimum Tax applies.
                    11 The Minimum Tax does not apply.
                    12 There is an exemption from the Minimum Tax for the first three years.
Appendix B


Using the example of Argentina, the following is a description of how we obtained the tax
measures “1st Year Effective Corporate Tax Rate” and “5-Year Effective Corporate Tax Rate”.

The statutory corporate income tax rate in Argentina is a single rate of 35%. The Social Security
Contributions paid by the employer are 23% total. The tax base for the Social Security
Contributions is the employee’s gross salary with a ceiling (which is not binding for
TaxpayerCo.) The Social Security Contributions are deductible from the tax base for the
corporate income tax. Depreciation rates are as follows: Land – not depreciable; Building – 2%
straight-line; Machinery – 10% straight-line; Truck – 20% straight-line; Computers – 33.33%
straight-line; Office Equipment – 20% straight-line. Advertising, interest, and machinery repair
expenses are deductible in the tax base for the corporate income tax.

We calculate the Labor Tax liability of TaxpayerCo as shown in Table A:

Table A – Labor Tax Calculations

Managers:
Total annual salaries for the 4 managers                          9*GNI per capita =    95,808
Monthly salaries                                                     95,808/(12*4) =     1,996
Monthly Soc. Sec. Contr.                                               23%*1,996 =        459
Yearly Soc. Sec. Contr. per manager                                        12*459 =      5,509
Total annual Soc. Sec. Contr. for the 4 managers                          4*5,509 =     22,036


Assistants:
Total annual salaries for the 8 assistants                       10*GNI per capita =   106,453
Monthly salaries                                                   106,453/(12*8) =      1,109
Monthly Soc. Sec. Contr.                                               23%*1,109 =        255
Yearly Soc. Sec. Contr. per manager                                        12*255 =      3,061
Total annual Soc. Sec. Contr. for the 8 assistants                        8*3,061 =     24,484


Workers:
Total annual salaries for the 48 workers                         48*GNI per capita =   510,975
Monthly salaries                                                  510,975/(12*48) =       887
Monthly Soc. Sec. Contr.                                                 23%*887 =        204
Yearly Soc. Sec. Contr. per manager                                        12*204 =      2,448
Total annual Soc. Sec. Contr. for the 48 workers                         48*2,448 =    117,524


Total annual Social Security Contributions paid by TaxpayerCo.                         164,044
Appendix B



The depreciation allowances for the first five years are calculated as shown in Table B:


Table B – Calculation of Depreciation Allowances


                                               Year 1    Year 2     Year 3       Year 4       Year 5
Building (40*GNI per capita)                   425,812   417,296    408,780      400,264      391,747
  Annual Depreciation (2% straight line)         8,516      8,516     8,516        8,516        8,516
  Net Property                                 417,296   408,780    400,264      391,747      383,231
Machinery (60*GNI per capita)                  638,719   574,847    510,975      447,103      383,231
  Annual Depreciation (10% straight line)       63,872     63,872    63,872       63,872       63,872
  Net Machinery                                574,847   510,975    447,103      383,231      319,359
Truck (5*GNI per capita)                        53,227     42,581    31,936       21,291       10,645
  Annual Depreciation (20% straight line)       10,645     10,645    10,645       10,645       10,645
  Net Machinery                                 42,581     31,936    21,291       10,645               -
Computers (5*GNI per capita)                    53,227     35,484    17,742               -            -
  Annual Depreciation (33.33% straight line)    17,742     17,742    17,742
  Net Machinery                                 35,484     17,742            -
Office Equipment (5*GNI per capita)             53,227     42,581    31,936       21,291       10,645
  Annual Depreciation (20% straight line)       10,645     10,645    10,645       10,645       10,645
  Net Machinery                                 42,581     31,936    21,291       10,645               -
Total Depreciation Allowance                   111,421   111,421    111,421       93,679       93,679


The Labor Tax liability, which as stated above is deductible in the Corporate Income Tax base,
and the Depreciation Allowance are then used in the calculation of the Corporate Income Tax
liability, which we calculate as shown in Table C:
Appendix B




Table C – Income Statement

                                              Year 1       Year 2       Year 3       Year 4       Year 5
Sales (=1050*GNI p.c.)                      11,177,578   11,177,578   11,177,578   11,177,578   11,177,578
Cost of Goods Sold (=875*GNI p.c.)           9,314,648    9,314,648    9,314,648    9,314,648    9,314,648
Operating Expenses (=77*GNI p.c.)             819,689      819,689      819,689      819,689      819,689
Labor Taxes (as calculated above)             164,044      164,044      164,044      164,044      164,044
Other Possible Deductions (i.e.
advertising expenses at 10.5 GNI p.c. and     143,712      143,712      143,712      143,712      143,712
machinery repair expenses at 4*GNI p.c.)

EBITDA                                        735,485      735,485      735,485      735,485      735,485
Depreciation and Amortization (as
calculated above)                             111,421      111,421      111,421       93,679       93,679
EBIT                                          624,064      624,064      624,064      641,806      641,806
Interest Expense (=5.5*GNI p.c.)               58,549       58,549       58,549       58,549       58,549
Earnings before Taxes                         565,514      565,514      565,514      583,257      583,257
Income Tax                                    197,930      197,930      197,930      204,140      204,140
Net Income                                    367,584      367,584      367,584      379,117      379,117
PDV of Income Tax (at an 8%
                                              197,930      183,269      169,693      162,053      150,049
discount rate)



With this information the 1st year effective corporate tax rate and the 5-year effective corporate
tax rate are calculated as follows:
    - The 1st year effective corporate tax rate is simply the Year 1 income tax liability divided
        by the denominator (i.e. 79 times GNI per capita), which in Argentina’s case works out to
        be (197,930/840,980 =) 23.54%.
    - The 5-year effective corporate tax rate is simply the sum of the present-discounted values
        of the income tax liability in years 1 to 5 divided by sum of the present-discounted values
        of the denominator in years 1 to 5 (which does not change in absolute terms but does
        change in PDV terms). In Argentina’s case, this works out to be (862,993/3,626,411 =)
        23.80%.
Appendix C

Sample 1 - Countries with the same tax regime regardless of legal form
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Germany, Hong Kong, China, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Korea, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Netherlands,
Nigeria, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland,
Taiwan, China, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom, Uruguay, Vietnam

Sample 2 - Countries with different tax regimes depending on legal form
Australia, Canada, China, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, Kenya, Kyrgyz Republic, New Zealand, Norway,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Tanzania, Uganda, United States, Venezuela, Zambia

Countries for which we do not have information on how the legal form affects the tax
regime
Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Czech Republic, Georgia, India, Israel, Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Pakistan,
Poland, Senegal, Slovenia, Ukraine, Zimbabwe



Basic regression restricted to Sample 1

                                                      Panel A - Investment
                                   (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
                                      Investment 2003-05                    FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.129                          -0.160**
                                  (0.086)                           (0.063)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                 -0.237***                         -0.229***
                                              (0.086)                           (0.062)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.250**                        -0.211***
                                                         (0.101)                          (0.075)
Constant                        25.332*** 25.683*** 26.345*** 8.356***         7.717***  7.796***
                                  (2.473)     (1.547)    (1.954)    (1.802)     (1.107)   (1.455)
Observations                            50         50         50         49          49        49
R-squared                            0.04        0.14       0.11       0.12        0.23      0.14

                                                   Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                   (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)
                                       Business Density             Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate     -0.139**                          -0.227***
                                  (0.062)                            (0.063)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                 -0.189***                        -0.211***
                                              (0.063)                          (0.063)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                               -0.191**                        -0.273***
                                                         (0.074)                          (0.072)
Constant                         8.792***    8.071***   8.447*** 14.314*** 11.325*** 12.921***
                                  (1.779)     (1.128)    (1.438)     (1.841)   (1.138)    (1.403)
Observations                           50          50         50          35        35         35
R-squared                            0.09        0.16       0.12        0.28      0.25       0.30
Appendix C

Basic regression restricted to Sample 2

                                                        Panel A - Investment
                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                   FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate           0.194                         -0.297**
                                     (0.245)                          (0.107)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                       0.188                          -0.336**
                                                (0.307)                           (0.138)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                   -0.008                              -0.248*
                                                           (0.266)                              (0.124)
Constant                             15.594* 18.307*** 21.874*** 12.069*** 8.797***            7.882***
                                     (7.840)    (5.722)    (5.728)    (3.427)     (2.578)       (2.667)
Observations                               19        19         19         19          19            19
R-squared                               0.04       0.02       0.00       0.31        0.26          0.19

                                                      Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                               (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                          Business Density               Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate          -0.163                               0.028
                                     (0.223)                             (0.158)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                       -0.031                               0.180
                                                 (0.293)                             (0.198)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                     -0.085                               0.174
                                                             (0.243)                             (0.162)
Constant                             11.255        6.680       7.864       8.630       6.366       5.946
                                     (7.159)     (5.354)     (5.174)     (5.074)     (3.584)     (3.450)
Observations                              16          16          16          14          14          14
R-squared                               0.04        0.00        0.01        0.00        0.06        0.09
Appendix C

Basic regression restricted to Sample 3

                                                         Panel A - Investment
                                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
                                         Investment 2003-05                    FDI 2003-05
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate          -0.070                           -0.191*
                                     (0.200)                           (0.096)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                     -0.300**                           -0.139*
                                                 (0.126)                           (0.072)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                 -0.372***                          -0.188**
                                                            (0.125)                           (0.070)
Constant                           22.335*** 26.003*** 28.150***       8.155**    5.123***   6.449***
                                     (6.080)     (2.609)    (2.803)    (2.912)     (1.483)    (1.574)
Observations                               16         16         16         16          16         16
R-squared                               0.01        0.29       0.39       0.22        0.21       0.34

                                                     Panel B - Entrepreneurship
                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                          Business Density            Average entry rate 2000-04
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate          -0.353                           -0.058
                                     (0.199)                          (0.163)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                     -0.263*                           -0.105
                                                (0.146)                          (0.110)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                                  -0.314*                           -0.121
                                                           (0.148)                          (0.116)
Constant                            14.655**    9.345** 10.945***      8.978*   9.259***   9.845***
                                     (5.993)    (3.065)    (3.354)    (4.806)    (2.260)    (2.614)
Observations                              14         14         14         13         13         13
R-squared                               0.21       0.21       0.27       0.01       0.08       0.09

Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Appendix D

FDI Regressions using OECD data

Basic regressions, no control

                                       (1)       (2)       (3)
                                         OECD FDI 2002-2004
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.248***
                                   (0.069)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.277***
                                             (0.090)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.268***
                                                       (0.083)
Constant                           10.525*** 7.874***  8.250***
                                   (2.144)   (1.672)   (1.717)
Observations                       28        28        28
R-squared                          0.33      0.27      0.28

Controlling for Tax Evasion

                                       (1)       (2)       (3)
                                         OECD FDI 2002-2004
Statutory Corporate Tax Rate       -0.257***
                                   (0.072)
1st Year Effective Tax Rate                  -0.295***
                                             (0.096)
5-Year Effective Tax Rate                              -0.317***
                                                       (0.093)
Tax evasion (GCR)                  0.223     0.290     0.602
                                   (0.474)   (0.507)   (0.523)
Constant                           9.934***  7.074***  6.899***
                                   (2.515)   (2.198)   (2.072)
Observations                       28        28        28
R-squared                          0.34      0.28      0.32

Note: No matter which of our controls we include, the coefficients on the tax rates always remain
negative and highly significant (always significant at least at the 5% level and in the vast majority
of the cases at the 1% level).
