NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COVERING THE UNINSURED IN THE U.S.
Jonathan Gruber
Working Paper 13758
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13758

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

Paper prepared for Journal of Economic Literature. I am grateful to Bert Lue, David Ovadia and Janet
Zhou for excellent research assistance, to the Kaiser Family Foundation for funding, and to Roger
Gordon and the referees for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Covering the Uninsured in the U.S.
Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 13758
January 2008
JEL No. H1,I1
ABSTRACT
One of the major social policy issues facing the U.S. in the first decade of the 21st century is the large
number of Americans lacking health insurance. This article surveys the major economic issues around
covering the uninsured. I review the facts on insurance coverage and the nature of the uninsured; focus
on explanations for why the U.S. has such a large, and growing, uninsured population; and discuss
why we should care if individuals are uninsured. I then focus on policy options to address the problem
of the uninsured, beginning with a discussion of the key issues and available evidence, and then turning
to estimates from a micro-simulation model of the impact of alternative interventions to increase insurance
coverage.

Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

One of the major social policy issues facing the U.S. in the first decade of the 21st century
is the large number of Americans lacking health insurance. While other industrialized nations
guarantee universal health care for their citizens, in the U.S. 47 million persons, or 18% of the
non-elderly population (the elderly are universally covered under the Medicare program) lack
health insurance. As a result, the problem of the uninsured has been front and center in public
policy debates and political campaigns for many years. The (failed) centerpiece of the early
Clinton presidency was a plan for universal health coverage; 15 years later, each of the major
Democratic candidates for President is proposing a plan for universal health coverage.
Of course, health insurance is not the only “merit” good which is not universally
consumed by the American public: a larger number of U.S. households do not own their own
homes, for example, than the number of households that contain uninsured individuals. While
homeownership is viewed as a valid goal for families, there is little demand for universal
ownership. With health insurance, however, a number of arguments are used to justify universal
coverage: financial and physical externalities to others, inefficiencies in labor markets from
limited job-related coverage, myopia among the uninsured, and income redistribution to lower
income groups that tend to be uninsured. Regardless of the validity of these arguments, strong
advocacy for universal insurance coverage is here to stay.
If public policy makers are to take on the problem of the uninsured, however, they must
understand why individuals are uninsured, and what the government can do about it. Not that the
U.S. government hasn’t been heavily involved in insurance markets. The U.S. government
currently accounts for almost half of all spending on health care in this nation. The regulatory

role of the government is pervasive. And an enormous tax subsidy of over $200 billion per year
encourages the provision of health insurance through a particular form, the employer, which may
not be optimal. Ex ante, it isn’t clear if the right answer for improving health access in the U.S.
is more government, less government, or just different government.
Economic insights and past research has an enormous amount to say about this crucial
debate. The purpose of this paper is to review the lessons and implications of those insights and
research.
I do so in several steps. I begin by reviewing the important facts on the insurance market
in the U.S., and the nature of the uninsured. I then focus on explanations for why the U.S. has
such a large, and growing, uninsured population, and I highlight the strange dichotomy between
the apparent “overinsurance” of the majority of Americans with the “underinsurance” of a
substantial minority. I then turn to the question whose answer has long been assumed by policy
makers: should we care if individuals are uninsured? I review the various arguments for public
policy intervention in this area, and conclude that externality-based arguments are unlikely to be
significant enough to warrant major new interventions (or even the current level of intervention).
Rather, arguments based on either irrationalities or redistribution are required to justify an
expanded government role.
The remainder of the paper focuses on policy options to address the problem of
uninsurance. I begin with a discussion of the key equity and efficiency issues that must be
addressed by any government intervention. I turn next to discussing the available evidence that

can guide policy-makers as they try to meet these sometimes conflicting goals.
I then use a micro-simulation model of the health economy to estimate the impact of
alternative reforms to provide health insurance. I begin by considering incremental reforms of
the type favored by the left (expanding public insurance) and the right (tax subsidies to private
insurance). I then turn to more fundamental reforms to insurance markets designed to raise
insurance coverage, including mandates on individuals to obtain insurance. I also discuss the use
of the existing tax exclusion of employer-provided health insurance as a financing mechanism
for these reforms.

Part I: The Insurance Market in the United States1
Health insurance markets are straightforward in principle. Individuals, or firms on their
behalf, pay monthly premiums to insurance companies. In return, the insurance company pays
the providers of medical goods and services for any goods and services used by the individual
(the individual's medical claims). Under most health insurance plans, the patient pays part of the
costs of medical goods and services, and the insurance company pays the remainder. There are
three types of patient payments: deductibles (under which individuals face the full cost of their
care, but up to some limit); copayments (under which individuals make some fixed payment
when they get a medical good or service); and coinsurance (under which the patient pays a
percentage of each medical bill).

1

Much of this section follows the discussion of health insurance markets in Gruber (2005a) and Gruber (2002).

Private (Mostly Employer) Insurance
The distribution of insurance coverage in the U.S. is shown in Table 1.2 The most
important source of health insurance in the U.S. is private insurance; 80% of the insured, or
177.8 million persons, have private health insurance. Within that group, the predominant source
of private insurance is employer-provided health insurance. Only 10% of those with private
insurance purchase insurance on their own, through the nongroup insurance market; nine of
every ten privately-insured persons get their health insurance through their employers.
Employers offer insurance to qualified employees in the firm, typically those who work full
time and have completed some minimal service requirement (such as 0-6 months of employment
at the firm). Employers also typically charge employees some share of the costs of insurance,
averaging 16% of insurance cost for single plans and 27% for family plans (Gruber and
Washington, 2005). As a result, take-up of health insurance by employees offered that insurance
is incomplete, with enrollment rates averaging roughly 75% among those offered. Partly, this
reflects the fact that individuals may be covered by other family members, so that overall only
7% of those offered insurance are actually uninsured (Gruber and Washington, 2005).3
There are two reasons why employers are the predominant source of insurance. The first is

2

There are three large nationally representative sources of data on insurance coverage in the U.S. The most
commonly used source is the March Current Population Survey (CPS), which asks about insurance coverage in the
previous year; that is the data used throughout this paper. Insurance coverage information is also collected by the
Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), for a smaller sample but on a more frequent (every four
months) and longitudinal basis, and by the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), which collects more detailed
data on insurance arrangements on a longitudinal basis as well.
3
There is an interesting set of issues around the decision of employers to pay premiums versus charging employees
for those premium costs; see Gruber and Washington (1995) for a review of those issues.

risk pooling. The goal of insurers is to create large insurance pools with a predictable
distribution of medical risk. Predictability of medical risk is increased when groups are large and
are constructed for reasons independent of health (or at least independent of unobserved
components of health). Employees of firms constitute a risk pool that has a good chance of
meeting these two conditions. Individuals, on the other hand, do not; even if individuals are
pooled together into a large group, insurers still can’t be sure that those individuals didn’t come
to the insurer specifically because they are sick. The preference for large groups by insurers is
reinforced by another aspect of insurance provision, administrative costs. Many of the costs of
administering insurance are fixed; for individuals or small groups, these fixed administrative
costs can amount to a large share of the premium.
These issues are reflected in the pattern of private insurance coverage in the United
States. Large employers in the U.S. almost universally offer health insurance to their employees;
98% of firms with more than 200 employees offer health insurance. Among smaller firms,
however, health insurance offering rates are much lower; only 55% of firms with fewer than 10
employees offer insurance, and only 76% of firms with 10-24 employees offer insurance.
The second reason why employers are the predominant providers of health insurance is that
the tax code subsidizes health insurance purchase through the firm by excluding employer
insurance spending from an individual’s income, for both income and payroll tax purposes. This
leads to a very large effective subsidy to the cost of health insurance for workers. The result of
this subsidy is that there is a lower “tax price” of insurance:
TP = (1 - Jf - Js - Jss - Jmc)
1+ Jss + Jmc

where τf is the federal income tax marginal rate; τs is the state income tax marginal rate; τss is the
marginal payroll tax rate for the OASDI program (the 6.2% tax rate that is levied equally on
employees and employers); and τMC is the marginal payroll tax rate for the Medicare HI
program.4 I differentiate the latter two programs because, beginning in the early 1990s, the
taxable maximum for the HI program was increased above that for the OASDI program (and was
eventually removed altogether); the marginal rate is zero above the taxable maximum for payroll
taxation. For a typical worker in the 15% tax bracket, facing a 5% state tax rate and a 15.3%
combined payroll tax rate, this tax price is roughly 0.65; a dollar of health insurance costs 35
cents less than a dollar of other goods purchased with after-tax wages.
In addition, there are also tax subsidies available to employees for their spending on
employer-provided health insurance, under section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code. Section
125 generally provides that an employee in a cafeteria plan will not have an amount included in
gross income solely because the employee may choose among two or more benefits consisting of
cash and qualified benefits. A qualified benefit generally is any benefit that is excludable from
gross income under the Code, including health insurance, group-term life insurance, 401(k)
plans, child care, and adoption assistance.
Perhaps as a result of these inherent advantages of the group insurance market, the

4

The reason that the payroll tax rate is additive in the denominator is that the employer is indifferent between
purchasing one dollar of benefits or paying wages of 1/(1+ τss + τmc), since each dollar of wages requires a payroll
tax payment as well.

nongroup insurance market has not provided a very hospitable environment for insurance
purchase. Load factors in this market are high, and the generosity of the typical policy is much
lower than in the group market (Gruber and Madrian, 1996). A recent study by the Kaiser
Family Foundation found that, for those individuals in less than perfect health, it was often not
possible to get coverage that was fully comprehensive, with the particular illness of the
individual often being excluded from coverage by the policy. Prices were also very variable in
this market, making it difficult to effectively anticipate the cost of insuring oneself.
There is an existing tax subsidy to the nongroup market itself, for a particular group: the
self-employed. Beginning in 1986, the self-employed were allowed to deduct 25% of their
insurance premiums from their taxable income. This share has grown over time and is now
100%.

Public Health Insurance
There are two major public sources of health insurance. The first is the Medicare
program, which provides health insurance for all people over age 65 and disabled persons under
age 65. This federal program is financed by a payroll tax. After a two-year waiting period,
Medicare insurance is also available to those receiving disability insurance.
The other major public health insurance program in the U.S. is the Medicaid program
which provides health care for the poor.5 The federal and state governments share the financing

5

Eligibility for the medicaid program was enhanced by the Children’s Health Insurance Program, enacted in 1997; I
describe both here under the rubric of Medicaid. Details of the Medicaid program are provided in Gruber (2003).

of this program which is paid for out of general tax revenues. Medicaid benefits are targeted at
several groups: those who qualify for cash welfare programs, mostly single mothers and their
children; most children in the U.S. who are poor (typically below 200% of the federal poverty
level); most poor pregnant women (for the expenses associated with their pregnancies); and the
low-income elderly and disabled (for non-Medicare health costs and long-term care costs for
facilities such as nursing homes). Medicaid is best known for its coverage of the young poor
population, particularly mothers and children, who make up nearly 70% of program recipients.
However, over two-thirds of the cost of the program is accounted for by the medical costs of the
25% of program recipients who are receiving long- term care, either from home health care or
from institutions.
Another large source of insurance in the U.S. is health insurance for those currently or
formerly in the military and their dependents. Tri-Care is a program administered by the
Department of Defense for military retirees and the families of active duty, retired, or deceased
service members. CHAMPVA, the Civilian Health and Medical Program for the Department of
Veterans Affairs, is a health care benefits program for disabled dependents of veterans and
certain survivors of veterans. Together, these two programs provide health coverage for nearly 7
million Americans.

The Uninsured
Finally, there are the 47 million in the U.S. without any insurance coverage at all. Who are

they? According to the CPS data used this far, the uninsured have lower-than-average incomes;
nearly two-thirds of the uninsured are in families with incomes below twice the poverty line.
Not all the uninsured are poor, however: 20% of the uninsured are in families with incomes
above $50,000 per year. Seventy percent of the uninsured are in families where the family head
is a full-time, full-year worker, but is either not offered health insurance or doesn't take it up to
cover himself or his family members. Thus, the modal uninsured person is a member of what
might be called the “working poor class”: below median income, but not among the poorest in
the nation.6
In addition, there are important dynamics within the uninsured population that are missed
by this point-in-time estimate. A problem with the CPS estimate is that it is a strange hybrid of a
point-in-time estimate and a backwards look at the previous year.7 Other surveys which are less
widely cited provide different perspectives on the uninsured, as reviewed in CBO (2003). The
CBO finds that other surveys that ask about uninsurance at particular point in the year provide
estimates very similar to the CPS. But they also find that estimates of uninsurance over an entire
calendar year are only about one-half to two-thirds as large as point-in-time estimates;
correspondingly, estimates of the number of individuals uninsured at any point in the last year re
on the order of 40-50% higher than point-in-time estimates. These findings highlight the
dynamic nature of uninsurance.

6

These facts are all derived from EBRI (2006).
Technically, the CPS question asks respondents each March about whether they were uninsured during the entire
previous year. In fact, most analysts suspect that respondents are replying about current insurance status, a
contention supported by the discussion below.
7

Part II: Why Are People Uninsured - and Overinsured?
To design sensible policy to address the problem of the uninsured, we must first
understand why individuals are uninsured. Medical risks are the type of large and unpredictable
risks for which full insurance would be optimal in a first best world. In a standard model with
concave utility individuals would be willing to pay an actuarially fair premium to fully insure
their medical risks. Clearly this is not the case for many Americans today. Why is that?

Actuarial Unfairness in the U.S. Insurance Market
Individuals may be unwilling to purchase insurance if it is not available at an actuarially
fair price to the individual. This can occur for several reasons. The first is the administrative
costs of insurance (along with the profit earned by insurers). Private insurance in the U.S. has
administrative costs that average roughly 12% of premiums paid. In a standard expected utility
model, such a deviation from actuarial fairness can cause individuals with a low level of risk
aversion to forgo insurance.
The second is irregularities in the insurance market. For example, even for very large
groups of insured, insurance is not available on a per person basis. Traditionally, in fact,
insurance was simply offered for singles and for families, regardless of family size. Under such
a model, small families cross-subsidize large families, leading to actuarially unfair pricing. Even
in today’s insurance market, most insurance groups are offered policies for singles, married with
no children, and married with children, so that such cross-subsidies still exist. The reasons for

this discreteness in insurance pricing are not clear, given the profits that could be made by finer
pricing patterns and the relatively low (presumably) administrative costs of such patterns. This
question is an interesting one for future research.
A third reason for actuarially unfair pricing is adverse selection in the insurance market.
As noted above, insurers operate with less than full information about those seeking insurance.
This raises the cost of insurance in two ways. First, some share of the administrative costs of
private insurance are the costs devoted to screening potential applicants to identify the costliest
cases. Unfortunately, there is no good data available on the share of administrative costs
absorbed by this function; gathering such data would be quite useful.
The second way that adverse selection raises the cost of insurance is though the standard
lemons pricing effect (Akerlof, 1970): prices will be higher to reflect the (presumably sickest)
subset of individuals who choose to insure. There is very clear evidence of adverse selection
within health insurance markets; see Cutler and Zeckhauser (2001) for a review of the literature
and Cutler and Reber (1998) for a particularly compelling example. There is less clear evidence,
however, on adverse selection into health insurance coverage. Indeed, there is surprisingly little
work on the general question of whether those who choose to be insured are adversely selected;
the two studies on this topic reviewed in Cutler and Zeckhauser (2001) reach mixed conclusions.
Clearly, high prices of insurance are a major cause of uninsurance. Indeed, Chernew et
al. (2006) estimate that two-thirds of the increase in the number of uninsured over the past
decade can be traced to rising health insurance costs. Literature on this point, however, has not
been able to distinguish rises in the underlying cost of medical care from changes in the value of

insurance against risk. In a standard model, while rising insurance loads will lead to less
insurance, a pure rise in the costs of treating medical illness should lead to fewer uninsured, not
more. If individuals have a constant coefficient of relative risk aversion, then as medical costs
rise they are effectively poorer. Being poorer should make them less likely to want to undertake
the risk of being uninsured.
Thus, the literature showing a negative correlation between insurance costs and insurance
coverage is either uncovering a strong response to the non-actuarial piece of insurance costs, or
capturing some non-standard mechanism through which higher medical costs affects insurance
demand. One such mechanism could be liquidity constraints, with individuals (particularly
young individuals, who make up a large share of the uninsured) unable to finance current health
insurance purchases to a desired level by borrowing against future income. If the rise in income
over the life cycle is faster than the rise in medical risk (or if individuals have access to non-age
rated group insurance), then these liquidity constraints may ease later in life. Another
mechanism could be problems of time inconsistency (Laibson, 1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin,
1999) whereby individuals overvalue short run insurance costs relative to downstream medical
expenditure risk. Yet another mechanism could be failures in the insurance market which do not
allow individuals to purchase the type of insurance they want against rising costs, forcing them
to include aspects of insurance that are valued at below their costs. This last point is developed
further below.

Implicit Insurance Through Uncompensated Care
Even at an actuarially fair price, individuals may not be willing to purchase insurance if
their medical risks are primarily catastrophic, due to the implicit insurance provided through
hospital uncompensated care. Under federal law, any hospital that accepts reimbursement from
Medicare must treat individuals who arrive in an emergent state, regardless of their ability to
pay. Hospitals can try to collect the costs of such care from uninsured patients, but they can be
avoided (in the limit through personal bankruptcy), becoming “uncompensated care” costs to the
hospital. Such uncompensated care amounted to roughly $30 billion for hospitals in 2005.8
The existence of free care for catastrophes provides a valuable option to primarily healthy
individuals whose only likely medical concerns are emergencies. Whether this effect is
quantitatively important in driving insurance decisions is unclear, however. Findings in Rask
and Rask (1995) and Herring (2000) suggests that individuals are more likely to be uninsured
where more free care is delivered (although causality is somewhat difficult to interpret in this
context), but LoSasso and Meyer (2006) find no effect of hospital uncompensated care on
insurance status. If uncompensated care does deter insurance purchase, it can have a multiplier
effect through adverse selection as well: if the (unobservably) healthiest individuals choose not
to insure and instead to rely on free care, then insurers will have to raise prices above actuarially
fair levels for the remaining individuals demanding insurance.

8

This fact is from Gruber and Rodriguez (forthcoming), who document that physicians, on net, provide no
uncompensated care in the U.S.

Overinsurance and Limited Choice
Even in a world without adverse selection, full insurance is not optimal due to another
informational imperfection: moral hazard. Under the theory of insurance outlined in Arrow
(1963) and Pauly (1970), optimal insurance trades off the gains from consumption smoothing
against the cost of moral hazard from distorting medical consumption. The result is a middle
ground plan with some moral hazard and some risk spreading.
The deadweight loss of excess medical consumption due to insurance is clearly
documented by the results from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Manning et al., 1987).
This experiment randomly assigned individuals to different levels of patient coinsurance and
deductibles. The findings were striking: higher patient payments led to significantly less use of
medical care with no adverse medical outcomes on average (although some adverse effects for
low income and unhealthy individuals). Overall, the elasticity of medical care use with respect
to its price was modest, at -0.2, but significant. Even at this small elasticity, Feldman and Dowd
(1991) estimate the deadweight loss of insurance in the U.S. to be $125 to $400 billion in today’s
health economy.
The finding of significant deadweight loss from moral hazard in the health insurance
market suggests that the optimal health insurance policy is one in which individuals bear a large
share of medical costs within some affordable range, and are only fully insured when costs
become unaffordable. This structure is optimal because coverage for all medical expenditures
(what is often called first dollar coverage, since all dollars of medical spending, starting with the

first dollar, are covered) has little consumption smoothing benefit, but a large moral hazard cost.
The consumption smoothing benefit from first dollar coverage is small because there is
little utility gain to risk averse individuals from insuring a small risk (relative to income). At the
same time, this first dollar coverage has substantial moral hazard cost because it encourages
individuals to overuse the medical system, demanding care for which the social costs exceed the
social benefits.
While first dollar coverage is clearly not optimal, the optimal level of coverage will
depend on the nature of risk preferences and the medical risk profile. An example of an optimal
insurance plan would be Feldstein's (1971) "Major Risk Insurance" plan, in which individuals
would face a 50% copayment on all services until they spent 10% of their income on medical
care, beyond which there would be no more copayments.
Feldstein's proposal is much less generous than the typical private insurance plan in the
U.S., however, which features relatively low copayments for enrollees. The typical insurance
plan in the U.S. has a deductible of $200-$600, a copayment for physician visits of $15-$20, and
a copayment for hospital stays of $0-$240 (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2005). As a result, the
insurance coverage distribution in the U.S. is best described by a line such as that in Figure 1,
from Gruber (2005a). On the horizontal axis is the population of the U.S., arrayed from least
generous insurance (uninsured) to most generous, and on the vertical axis is the generosity of
health insurance products. Forty-five million Americans have no health insurance, so they lie at
zero on the vertical axis (no insurance = zero generosity). The line then jumps up, and there is an
increasing generosity of insurance for the remainder of the population.

This discontinuity has the potential to explain a share of uninsurance in the U.S. If there
is a large share of individuals who would value some insurance, but not the (close to) first dollar
coverage provided by most insurance plans, then they may choose to be uninsured instead. So
why does this discontinuity arise? Why are people either uninsured or "over-insured"? There
are five possible reasons.

The “Offset” Hypothesis
One explanation could be that if individuals are not covered for minor expenditures, this
will raise their major expenditures: less use of the doctor leads to more use of the hospital. This
is a common liberal criticism of high patient-cost plans. But this contention is not supported by
the RAND experiment, which found total costs to be falling as copayments rose. Indeed, RAND
indicated an anti-offset result: more use of primary care led to more, not less, use of hospital
care, once again with no overall health benefit.
There is one exception to this fact, however, as highlighted by Gruber (2006): primary
care for low-income chronically ill patients does seem to be important to their health – and even
cost effective in reducing ultimate health care costs. The research reviewed in Gruber (2006)
suggests that the optimal insurance policy should cover maintenance care for chronic illness with
smaller cost sharing than other care. A limiting case of such an approach is suggested by
Fendrick et al. (2001), who promote patient copayments targeted to specific patient diagnoses
and related treatments (such as zero copayments on diabetes maintenance drugs for diabetics). It

is not clear whether this is feasible in the short run, but this “value based insurance design”
approach holds promise as a future means of targeting demand-side incentives.

The Tax Subsidy
As noted above, health insurance expenditures by employers are tax subsidized: payments
to employees in the form of wages are taxed, while payments in the form of health insurance are
not. As emphasized by Feldstein (1973), this leads to overconsumption of health insurance.
Indeed, recent evidence suggests that tax subsidization leads to a large rise in health care
spending among those firms that do offer insurance, with an elasticity of spending with respect to
the tax subsidy of -0.7 (Gruber and Lettau, 2004). This cannot be the full explanation, however:
there is not a robust catastrophic (or, even better, Feldstein MRI-like) insurance market even in
the non-tax subsidized nongroup market.

Regulation
Another reason for this discontinuity could be minimum standards regulations in the
insurance market. If the government mandates that insurance plans contain certain features, then
indviduals who do not value those features at their cost may find it unattractive to purchase
insurance, while those who continue to purchase insurance will have a generous policy.
In fact, however, the regulatory requirements on insurance policies in the U.S. are fairly
modest. Some benefits, such as coverage for the expenses of pregnancy and continuation
coverage for those who lose insurance, are mandated at the federal level. Many others are

mandated at the state level: for example, most states mandate coverage of mammography and
substance abuse treatment, while some states have mandates for benefits such as invitro
fertilization and chemotherapy. States also in some cases impose premium taxes on insurance,
which would explain underinsurance but not overinsurance.
Existing evidence suggests, however, that these state mandated benefits are not a major
cause of uninsurance - or overinsurance. Indeed, Gruber (1994) finds that virtually all insurance
plans voluntarily cover mandated benefits even in states where they are not mandated. As a
result, this article finds that when states add these mandates, it does not affect the rate of health
insurance coverage in the state. Moreover, a number of states have passed “barebones”
insurance laws which allow insurers to offer “mandate-free” or “mandate-lite” benefits packages
to certain groups of insured (e.g. small firms), yet there has not been much demand for such
policies. Thus, overinsurance appears to be the result of choice and not state regulation.

The Access Motive
A fourth reason why insurance may be so generous is that the traditional analysis overstates
the costs of moral hazard. In traditional models of insurance, the additional medical care used
because of subsidized costs is all due to moral hazard. Nyman (1999) highlights a problem with
this view: some of the additional medical care used because of insurance is not due to moral
hazard, but rather due to the fact that individuals can now afford better treatments (income
effects). That is, moral hazard technically arises only through substitution effects, but the

estimates of Feldman and Dowd referenced above reflect both substitution and income effects.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to decompose the increase in use of medical care into access
and moral hazard effects. The access motive is a more important consideration for very
expensive treatments, and not for everyday treatments such as physician's visits. Thus, the
access motive may explain the strong demand for catastrophic limits on spending out of pocket
but it is unlikely to explain why individuals don't face higher copayments for more minor
medical procedures, such as physician office visits.

Psychological Motivations
Finally, there may be motivations for holding insurance that go beyond the simple expected
utility model that underlies the welfare calculus used here. For example, individuals with selfcontrol problems (a la Laibson (1997) or O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)) may use insurance as a
commitment device. Alternatively, it may be that individuals simply don't like associating
financial transactions with medical care. They would rather pay higher insurance up front to
avoid dealing with the difficult decisions about whether they want to pay at the time of care.

Summary: Still a Mystery
In summary, there are a variety of hypotheses for why so many individuals are uninsured,
but no clear sense that this set of explanations can account for 47 million individuals. Moreover,
an equally important and related mystery is why insurance is so much more generous for most
individuals than would be suggested by optimal insurance theory. That is, a unified theory of

insurance coverage in the U.S. must therefore explain not only why so many individuals don’t
have coverage, but also why those who do have coverage are over-insured. This should be a top
priority for future research in health insurance markets.

Part III: Why Should we Care About the Uninsured?
The public debate over the uninsured takes as a given that this is a major social policy
problem, with 18% of the non-elderly population an unacceptably high share of the population to
be without insurance. As highlighted earlier, however, the simple fact that so many are without
insurance is not necessarily a cause for public policy intervention; many more individuals don’t
own their own homes or are obese. So why should we care about uninsurance in the U.S.?

Externalities
The classic argument for increasing insurance coverage is the externalities associated
with underinsurance. For example, there are physical externalities associated with
communicable diseases; uninsured people are less likely to receive vaccinations and care for
communicable diseases. Since such a small share of medical expenditures are related to
communicable disease, however, this is not a major rationale for universal health insurance (as
opposed to universal vaccination). There is also significant financial externality imposed by the
uninsured on the insured through uncompensated care; when the uninsured don't pay their
medical bills, those costs are passed on to other users of the medical system. As noted earlier,

however, such uncompensated care amounts to $30 billion each year, which is quite small
relative to the $2 trillion health economy.

Labor Market Inefficiency
Another potential inefficiency associated with uninsurance, however, is distortions to the
labor market caused by partial employer-based coverage. It is possible that many individuals are
afraid to search for or move to jobs where they would be more productive because they are afraid
of losing their health insurance coverage. This reluctance to change can lead to a mismatch
between workers and jobs that can lower overall U.S. productivity. This is often referred to as
“job lock”, the unwillingness to move to a better job for fear of losing health insurance (see
Gruber, 2001 for a discussion of the theory of job lock).
The problem of job lock is a potentially important welfare cost of the employer-based
private health insurance system in the U.S. Empirical studies, reviewed in Gruber and Madrian
(2004), confirm that mobility from job-to-job is reduced by job lock. The central estimate, in
Madrian (1994), suggests that mobility may be reduced by as much as 25%.
At the same time, the fact that mobility is reduced does not necessarily have major
welfare implications. As highlighted in Gruber and Madrian (2004), while there is a large
literature documenting the problem of job lock, there is no work that focuses on the welfare
implications of this phenomena. Gruber and Madrian offer some back of the envelope
calculations which suggest that the welfare cost is unlikely to be large, on the order of 0.1-0.2%
of GDP. But these are very rough calculations and this is an area of considerable uncertainty.

Paternalism
The major motivation for caring about the uninsured is paternalism: the concern that
individuals may be harming themselves by not buying insurance. There is a clear belief among
the public and policy-makers that being uninsured is bad for your health. A recent Institute of
Medicine (IOM) study reviewed hundreds studies documenting the health problems associated
with uninsurance. The IOM estimated that uninsured individuals use only half as much medical
care as the insured, and have a mortality risk that is 25% higher, with over 18,000 people dying
each year because of lack of insurance.9 The studies reviewed by the IOM, however, were
mostly observational analyses documenting a correlation between a lack of health insurance and
poor health, perhaps controlling for other correlates of insurance and health. Few, if any, of
these studies dealt with the endogeneity of health insurance coverage with respect to health
status.
Several other studies have used careful empirical methods to more carefully document a
causal impact of health insurance on health. Hanratty (1996) studied the impact of the staggered
introduction of national health insurance in Canada across the nation’s provinces, and found that
it was associated with a 4% decline in the infant mortality rate and an 8.9% decrease in the
incidence of low birth weight among single mothers. Lurie et al. (1984) studied the removal of
eligibility for public insurance for a large group of individuals in California (due to a fiscal crisis
in that state in the early 1980s that forced the state to cut back its insurance coverage), and found
9

http://www.iom.edu/Object.File/Master/17/748/0.pdf, accessed October, 2005.

that health deteriorated significantly after losing public insurance. For example, blood pressure
rose among hypertensive patients, leading to 40% increased risk of dying: overall, 5 of the 186
patients who had lost insurance had subsequently died, compared to zero of the 109 patients in a
comparable group of individuals who did not lose insurance coverage. Currie and Gruber
(1996a, b) studied the expansion of public insurance across and within the U.S. states in the
1980s and 1990s. They found that this expansion led to an 8.5% reduction in infant mortality
and a 5% reduction in child mortality.
Note that these findings do not contradict the conclusions of the RAND Health Insurance
Experiment, which found that varying the extent of insurance (through the coinsurance rate) had
no impact on health. This is because the HIE made no one uninsured; all individuals were fully
insured for expenditures above an out-of-pocket limit of $1000.
Putting these two pieces of evidence together suggests the structure of a “medical
effectiveness curve” for the U.S., as shown in Figure 2 from Gruber (2005a), which graphs the
relationship between medical spending and the associated improvement in health, or the "health
effectiveness curve." The horizontal axis in this figure measures the level of medical spending.
The vertical axis measures the marginal health benefit from the next dollar of medical spending.
Health benefits in this stylized figure are represented in dollar terms, or the monetary value of
improving one's health; that is, an improvement of $1 means that this improved health is worth
$1 to the individual. Each point on this curve is the marginal improvement in health for
spending the next dollar on health care.
Initially, health spending is very productive in terms of improving health status, because

there are a series of very cost effective medical interventions (e.g. vaccination against influenza
for the elderly). Point A, for example, measures the marginal health benefits to spending another
dollar of health care once one has spent $1000 on health care. This next dollar of spending
improves the individual's health by $5 (vertical axis), or 5 times the increase in health spending.
This situation appears to represent the case of the uninsured, where some health care provision is
very important for health.
As health spending rises, however, we move from clearly cost effective interventions to
less clearly cost effective interventions. At point B, moving from $2000 to $2001 of health care
spending improves the value of health by $1, equal to the spending increase. At point C, moving
from $5000 to $5001 in health care spending improves health by 10 cents, or one-tenth the
spending increase. Eventually, additional spending does no good in terms of improving health
and the effectiveness curve flattens out; some claim that overuse may actually reduce one's
health. This appears to be the case as we move from less to more generous insurance coverage,
as in the RAND HIE. Once again, this suggests an optimal insurance configuration where there
is broad coverage by insurance, but that insurance is relatively spare, in contrast to the insurance
situation in the U.S. today with joint under and overinsurance.

Redistribution
The final reason for caring about the uninsured is redistribution. As discussed earlier, the
uninsured are a disproportionately low income group, and insurance is very expensive relative to

their incomes; therefore, they may be a group to whom we want to redistribute health care
resources. Of course, this raises the important question of why we would choose this form of
redistribution rather than cash. One rationale could be paternalism: many feel that health care is
a basic right, like food or shelter, and individuals are more willing to distribute to ensure these
“rights” than simply to raise the utility of the poor. Another could be failure of intra-household
utility maximization, whereby providing health insurance to poor children offsets the failures of
their parents to sufficiently provide for their care.

Part IV: Covering the Uninsured: Background Issues10
Solving the problem of the uninsured poses no great mystery. There are a variety of
ways in which the government could achieve universal insurance, or even just significantly
reduce the number of uninsured. But different approaches pose different tradeoffs, both
economically and politically. In this section, I discuss the set of background economic and
political issues relative to covering the uninsured, before discussing specific policy options in
Part V.

Political Considerations
There are two political constraints in particular which appear to be tightly binding on
fundamental health insurance reform at this point. First, it is difficult to envision a solution to

10

This section draws heavily on Gruber (2005b).

the problem of the uninsured which does not involve in some way the private insurance industry.
A common complaint about the private-based health insurance system in the U.S. is its high
administrative costs; private insurance administrative costs average 12%, while those of
Canada’s National Health Insurance (NHI) system only amount to 1.3% (Woolhandler, et al.,
2003). Removing this gap would provide an attractive means of saving a large amount of
money, money that could be recycled to cover the uninsured.
But this is easier said than done. The health insurance industry in the United States has
revenues of over $500 billion per year, making it a very concentrated interest that would have to
be defeated to move to nationally provided health insurance. Likely for this reason, efforts at
national health insurance in the U.S. have never gone far, even when they included a large role
for private health insurance, such as the Clinton health reform plan of 1994. Moreover, the
majority of Americans, particularly those working for large firms with choice of plans, are quite
content with their private health insurance. Telling them that they have to give up that insurance
so that a minority of Americans can get covered will be a very difficult political sell (as
witnessed by the attacks on the Clinton plan based on fear of restricting insurance choice).
In recent years, as a result, even major health reform proposals work off the existing private
insurance market model.
The second constraint is the fiscal situation of the U.S. government. Except for a brief
window at the end of the 20th century, the U.S. government budget has been in significant deficit
for thirty years, and this deficit shows no sign of abating. Moreover, the government faces

enormous unfunded liabilities under the Social Security and (especially) Medicare programs as
the population ages. Given these pressures, major new expenditures to cover the uninsured are
likely to engender a major political battle. This highlights the importance of the budgetary
considerations discussed next.

Bang for the Buck
Given the budgetary limitations on any public approach to expand health insurance
coverage, a key concept that drives reform is the bang for the buck (BfB) of the policy. There
are several different means of defining BfB, which I will review below, but the basic concept is
the extent to which new public spending is directed to those who would otherwise be uninsured,
as opposed to “buying out the base” of existing insured individuals. The issue that is central to
all of these definitions is targeting. If individuals were indelibly labeled as “insured” or
“uninsured”, then the government could easily target new tax subsidies to those labeled
uninsured, with no spending on those labeled insured. In fact, this is not the case: insurance
status is a choice of the individual, and can respond to government policy in a way which causes
the policy to have lower budgetary efficiency.
It is useful to think about the uninsured as tuna and those who already have insurance as
dolphins. The goal of environmentally conscious fishermen is to catch as many tuna as possible
in their nets, while minimizing the number of dolphins who are caught by those nets (which
happens since tuna and dolphins swim together in the ocean). If the uninsured tunas were
swimming in a separate ocean than the insured dolphins, the problem would be minimized. And

if the uninsured tunas greatly outnumbered the insured dolphins, then there would also be a
minimal dolphin catch. But, in reality, the 47 million uninsured tunas mostly swim in a part of
the ocean where there are 190 million privately-insured dolphins, making it difficult if not
impossible for policymakers to design insurance nets to capture the tuna without pulling in the
much more numerous dolphins.
This point is emphasized in Table 2, which is tabulated from the March 2006 Current
Population Survey (CPS). This table shows, for various income groups in the U.S., the number
of the group which is uninsured, the number which is publicly insured, and the number which is
privately insured. One-third of the uninsured have incomes below $20,000 per year. In this
income range, the uninsured make up over one-third of the total population. Another 40% of the
uninsured have incomes between $20,000 and $50,000 per year, and in this income range the
uninsured make up about one-quarter of the total population. But one-seventh of the uninsured
have incomes between $50,000 and $75,000 per year, and in that range they make up less than
one-seventh of the total population; another one-seventh of the uninsured have incomes above
$75,000 per year, and in this range they make up only 7% of the total population. Thus, the vast
majority of the uninsured reside in parts of the income distribution where they make up less than
one-quarter of the population, making targeting of the uninsured a challenge.
There is another important sense in which the uninsured tuna and the insured dolphins
swim together: most insurance is provided through firms, and take-up of employer-provided
insurance is only partial. Indeed, roughly one-quarter of the uninsured work in firms that offer

insurance. But these are very costly tuna to collect, because those uninsured who are offered
insurance represent only about 7% of the total pool that is offered. So targeting this 7% of
uninsured within firms without providing government subsidies to the other 93% already insured
is very difficult.

Measuring Bang for the Buck
Three sources of inefficiency potentially plague any policy designed to cover the
uninsured with a high bang for the buck. First, if the government subsidizes a particular form of
insurance coverage, it might spend money on those who already have coverage through that
subsidized form. The group that will benefit most clearly from tax credits for non-group
insurance, for example, is those already holding non-group insurance. Yet the use of subsidies
by this group raises costs while doing nothing to reduce the number of the uninsured.
Second, government subsidies to a particular form of insurance coverage may “crowdout” other forms of insurance coverage. For example, when the government subsidizes nongroup insurance, it can lead those with group insurance to move to the non-group market, either
by their decision (switching out of employer-provided insurance) or by their employer’s decision
(dropping the offering of insurance at the firm). This can lead to more government spending as
individuals move from a non-subsidized form of insurance (or less-subsidized, such as employer
insurance) to a more subsidized form of insurance.
The third source of low BfB is the possible reduction in coverage for those who are
insured before the policy is put into place. For example, suppose that a firm has a workforce that

is predominantly, but not universally, eligible for a non-group credit. This firm might decide to
stop offering health insurance, since the majority of its employees can use the credit instead. The
minority of employees that cannot use the credit is then out of luck, however, since they have
lost their employer insurance with no subsidized alternative, and these individuals may become
uninsured. This rise in uninsurance offsets the reductions in the ranks of the existing uninsured,
reducing the BfB of the program.
Based on this discussion, there are several different means of measuring bang for the
buck – or its inverse, the “buck for the bang”. The traditional measure is dollars of public
spending per person newly insured. Another measure of interest is the extent of crowd-out: the
reduction in employer-provided insurance when other forms of insurance are subsidized (or
when the existing subsidies to employer-provided insurance are reduced). A third measure of
interest is the (gross) rise in the uninsured, due for example to firm dropping. A fourth measure
is the share of beneficiaries of any intervention that were previously uninsured, as opposed to
receiving subsidies to remain insured.
A final measure incorporates the type of uninsured who are impacted by reform. Simply
counting the dollars per newly insured is not satisfactory when different reforms may appeal to
very different populations. For example, a reform which significantly increases insurance
coverage among children will have much lower costs than one which has the bulk of its impacts
in the much higher cost adult population. But this is an unfair comparison because the latter
reform is essentially extending more valuable insurance coverage than is the former. So a better

measure of buck for the bang is the spending per dollar of insurance value provided, which
incorporates both the numerical increases in coverage and the cost of the individuals provided
coverage.

Relation to Social Efficiency
As economists, we typically don’t care about budgetary concepts such as bang for the
buck, but rather social efficiency. Socially, if an individual was formerly covered by employerprovided insurance and switches to identical coverage through a government-subsidized product,
then the only direct financial efficiency consequence is the deadweight loss of raising the
additional funds necessary to finance the net cost to the government. There are indirect
efficiency consequences as well that are not directly financial, such as the fact that moving from
an employer-based system to a non employer-based system might raise labor market efficiency.
The numerical simulations below, however, will touch only indirectly on these larger
social efficiency issues. I will present results on the financial consequences for the government
and the amount of redistribution that is inherent in each of the policy options. But I will not
endeavor to undertake a full social welfare analysis. Such an analysis would extend these results
by estimating not just government spending but all changes in spending across various groups in
society, and weighting the well-being of each group (insured and uninsured) and thereby valuing
the transfers across them. Such an exercise would be a very useful extension of this work.

Part IV: Covering the Uninsured: Behavioral Responses
Policies designed to reduce the number of uninsured come in four (non mutuallyexclusive) varieties: policies that expand entitlement to free (or very low-cost) public insurance;
policies that expand access to private pooling mechanisms for purchasing insurance; policies that
subsidize the purchase of private insurance; and policies that mandate insurance coverage. For
each of these types of policies, we would ideally like to know the impacts on the distribution of
insurance coverage, on the distribution of income, and on public sector costs. Uncovering these
effects requires modeling the behavioral responses to intervention in insurance markets.
In this section, I review what is known about those behavioral responses. In doing so, I
draw on a large literature that has emerged in health economics over the past 20 years to study
this important set of issues.

Take-Up of, and Crowd-Out by, Public Insurance
The first set of relevant issues is the effect of public insurance expansions on insurance
coverage. Expanded public insurance entitlement can raise public insurance coverage through
two channels. The first is take-up of the public insurance by those who would be otherwise
uninsured. As documented in a variety of social insurance contexts, take-up of public
entitlements of this type is far from certain.11 The reasons for incomplete take-up of free benefits
is unclear, likely reflecting some mix of mis-information about eligibility and stigma about
11

See Remler, Rachlin and Glied (2001) for a discussion of take-up of social insurance programs and its implications
for public health insurance.

taking a public handout. Take-up has been shown to be at least partly rational in a variety of
social insurance contexts, however, with higher benefits entitlements or more extreme risks when
not publicly insured leading to higher take-up rates.12
The second channel is crowd-out, or movement from other forms of insurance to public
insurance. The extent of crowd-out of private insurance by public insurance is unclear ex ante.
On the one hand, leaving private insurance for public insurance might be attractive, because the
Medicaid insurance package is much more generous than that provided by the typical private
insurance plan and it doesn't cost anything. In terms of benefits, many employer-provided
insurance plans don't include the "optional" benefits covered by virtually all state Medicaid
programs, such as dental or vision care. In terms of costs, the typical employer who offers health
insurance charges families over $200 per month, or almost $2500 per year, to enroll in an
insurance plan. Moreover, while copayments are low in employer-provided insurance relative to
the optimal level recommended by economic theory, they are much higher than those paid in
Medicaid, which has close to zero copayments mandated by law. Indeed, based on its benefits
package, the Medicaid program provides the “best insurance money can’t buy”!
On the other hand, there are disadvantages to moving from private insurance to Medicaid
as well. First, while Medicaid provides generous benefits, in many states the program
reimburses physicians quite poorly, making it difficult in some areas to find a physician who will
accept Medicaid reimbursement. Second, Medicaid is an uncertain entitlement, subject to both
the vagaries of the political process and the uncertainty of income; if income rises too much,
12

For example, in the context of unemployment insurance, see Anderson and Meyer (1997).

individuals may find themselves disqualified from the program. Given potential difficulties in
re-enrolling in private insurance, individuals may be wary of leaving that insurance in the first
place for a public entitlement.
A large body of empirical research has investigated the degree of take-up and crowd-out
of expanded public insurance, as reviewed in Gruber and Simon (forthcoming). It is clear from
this past work that overall take-up of public insurance expansions is low; for example, Gruber
and Currie (1996b) estimate take-up of Medicaid expansions over the 1984-1992 period at only
23%, while Gruber and Simon estimate take-up of the S-CHIP expansions of the 1996-2002
period at only about 10%. Low overall takeup is not surprising, however, given that the large
majority of individuals made eligible for public insurance through these expansions already had
private health insurance.
This raises the question of the degree of crowd-out of private insurance. The earliest
work on crowd-out, Gruber and Cutler (1996), suggested that crowd-out was quite large, with
private insurance coverage declining by half as much as public insurance enrollment was rising.
Subsequent work has been mixed. This work is summarized in Gruber and Simon
(forthcoming), who estimate that crowd-out is about 60%.

Firm Reactions to Changes in the Insurance Environment
A second set of behavioral reactions that are crucial for modeling the impact of insurance
market interventions is firm reactions to changes in the insurance environment. In theory,

subsidies to employer spending on insurance should raise the odds that employers offer
insurance, increase the share of the insurance burden financed by employers, and lead employers
to choose more generous insurance plans. At the same time, subsidies to non-employer
insurance options (such as non-group insurance and Medicaid) should lead employers to do the
opposite.
There is a sizeable literature that estimates the reaction of employers to changes in aftertax insurance prices, as reviewed in Gruber (2002). Most of this work has focused on estimating
the elasticity of firm offering with respect to the after-tax price. Studies using variation in tax
prices in a cross section have yielded large estimated elasticities in the range of -0.6 to -1.8, but
these studies suffer from omitted variables that contemporaneously determine tax prices and
insurance offer decisions. Other studies have overcome this difficulty by using changes in tax
subsidies over time that vary across firms (e.g. due to state tax changes). These studies have
yielded more modest estimates of -0.3 (Gruber and Lettau, 2004, for the U.S. context) to -0.5
(Finkelstein, 2002, for supplemental benefits in Canada). Gruber and Lettau (2004) highlight
that the response of employer offering to tax price variation is concentrated in small firms; the
elasticity of offering for small firms was -0.69, while it was close to zero for medium and large
size firms.
There is also a sizeable literature on the impact of after-tax prices on employer insurance
spending. Once again, the most convincing estimates come from tax changes over time.
Woodbury and Hammermesh (1992) analyze all fringe benefit expenditures around the Tax
Reform Act of 1986 in a panel data set of colleges and universities. They conclude that tax

reform substantially reduced the demand for fringes, with an estimated elasticity in excess of -2.
But this is not focused on health insurance spending per se, so it is difficult to disentangle the
impact on health insurance. Gruber and Lettau (2004), in the study described above, also
examine the impact of tax subsidies on employer-provided insurance spending, using similar
variation across states in their tax systems to Woodbury and Hamermesh. And they also find a
quite large elasticity of insurance spending of -0.7.
A particularly important margin of response to tax subsidies is how employers change
their contributions to health insurance for employees. This response would be subsumed in the
spending elasticities cited above, but it is important to break it out distinctly due to the potential
impact of changing contributions on employee takeup. Gruber and McKnight (2001) use the
Current Population Survey to study the impact of tax changes on the decisions of employers to
pay all of the cost of their health insurance plans. The share of employers paying all those costs
fell from 44% in 1982 to 28% by 1998. They model this variable as a function of a variety of
factors, including the tax subsidy to employer-sponsored insurance. They find that for each 10
percentage point reduction in the tax subsidy, the share of employers paying all of the costs of
health insurance falls by 1.7 to 3.8%.

Individual Reactions to Insurance Price Changes
A central parameter for evaluating the effects of tax subsidy policy is the elasticity of
employee takeup of employer-provided insurance if it is offered. As highlighted earlier, takeup

among those offered is fairly high for all firm sizes and average firm wage levels. But does
takeup respond to the prices charged to employees for insurance?
The answer, to date, appears to be no. Two articles have studied the response of
employee takeup to the price charged for insurance (Chernew, Frick and McLaughlin, 1997;
Blumberg and Nichols, 2001). Both papers find that firms that charge more for insurance have
no lower takeup of their insurance policies. These papers do run into the potential problem that
firm premium decisions are endogenous to employee tastes. The direction of bias here is
unclear, and depends on whether firms set low employee premiums when there are tastes for
insurance, or when there are not (because of paternalism or to satisfy insurance company
conditions for high employee takeup). Gruber and Washington (2005) surmount this problem by
examining the “natural experiment” provided by the Federal government’s action, first for postal
workers in 1994 and then for other workers in 2000, to make employee premiums tax deductible.
This move to tax deductibility, which significantly lowered the net premium cost of insurance,
had no effect on the odds of taking up insurance by individuals or by families.
At least three-quarters of the uninsured are not offered health insurance. Thus, in
focusing on the impacts of tax subsidies to nongroup insurance, the key question is how price
sensitive this group will be in their takeup decisions. Unfortunately, we have essentially no
evidence on this critical question. The one relevant paper is Marquis and Long (1995), who
estimated the demand for non-group insurance coverage among workers not offered employersponsored coverage as a function of the area-specific price of non-group coverage. They
estimate an elasticity of non-group coverage of -0.3. The problem with this approach is that the

price of insurance reflects not only true price differences in insurance (differences in the load
factor, or the premium cost relative to expected claims expenses), but also differences in medical
costs, and differences in underlying tastes for insurance. Both of these latter two factors will bias
downward any estimate of the impact of area insurance prices on demand. Thus, we are left with
only a lower bound on the elasticity of insurance takeup among those not eligible for employer
coverage.

Part V: Covering the Uninsured: Policy Impacts
The large literature reviewed in Part IV provides a valuable set of insights about how
changes in the insurance market can affect individuals and firms. But it is not straightforward to
translate these insights into policy conclusions, particularly when multi-faceted policies affect
several margins at once (e.g. simultaneous subsidies to employers and expansions of public
insurance). To move from these behavioral estimates to policy impacts requires a modeling
framework.
Typically, academics have played the role of providing the inputs to this framework,
behavioral elasticities of the type reviewed above, while leaving to others (such as the
Congressional Budget Office) the problem of how to incorporate these elasticities into outcome
effects of policy interventions. Over the past decade, however, I have developed a microsimulation model similar to that used by government scoring agencies, incorporating the best
evidence from health economics to predict policy outcomes. This section reviews briefly the

structure of this model, and then uses it to assess alternative reforms to cover the uninsured.

The Micro-Simulation Model
The micro-simulation model that I use is described in detail in Gruber (2005b), so I just
summarize the key elements here. The model takes as its base data from the February and
March, 2001 Current Population Survey, updated to 2006. These data are matched to
information on health insurance premiums and health costs. Data on the premiums for employer
insurance, and the distribution of premiums between employers and employees, comes from the
2004 MEPS, updated to 2006. For non-group insurance, a premium for a healthy 40 year old
male is assigned based on analyses from the Community Tracking Survey and the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), and data on premiums collected by the Commonwealth
Fund, the Health Insurance Association of America, and e-health insurance.com. This premium
is then adjusted by age, sex and health status using factors provided by an actuarial consulting
firm.
These data are used to develop a micro-simulation model that computes the effects of
health insurance policies on the distribution of health care spending and private and public sector
health care costs. This model takes as inputs both the data sources described above and the
detailed parameterization of reform options. The model first turns these policy rules into a set of
insurance price changes; for example, if the policy intervention is a tax credit for non-group
insurance, then the model computes the implied percentage change in the price of nongroup
insurance for each individual in the model. These price changes are then run through a detailed

set of behavioral assumptions about how changes in the absolute and relative price of various
types of insurance affect individuals, families, and businesses.
The key concept behind this modeling is that the impact of tax reforms on the price of
insurance continuously determines behaviors such as insurance take-up by the uninsured and
insurance offering by employers. The model assiduously avoids “knife-edge” type behavior,
where some critical level is necessary before individuals respond, and beyond which responses
are very large. Instead, behavior is modeled as a continuous function of how policy changes (net
of tax) insurance prices.
In doing this type of analysis, a number of assumptions must be made about how
individuals will respond to tax subsidies, through their effect on the price of insurance. These
assumptions have been developed based on the available empirical evidence reviewed above,
although there are many holes in this literature that must be filled in order to fully simulate
policy effects. These assumptions are reviewed in detail in Gruber (2005b).
A key aspect of modeling health insurance policy is appropriately reflecting the decisions
of firms, since 90% of private health insurance is provided by employers. Economists tend to
model firm decision-making as reflecting the aggregation of worker preferences within the firm.
The exact aggregation function is unclear, as reviewed in Gruber (2002); in my model I assume
that the mean incentives for the firm (e.g. the average subsidy rate for non-group insurance) is
what matters for firm decision-making.
The fundamental problem faced by individual-based micro-simulation models is that data

on individuals does not reflect the nature of their co-workers, so that it is impossible to exactly
compute concepts such as the average non-group subsidy in a worker’s firm. I address this
problem by building “synthetic firms” in the CPS, assigning each CPS worker a set of coworkers selected to represent the likely true set of co-workers in that firm. The core of this
computation is data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics that show, for workers of any given
earnings level, the earnings distribution of their co-workers, separately by firm size, region of the
country, and health insurance offering status. Using these data, I randomly select 99 individuals
in the same firm size/region/health insurance offering cell as a given CPS worker in order to
statistically replicate the earnings distribution for that worker’s earnings level. These 99 workers
then become the co-workers in a worker’s synthetic firm.
These synthetic firms then face three decisions about insurance: offering (whether to
offer if now not offering, or whether to drop if now offering); the division of costs between
employer and employees; and the level of insurance spending. I model each of these decisions
as subject to “pressures” from government interventions. In particular, subsidies to outside
insurance options (non-group insurance or public insurance) exert pressures on firm’s offering
insurance to drop that insurance and to raise employee contributions; subsidies to employer
spending on insurance cause firms that don’t now offer insurance to be more likely to offer,
causes firms to pick up a larger share of the cost of insurance, and causes a rise in employer
spending on insurance; and subsidies to employee spending on insurance also raise the odds that
firms offer insurance, and raise employer spending on insurance, but they lower employer
contributions to insurance.

Finally, a key assumption for this type of modeling is the assumption on the wage
incidence of changes in employer-insurance spending. Gruber (2001) reviews the literature on
incidence, and concludes that there is strong evidence for full shifting to wages of firm-wide
changes in insurance costs, with some evidence of shifting to sub-groups within the workplace as
well. I make a mixed incidence assumption for this model. Any firm-wide reaction, such as
dropping insurance or lowering employee contributions, is directly reflected in wages. Yet any
individual’s decision, such as switching from group to non-group insurance, is not reflected in
that individual’s wages; rather, the savings to the firm (or the cost to the firm) is passed along on
average to all workers in the firm.
Mine is far from the only approach to modeling the impact of health reform on
individuals, firms and the government. Modelers such as the Lewin Group and the Urban
Institute (through their TRIM model) have been working on these issues for years. They have
well developed models which provide interesting alternative scenarios for policy-makers. I rely
on my model for this paper since these alternatives are not readily available to me for
comparable runs. But a critical issue for policy makers is to “get under the hood” of all models
of this type and to consider the implications of key sensitivity checks of the models’
construction.

Modest Reforms
I first consider two examples of modest reforms to insurance markets. These reforms

provide a benchmark for the kind of health policy changes that are most likely in today’s fiscally
constrained environment13 I consider both a typical “liberal” incremental reform (expanding
public health insurance entitlements) and “conservative” incremental reform (offering tax credits
for the purchase of nongroup insurance). To compare these alternative reforms, it is useful to put
them on an even footing in terms of coverage impacts. I do so by comparing alternative policies
that cover either 5 or 10 million new persons.

Public Insurance Expansion
The first approach that I consider is expanding our existing public insurance entitlement.
Currently, that entitlement is fairly generous for children (extending at least to 200% of poverty),
but not at all for non-children who don’t then become pregnant. This has the strange feature that
individuals are covered quite generously until they turn 19, then covered not at all. This implies
that extending public insurance to the lowest income adults would be a much better targeted
expansion than would further extensions to middle class children.
Table 3 considers two such expansions. The first column shows the effects of extending
free public health insurance to all individuals under 100% of the poverty line. In this range,
children and many parents are already eligible for public insurance, but single adults and most
parents are not.
This policy reduces the number of uninsured in the U.S. by 5.1 million. This is only a net

13

This subsection updates some of the estimates in Gruber (2005b) for incremental reforms. See that paper for a
richer discussion of these options and other alternatives.

figure, however; there is a gross reduction in the number of uninsured of 5.2 million, but an
offsetting very small increase in the number of uninsured of 0.1 million from firms dropping
insurance in reaction to this increase in outside insurance opportunities. Roughly 85% of the
individuals receiving the benefit of this expansion were previously uninsured; the remaining 15%
were individuals who had private insurance but who chose to move to public coverage (crowdout). As a result, there is a reduction in the number of employer insured of 0.6 million. Overall,
the number of persons on public insurance rises by 6.2 million, so that the total amount of
crowd-out (1 - change in uninsured/change in public insurance) is about 17%.
This expansion has a total cost to (federal plus state and local) government of $26 billion
per year. This amounts to about $5000 per person newly insured. This reflects not only the cost
of paying for the previously uninsured who sign up for public coverage, and also the cost of
paying for those previously insured who sign up (which increases the numerator but not the
denominator). This cost also includes some (relatively small) tax incidence effects from changes
in wages due to the policy.
The next row of the table focuses on the targeting of the policy, in terms of which types
of formerly uninsured individuals are helped by this intervention. The average age of those
newly insured by this policy is over 33 years, and 21% of those who were newly insured by the
policy were in fair or poor health. For comparison, among all uninsured persons, the average
age is 31 years old, and 9% are in fair/poor health. Thus, the set of individuals getting covered
by these expansions are in much worse health, and therefore more costly to insure, than are the

set of uninsured individuals not affected by the policy.
This point is summarized by the next row in the table, which shows the average cost
associated with insuring the uninsured who gain coverage through these initiatives. For this
calculation, I have imputed to each person in the data the cost of insuring them through nongroup insurance, which varies by age/sex and by health status. I then discount this figure by
33% to approximate the cost in a group environment. I then add up across all newly insured, and
subtract it for those newly uninsured, to get a total “value” of insurance provided. This is a
somewhat arbitrary normalization but provides a useful means of comparing different policies.
For the public expansion this cost is almost $5400; by way of comparison, for all uninsured
persons, the average cost is less than $3400.
The next row shows government spending per dollar of insurance value provided, which
is the ratio of government spending to the sum of the insurance value provided to the uninsured;
this is the “buck for the bang” measure described earlier, for this arbitrary normalization of
insurance value. For this expansion the figure is $0.93; that is, relative to providing those newly
insured with coverage at an age/sex/health specific group-level price, this policy spends 7 cents
less per person. As emphasized earlier, this is not a measure of deadweight loss or social
efficiency; it is simply a convenient proxy for capturing the targeting of this approach versus
alternatives that we consider below.
The final rows in the table show the redistributive impact of this policy by documenting
the share of government spending going to different income groups. In this case, the result is
simple: 100% of the benefits go to those below the poverty line, with no benefits for those above

the poverty line. This is a highly redistributive policy.
The second column of Table 3 shows the effect of a much larger expansion in public
insurance, making all individuals with incomes below 185% of the Federal poverty line eligible
for public insurance. This expansion covers 10 million persons, although Medicaid rolls rise by
13.5 million, for a net crowd-out of one-quarter. The cost of this policy is much larger, at $47
billion per year, or $4700 per newly insured. Thus, despite the much larger expansion, the cost
per newly insured is quite similar to column 1.
The set of individuals newly insured by this more generous expansion is somewhat
healthier than in column 1, and the typical person newly insured has an average cost of $4690.
The bang for the buck is somewhat lower than in column 1: spending per dollar of insurance
value provided is roughly $1. This is a common feature of most health policies: as they are
expanded more broadly, the value of insurance coverage per dollar of spending falls. This is
because more generous expansions are less well-targeted, leading to a bigger problem of crowdout.
Moreover, the spending is somewhat less redistributive with this policy. In this case,
55% of spending goes to those below the poverty line, and 45% to those between 100% and
200% of the poverty line.

Non-group Tax Credits
Table 4 considers an alternative popular incremental reform: tax credits for the purchase

of non-group insurance.14 Individuals and families are eligible for a credit of one size for single
coverage, and another size for family coverage. This eligibility is restricted on income in one of
two ways. First, I consider a “tightly targeted” non-group credit, which is fully available to
single persons with income below $15,000, or families with income below $30,000, and which
phases out as income rises, with eligibility ending at $30,000 for singles and $60,000 for
families. Second, I consider a “loosely targeted” non-group credit, which is fully available to
single persons with income below $25,000, or families with income below $50,000, and which
phases out as income rises, with eligibility ending at $50,000 for singles and $100,000 for
families. The required magnitude of these credits is shown in the second row of the table; for
each level of targeting, I choose a credit amount sufficient to hit the targets of 5 and 10 million
newly insured persons.
Several differences in the effects of nongroup tax credits and public insurance
expansions are immediately apparent. First, there is a much larger gross increase in the
uninsured offsetting the gross reduction in meeting our targets of 5 and 10 million. For example,
to hit the target of a 10 million person reduction with tight targeting requires take-up by 13
million persons, since there is a 3 million person rise in the uninsured from firm dropping.
Second, there are very large reductions in the number of employer insured, due both to employee
switching and firm dropping; roughly 20% of this reduction comes from switching, and the
remaining 80% is due to firm dropping. Moreover, a much smaller share of the recipients,

14

For all of the tax policy analyses considered here, I assume that any tax policies are fully refundable. Roughly half
of the uninsured do not pay taxes, so any non-refundable tax policy will have very limited impact.

between 37 and 50%, were previously uninsured; the majority are using this subsidy while
retaining insurance coverage.
This may seem like a lot of firm dropping in response to (in particular in the first column)
fairly small non-group credits, but it is important to remember that this reduction in employer
insured is off of a very large base of 180 million employer-insured. The 5.5 million reduction in
employer-insured in the first column, for example, represents just 3.5% of the employer-insured
in the U.S. Even with the enormous non-group credit shown in the second column, $6000 for
singles and $15,000 for families, only 6.6% of those with employer-provided insurance drop that
insurance. This is partly because the credits are targeted to only a subset of employees, so that
on average the pressure on employers to stop offering insurance (due to the erosion of the
employer tax advantage) is small. When the credit is more loosely targeted, in the final two
columns, the reduction in the employer-insured is much larger, rising to almost 13% of the
employer-insured in the final column.
Third, this approach is by and large more expensive than public expansions. For the 5
million target, with the tightly targeted credit, the cost is fairly similar to the public expansion.
The other approaches, however, are much more expensive, both overall and (by definition) per
person newly insured. Indeed, a loosely targeted credit designed to cover 10 million persons
costs almost $80 billion per year, or about $8000 per person newly insured.
Another striking difference between public expansions and non-group credits is the
targeting of the spending. In contrast to public expansions, the set of uninsured who gain

coverage through non-group credits are much healthier than the average uninsured person, with
an average age of 27-28 years, and only 5-7% in fair or poor health. The average cost of
insuring the newly insured is only $2400-$2700 per year.
The reason for these low costs is that these types of partial subsidies to non-group
insurance are much more attractive to the healthy individuals for whom the lower cost of nongroup insurance makes these a larger percentage subsidy. As a result, the value of insurance
provided by these policies is much less than for a public expansion. Indeed, as the last row
shows, it takes $2.40 to $4 of government spending to provide just $1 of insurance coverage
through these policies. Thus, by this measure, non-group tax credits are much lower bang for the
buck than public insurance expansions.
Another lesson is that the BfB of non-group credits is much higher if they are tightly,
rather than loosely, targeted. This is because, given the low incomes of the uninsured, more
tightly targeted credits spend a higher share of their costs on those who would otherwise be
uninsured. This highlights the value of tightly targeting health care interventions, but it is not
clear how politically realistic such targeting will be, given the broad reach of recent tax policy
changes. For example, the child tax credit, originally introduced as a benefit for low income
families with children, now extends to families with incomes over $100,000 per year.
Because of the less stringent targeting than for public insurance, non-group credits also
embody less redistribution, as shown by the distribution of net spending in the final rows of the

table.15 The credits that extends coverage to 5 million persons distributes benefits to those up to
300% of poverty; the credits that extend coverage to 10 million persons distributes significant
benefits up to 400%, and some even beyond that level.
In order to combat the erosion of nongroup tax credits, many have suggested extending
tax credits to the employee portion of employer-provided insurance as well. While this does to
some extent mitigate the erosion of the employer market, however, it significantly raises costs.
This follows directly from the observations made earlier: 93% of those offered already have
insurance, so most of the dollars from credits to employees will flow to those already covered,
and those who don’t take up employer offers are very price insensitive, so there will be relatively
few newly insured from such a policy. Moreover, employers would react to such a policy by
raising employee contribution levels to some extent, so that the incidence of the tax credit would
not be fully on lowering health insurance costs. Indeed, if the government attempted to newly
insure 5 million persons through a tightly targeted credit to employees to purchase employerprovided insurance, it would require a credit of $1200 for individuals and $3000 for families, for
a total cost of $55 billion per year. Costs rise exponentially as the credit is more loosely targeted
or attempts to cover more individuals.

More Fundamental Reform
If politicians decided to consider more fundamental reforms to address the problem of the
15

The spending distribution here incorporates both the spending through non-group tax credits and the savings
through lower public insurance payments to these groups for those leaving public insurance.

uninsured, there are a number of directions that could be considered. A more comprehensive
plan to deal with the uninsured must address three issues. The first is pooling. Insurance is most
efficiently provided through a pool, and a key goal of fundamental health care reform must be to
provide some type of pooling mechanism through which individuals can buy their insurance and
avoid the harsh non-group market. The second is affordability. The largest single private
insurance pool in the U.S. today is the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program (FEHBP),
which insures almost 3 million federal employees. Employees face a variety of choices in this
pool, but all are fairly generous and subject to mandated restrictions such as mental health parity
(mental health expenses must be covered as generously as other expenses). The cost of
insurance under the most frequently chosen Federal plan, the Blue Cross plan, is very high: for
2006 this plan cost $5125/year for individuals and $11750/year for families. For a family of four
at 200% of the poverty line, this would represent more than one-quarter of their family income!
The final issue is mandates. A key issue that must be faced by policy makers as they
address the uninsured is whether the goal is universal insurance access, or universal insurance
coverage. As will be clear from the estimates below, there is no way to design a public policy
that gets close to universal coverage without mandating that individuals are insured. But
mandates are politically unpopular, so politicians may want to focus instead on ensuring that
everyone who wants insurance can afford to have it.
To give some sense of the cost and consequences of fundamental reform, I consider three
options that take as given the constraint that private insurance provision must be a centerpiece of
any reform plan.

Universal Access
The first option is to ensure universal access of individuals to an affordable insurance
product. Here I follow the proposal for national universal coverage developed in Gruber
(2007a). This proposal shares many features with the ambitious health care reform passed in
Massachusetts in 2006 (and considered by other states as well, most prominently California), as
well as many of the proposals of the leading Democratic candidates in the 2006 Presidential
election.
Public insurance entitlements would be frozen at their current level, which is typically
around 200% of poverty for children in most states, and 100% of poverty for parents in many
states. The remainder of low income individuals in the U.S. who do not have access to
employer-sponsored insurance would be enrolled in new state-specific pools. Insurance
companies would be eligible to offer insurance in these state-specific pools on a guaranteed issue
basis. Within these pools, insurance prices would be completely community rated.
The benefits packages within the pools would vary based on income group. For the
lowest income individuals (below the poverty line), coverage would be complete, with minimal
cost-sharing. As income increased, modest cost sharing would be introduced, reaching levels
typical of new employer-sponsored insurance offerings for the highest income members of the
pool (e.g. $20 copayment for physician visits or generic prescriptions). There would be other
cost controls in place, such as selective networks, to offset the more generous benefits provision

for lower income groups. In my modeling I assume that the cost of insurance in this pool would
equal the typical cost of insurance to large firms in each state, and that this would fall to 95% of
that level for those between 100 and 200% of poverty, to 90% of that level for those between
200% and 300% of poverty, and to 85% of that level for those between 300% and 400% of
poverty through cost-sharing. There would also be redistribution across plans within this pool to
offset very high cost cases, with all insurers contributing to a fund going to offset part of the
highest cost patients.
Insurance would be subsidized in this pool by setting a limit as a share of income that
individuals must pay for their insurance. These limits would be:
•

2% of income between 100 and 150% of the poverty line

•

4% of income between 150% and 200% of the poverty line

•

6% of income between 200% and 250% of the poverty

•

8% of income between 250% and 300% of the poverty line

•

10% of income between 300% and 350% of the poverty line

•

12% of income between 350% and 400% of the poverty line

For comparison purposes, median income in the U.S. is between 3 and 4 times the poverty line,
depending on family structure, so this schedule would subsidize insurance up to median income
levels.
This approach leaves one low income group without subsidies, however: low-income
individuals who are offered employer-sponsored insurance (ESI) but who cannot afford the
premiums. As highlighted earlier, the vast majority of low-income individuals who are offered

ESI take it; for example, 87% of those between 100% and 200% of the poverty line offered ESI
are insured (Gruber, 2007b). Thus, it is very expensive to try to insure the remaining individuals.
At the same time, there is a major horizontal equity concern with allowing subsidies only to
those who aren’t offered ESI (particularly once, as described below, the tax subsidy to ESI is
removed).
Gruber (forthcoming) reviews the options for addressing this inequity and suggests that a
middle ground may be the “voucher” option that is present in the recent Massachusetts
legislation: low income individuals offered ESI can come to the low-income pool, but must bring
their employer contribution with them (e.g. employers must contribute their share to offset the
state’s pool cost). While expensive, this approach reduces costs by forcing individuals to move
to the pool if they want to get the subsidies, rather than just subsidizing their status quo ESI
choice. I include this option in the modeling here.
For middle and high income families (above 400% of poverty), states would set up a new
pooling mechanism which would replace the existing non-group insurance market. This new
pool would be guaranteed issue (insurers cannot reject any applicants), and there would be no
health rating, although insurers could age-rate on a 2:1 basis (e.g. the premiums for the oldest
enrollees can be no more than 2 times the premiums for the youngest enrollees). Any insurer
participating in the pool would contribute towards a risk pool that offset part of the costs of the
very highest cases, to deal with adverse selection within the pool.

While the new pooling mechanism would replace the non-group market, firms would also
be allowed to buy into that pool, although if they did so they could not offer their employees any
non-pool source of insurance (to avoid sending the worst risks to the pool). If an employer
offered the pool to its employees, the employer would be list-billed for the individual costs of
each enrollee.
The results of introducing a plan of this nature are shown in the first column of Table 5.
This policy would increase the number of newly insured by 23 million, slightly less than half of
the total stock of uninsured, despite these very generous subsidies and comprehensive reform.
This reflects the fact that many uninsured are uninterested in obtaining coverage even at very
high subsidy rates. Although this is clearly an out of sample prediction, this result is consistent
with the large number of uninsured who are eligible for free public insurance but do enroll as
well as the large number of uninsured who are eligible for highly subsidized employer-provided
insurance but do not enroll. Universal access does not lead to anywhere near universal coverage.
This policy is also very expensive, with a cost of $102 billion, or almost $4500 per
person newly insured. This reflects the fact that the vast majority of those taking up the new
subsidies were already insured; only 25 million of the 52 million persons using these subsidies
were formerly uninsured. There is a sizeable erosion of employer provided insurance, with 16
million persons losing employer coverage, which represents about 10% of the existing stock of
employer-insured individuals. Most of those move to the new pool, but over 2 million become
uninsured as their firms drop insurance but they don’t find the new pool option attractive.
This policy attracts individuals who are slightly sicker than the average uninsured person,

with average costs per person of $3430 (about $70 higher than the typical ex-ante uninsured).
Overall, this policy spends $1.10 per dollar of insurance value provided. It is quite striking that
the BfB of this policy is better than for non-group tax credits. In other words, compared to a
broad tax credit designed to cover 10 million uninsured, this policy covers more than twice as
many individuals for only 25% more in spending, and delivers almost four times as much
insurance value.

Individual Mandate
The second option is to move from the universal access approach in the first column to a
universal coverage approach. This can be accomplished by adding an individual mandate, a
requirement that all individuals obtain insurance coverage, to the universal access option. This is
similar to what is required for auto insurance in many states, and was a centerpiece of the recent
Massachusetts reform plan. We have no experience to date with such a mandate, so it is hard to
predict the success of enforcement. But, if penalties are strong (as they are in Massachusetts,
where individuals are liable for half of insurance premiums even if uninsured), the mandate is
likely to be close to universal. For simplicity here I assume that the mandate provides close to
universal coverage, although in practice some individuals are likely to “slip through the
cracks”.16
The results of adding this mandate are shown in the second column of Table 5. By
16

In particular I assume that 95% of those who would not voluntarily choose to insure are forced to insure through
the mandate.

assumption, 97% of the uninsured are covered. What is striking about these results, however, is
the incredible gain in budgetary efficiency relative to the universal access plan. Total public
sector costs have risen only 25%, while the number of newly insured has increased by 100%.
There is less displacement of employer insurance than in the universal access plan, as individuals
use their employer coverage to meet this mandate. With the mandate, 52% of those using the
new pooling mechanism were formerly uninsured. As a result, the cost of this option per newly
insured falls to $2732, and the government spends only $0.81 per dollar of insurance value
provided.17
This is a striking set of findings, which suggest that besides any moral/paternalism
argument for universal coverage, there is a budgetary efficiency argument as well. The logic of
this result is quite clear: relative to a universal access plan, moving to universal coverage
involves mandating those who would be uninsured to sign up for insurance. This is the ultimate
form of targeting; these individuals are only tunas, so there is no money wasted on dolphins.
This result in particular highlights the important difference between bang for the buck
and social efficiency. The higher bang for the buck in this case comes from mandating that
uninsured individuals spend money they would prefer to spend elsewhere on their health
insurance coverage (above and beyond subsidies). Yet there is no gain in social efficiency unless
there are externalities from this increased insurance or other gains through paternalism.

17

This estimate is below 1 because I value insurance at the typical group insurance cost, while I assume that
individuals enroll in less generous plans at higher income levels in the pool.

Universal Coverage Financed By Removing the Tax Exclusion
A natural source of financing for this initiative is the tax subsidy to employer-sponsored
insurance. While employer expenditures on wages are taxed, employer expenditures on health
insurance are not. This large subsidy to ESI is regressive, since it is worth the most to the higher
income individuals with the highest tax rates, and induces inefficient insurance purchase, since
individuals can buy excessively generous insurance with pre-tax dollars. Of course, in the
absence of any other pooling mechanism for workers, the ESI tax subsidy may be a necessary
price to pay to keep the employer-sponsored insurance market intact. With a new pooling
mechanism, however, reductions in ESI are not problematic: it doesn’t matter whether
individuals obtain insurance through employers or not, so long as they have access to some
group insurance mechanism. That is, introducing a new pooling mechanism can facilitate reform
of the regressive and inefficient existing subsidy to ESI.
Moreover, the employer tax expenditure has a natural advantage as a source of financing:
the tax savings grow at the rate of health insurance premiums, matching the growth in
expenditures under a universal coverage plan. Since health insurance premiums grow faster than
incomes, supporting universal coverage through an income tax would require a constantly rising
tax rate. Limiting the exclusion, however, would provide a stream of revenues that grows at the
same rate as program costs.
I therefore consider the impact of funding the national plan by removing this tax subsidy.
More specifically, employer expenditures on health insurance would be included in taxable

wages for individuals. An important issue to resolve with such a policy is whether ESI
expenditures would be included for both income and payroll tax purposes and, if included for
both, whether the resulting revenues would be dedicated to the social insurance programs
financed by these payroll taxes or “recaptured” for use in funding the universal coverage plan. I
assume that revenues would be recaptured from the payroll tax.
The next column of Table 5 shows the implication of using this financing source for the
mandate plan. Strikingly, this source is sufficient to move than pay for the national plan, with
$50 billion in excess government tax revenues.18 That is, the current tax exclusion is so large
that by rededicating it in this fashion the U.S. can have universal coverage with a $50 billion
surplus. This $50 billion is much less than the amount lost through the tax exclusion ($200
billion) minus the cost of the individual mandate in Table 5 ($120 billion), because the removal
of the employer exclusion significantly erodes the employer-provided insurance base. Whereas
employer-provided insurance fell by only 7 million before removing the exclusion, it now falls
by 24 million, or 15% of the base, when the exclusion is removed as well. Of course, with the
individual mandate, this is simply a shift of insurance coverage from employers to the new
pooling mechanism. Indeed, the cost per dollar of insurance provided is negative, since the
government saves money yet provides insurance.
Of course, such a policy would have enormous distributional consequences, as the
spending would be targeted to the lower parts of the income distribution, while the higher taxes
would be borne by higher income groups. In fact, while there would be substantial gains for

18

This estimate understates the total gain in revenues from removing the tax exclusion because it does not count the
revenues collected on employer-provided insurance to retirees.

those below 2 times the federal poverty line, there would be losses at 3 or more times the federal
poverty line; median income in the U.S. is between 3 to 4 times the poverty line depending on
family structure. Thus, such a policy would be a net loser for more than half the families in the
U.S.
The surplus revenue of $50 billion can be used to reduce the net losses from the proposal
experienced by those with income above about three times the poverty line. For example, these
funds are sufficient to provide a credit equal to $380/individual and $950/family for those
between 300% and 400% of the poverty line, falling to $120/individual and $340/family for
those between 400% and 500% of the poverty line. The final column shows that adding such a
credit would lead to no net losses between three and four times poverty, and would reduce by
25% the losses between four and five times poverty. Thus, by recycling revenues, we could
finance universal coverage in the U.S. in a way where there are net gains to all income classes
below median incomes in the U.S.

Part VI: Conclusions
There is a standard health policy joke that goes like this. Health policy expert X dies and
goes to heaven. When there, he is greeted by God himself, and the Lord says that the health
expert can ask one question of Him before entering heaven. The health expert chooses to ask
God "Will we ever have universal health insurance coverage in the United States"? To which
God answers "Yes, but not in my lifetime".
This joke summarizes the prospects that policy experts see for universal health coverage

in the United States. Over the past few years, however, significant coverage expansions have
started to percolate up from the U.S. states. Maine's "Dirigo" program, enacted in 2003, gained
national attention for its bold structure and large subsidies to individuals and employers. More
recently, the state of Illinois announced plans to cover all uninsured children in the state. Most
dramatically, the state of Massachusetts recently enacted legislation that transforms the nature of
the insurance market, subsidizes a large share of the low-income population so that they can
afford health insurance, and mandates that all residents be covered by health insurance. This is
truly a comprehensive reform that brings the state as close to universal coverage as anywhere in
the United States. This effort is being replicated in other states, most notably in debates in
California.
These recent episodes have brought the issue of the uninsured back to the forefront of
policy debates in the U.S. In this article, I have reviewed the issues that must be addressed as
policy makers consider further expansions in insurance coverage at either the state or national
level. There are many routes to expanded insurance coverage in the U.S., and economic analysis
has a lot to offer in terms of guiding us towards the correct path.
Of course, this essay has focused on only one of the two major problems facing the U.S.
health economy. The other is the rapid rise in health care costs. Health care spending has more
than tripled as a share of GDP since 1950, and by current projections will reach almost 50% of
health care over the next 75 years (Congressional Budget Office, 2007). What has driven this
rapid rise in health care costs? A large health economics literature has studied this question, and
the general conclusion is a simple one: the rapid rise in health care costs has been driven by

quality-improving technological change.
The focus of the current article (as well as most recent policy proposals) is to focus on
covering the uninsured, and to pay only lip service to fundamental cost control. This is by
design. The solution to problems of low insurance coverage is clear, and there is an emerging
consensus path to addressing this concern in a politically feasible fashion. But the science of
cost control is much less advanced, and at this point we have no way to fundamentally control
health care costs which does not deny American consumers (and their health providers) care that
they value.
Measures that are being discussed today under the guise of cost control are very modest.
Initiatives such as medical electronic records, increased preventive and maintenance care, and
reduced medical errors will at best reduce health care costs by only a few percentage points, and
are just as likely to raise costs (with increasing quality). With health care costs rising at 7-10%
per year, this is not enough. To fundamentally control health care costs we need to actually be
willing to deny care that does little for health – but which consumers now want. This would be
accomplished either through government technology policy, medical standards, or global
provider budgets.
There remains considerable controversy, however, over the appropriate level of such
government interventions – or whether they are necessary at all. Some argue that past health
care spending advances are well justified by improvements in population health (Cutler, 2004).
Others argue that there are huge variations in health care practices across the U.S. with no

tangible benefits (e.g. Skinner, Staiger and Fisher, 2006). These two views are not mutually
inconsistent: the first speaks to the average value of medical care over time, the second to the
marginal value of additional health care at a point in time. But until we can resolve these
discrepancies and understand more fully which health care spending is justified and which is not,
we are not prepared to take on the American public on cost control. The fundamental insight of
this round of reform is therefore to not hold the attainable goal (universal coverage) hostage to
the (currently) unattainable goal, fundamental health care cost control.

References
Akerlof, George A.(1970). “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (3): 488-500.
Anderson, Patricia, and Bruce Meyer (1997) “Unemployment Insurance Take-up rates and the
After-Tax Value of Benefits.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.112: 913-937.
Arrow, Kenneth (1963). “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” The
American Economic Review, 53 (5): 941-973.
Buchmueller, T., Lo Sasso, A.(2004) "The Effect of the State Children's Health Insurance
Program on Health Insurance Coverage," Journal of Health Economics. Vol 23, 5: 10591082.
David Card & Lara D. Shore-Sheppard (2004).. "Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to
Identify The Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions On Low-income Children," The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 752-766.
Congressional Budget Office (2007). “The Long Term Outlook for Health Care Spending”.
CBO, November 2007.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996a). “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political Economy,
104, p. 1263-1296
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996b). “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of
Medical Care, and Child Health,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, p. 431-466.
Cutler, David (2004). Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care
System. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cutler, David, and Jonathan Gruber (1996). “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, p. 391-430
Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber. “Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-off between
Competition and Adverse Selection.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (2): 433-66.
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser (2001). "The Anatomy of Health Insurance", in Anthony
Culyer and Joseph Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume IA,
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 563-643.
Feldman, Roger, and Bryan E. Dowd. (1991). “A New Estimate of the Welfare Loss of Excess
Health Insurance.” American Economic Review, 81 (1): 297-301.

Feldstein, Martin (1971). “A New Approach to National Health Insurance,” Public Interest, 23,
93-105.
Feldstein, Martin (1973). “The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance.” Journal of Political
Economy, 81(2): 251-80.
Fendrick, A. Mark, Dean G. Smith, Michael E. Chernew and Sonali N. Shah (2001). “A BenefitBased Copay for Prescription Drugs: Patient Contribution Based on Total Benefits, Not
Drug Acquisition Costs,” American Journal of Managed Care, 7, 861-867.
Finkelstein, Amy (2002). “The Effect of Tax Subsidies to Employer-Provided Supplementary
Health Insurance: Evidence from Canada,” Journal of Public Economics, 84, 305-340.
Gruber, Jonathan (1994). “State Mandated Benefits and Employer Provided Insurance,” Journal
of Public Economics, 55, p. 433-464.
Gruber, Jonathan (2001). “Health Insurance and the Labor Market,” in Joseph Newhouse and
Anthony Culyer, eds., The Handbook of Health Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland,
p. 645-706.
Gruber, Jonathan (2002). “Taxes and Health Insurance,” in James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and
the Economy 16, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002, p. 37-66.
Gruber, Jonathan (2003). “Medicaid,” in Robert Moffitt, ed., Means Tested Transfer Programs
in the U.S. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003, pp. 15-77.
Gruber, Jonathan (2005a). Public Finance and Public Policy, 1st Edition. New York: Worth
Publishers, 2005.
Gruber, Jonathan (2005b). “Tax Policy for Health Insurance,” in James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy
and the Economy 19. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005, p. 39-63.
Gruber, Jonathan (2006). “The Role of Consumer Copayments for Health Care: Lessons from
the RAND Health Insurance Experiment and Beyond”. Report for the Kaiser Family
Foundation, October 2006. Available at http://www.kff.org/insurance/7566.cfm
Gruber, Jonathan (2007a). “Taking Massachusetts National: Incremental Universalism for the
U.S.,” mimeo, Hamilton Project of the Brookings Institution.
Gruber, Jonathan (2007b). “Evidence on Affordability From Consumer Expenditures and
Employee Enrollment in Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance,” mimeo, MIT.
Gruber, Jonathan (forthcoming). “Incremental Universalism for the U.S.: The States Move
First,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Gruber, Jonathan and Michael Lettau (2004). “How Elastic is the Firm’s Demand for Health

Insurance?,” Journal of Public Economics, 88, p. 1273-1294
Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte Madrian (1996). “Health Insurance and Early Retirement:
Evidence from the Availability of Continuation Coverage,” in Advances in the Economics
of Aging, David Wise, ed., 1996, p. 115-143.
Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte Madrian (2004). Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job
Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature,” in Catherine McLaughlin, ed., Health
Policy and the Uninsured. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press, p. 97-178
Gruber, Jonathan and Ebonya Washington (2005). “Subsidies to Employee Health Insurance
Premiums and the Health Insurance Market,” Journal of Health Economics, 24, p. 253276.
Gruber, Jonathan and David Rodriguez (forthcoming). “How Much Uncompensated Care do
Doctor’s Provide?,” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.
Gruber, Jonathan and Kosali Simon (forthcoming). “Crowd-Out Ten Years Later: Have Recent
Public Insurance Expansions Crowded Out Private Insurance,” Journal of Health
Economics, forthcoming.
Hanratty, Maria. (1996). “Canadian National Helath Insurance and Infant Health.” American
Economic Review. 86: 276-84.
Herring, Bradley (2005). "The Effect of the Availability of Charity Care to the Uninsured on the
Demand for Private Health Insurance." Journal of Health Economics, 24,: 225-252.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2005). Employer Health Benefits 2005 Annual Survey. Available at
http://www.kff.org/insurance/7315/index.cfm
Laibson, David (1997) “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 62, May 1997, 443-77.
Lurie, Nicole et al. (1984). “Termination from Medi-Cal–Does It Affect Health?” New England
Journal of Medicine 311: 480-4.
Madrian, Brigitte C. (1994) “Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is There
Evidence of Job-Lock?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 109: 27-54.
Manning, Williard et al. (1987). “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence
from a Randomized Experiment,” American Economic Review, 77, 251-277.
Marquis, Susan, and Stephen H. Long (1995). “Worker Demand for Health Insurance in the
Non-Group Market,” Journal of Health Economics, 14, 47-63.
Nyman, John A (1999). "The Economics of Moral Hazard Revisited," Journal of Health

Economics, 18 (6): 811-824.
O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (1999). “Doing it Now or Later,” American Economic
Review, 89, 103-124.
Pauly, Mark (1974) “Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of Moral
Hazard and Adverse Selection,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88, pp. 44-62.
Rask, K.N. and K.J. Rask (2000) “Public Insurance Substituting for Private Insurance: New
Evidence Regarding Public Hospitals, Uncompensated Care Funds, and Medicaid,”
Journal of Health Economics, 19, pp. 1-31.
Remler, D., Rachlin, J., and Glied, S. (2001) “What can the take-up of other programs teach us
about how to improve take-up of health insurance programs?” NBER Working Paper No.
8185.
Skinner, Jonathan, Douglas Staiger, and Elliot Fisher (2006). “Is Technological Change in
Medicine Always Worth It? The Case of Acute Myocardial Infarction,” Health Affairs
web exclusive, February 2006.
Woolhandler, S. et al. (2003). “Costs of Health Care Administration in the United States and
Canada.” New England Journal of Medicine 349: 768-75.

Table 1: Non-Elderly Americans’ Source of Health Insurance Coverage
People (Millions)
Total Population

Percentage of Population

260.0

100.0%

179.4

69.0%

161.7

62.2%

17.7

6.8%

45.5

17.5%

Medicare

6.5

2.5%

Medicaid

34.9

13.4%

7.1

2.7%

46.5

17.9%

Private
Employment-based
Individually purchased
Public

TRICARE/CHAMPVA
Uninsured

Table 2: Nonelderly Population With Selected Sources of Health Insurance, by Family Income
Family Income

Total

Employment
-Based
Coverage

Individually
Purchased

Public

Uninsured

Population (Millions)
260

161.7

17.7

45.5

46.5

Under $10,000

20.5

2.2

2.1

9.5

7.3

$10,000-$19,999

22.8

4.9

2.1

9.1

7.8

$20,000-$29,999

25

9.8

2

6.8

7.6

$30,000-$39,999

25.6

13.4

1.9

5.5

6.1

$40,000-$49,999

23.4

15

1.6

3.6

4.5

$50,000-$74,999

48.9

36.6

3

5.2

6.4

$75,000 and over

93.8

79.9

5

5.7

6.7

Total

Table 3: Public Insurance Expansions as a Benchmark
Policy

Expand to 100% of
Poverty

Expand to 185% of
Poverty

Changes in Population (Millions of Persons)

Uninsured Takeup
Uninsured Share of Takeup (%)
Uninsured Increase
Net Decrease in Uninsured
Net Change in Employer Insured
Net Change in Non-group Insured
Net Change in Publicly Insured

5
84%
0
5
-1
-1
6

11
78%
1
10
-3
-1
14

Costs ($2006 Millions)
Total Cost Per Year
Cost Per Newly Insured ($)

$26,000
$5,000

$47,000
$9,000

38
21%
$5,400
$0.93

37
17%
$4,700
$0.99

Targeting
Average Age of Newly Insured
% of Newly Insured in Fair/Poor Health
Average Cost of Newly Insured
Spending Per Dollar of Insurance Provided

Distribution of Federal Spending Benefits (%)
<100% Poverty
100 - 200% Poverty
200 - 300% Poverty
300 - 400% Poverty
400 - 500% Poverty
> 500% Poverty

100%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

54%
46%
0%
0%
0%
0%

Table 4: Non-group Credits
Targeting

Tight (15-30k/30-60k)

Loose (25-50k/50-100k)

Target

5 Million

10 Million

5 Million

10 Million

Credit Amount

$2500/
$6250

$6000/
$15000

$2200/
$5500

$4300/
$10750

9
37%
4
5
-11
17
-1

16
40%
6
10
-20
32
-2

$61,500
$6,100

$29,300
$5,900

$79,100
$7,900

28
7%
$2,700
$2.50

27
5%
$2,400
$4.01

29
6%
$2,700
$3.67

Changes in Population (Millions of Persons)
Uninsured Takeup
Uninsured Share of Takeup (%)
Uninsured Increase
Net Decrease in Uninsured
Net Change in Employer Insured
Net Change in Non-group Ins.
Net Change in Publicly Insured

7
44%
2
5
-5
12
-1

13
49%
3
10
-10
22
-2

Costs ($2006 Millions)
Total Cost
Cost Per Newly Insured ($)

$22,600
$4,400
Targeting

Average Age of Newly Insured
% Newly Insured Fair/Poor Health
Average Cost of Newly Insured
Spending Per $ of Insurance

27
5%
$2,400
$2.35

Distribution of Federal Spending Benefits (%)
<100% Poverty
100 - 200% Poverty
200 - 300% Poverty
300 - 400% Poverty
400 - 500% Poverty
> 500% Poverty

29%
48%
20%
3%
0%
0%

27%
45%
22%
5%
0%
0%

17%
33%
29%
14%
5%
2%

16%
32%
29%
15%
6%
2%

Table 5: New Pool with Subsidies and Changed Tax Exclusions
Tax Exclusions

None

None
Yes

Eliminate
All
Yes

Distributionally
Neutral
Yes

Individual Mandate

No

Voucher

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Changes in Population (Millions of Persons)
Uninsured Takeup
Uninsured Share of Takeup (%)
Uninsured Increase
Net Decrease in Uninsured
Net Change in Employer Insured
Net Change in Non-group Ins.
Net Change in Publicly Insured
Net Change in New Pool

25
48%
2
23
-16
-7
-7
53

33
53%
0
45
-7
-7
-3
62

34
43%
0
45
-24
-7
-3
78

34
43%
0
34
-24
-7
-3
78

($50,000)
($1,100)

($14,500)
($400)

31
10%
$3,400
($0.33)

31
10%
$3,400
($0.10)

Costs ($2006 Millions)
Total Cost
Cost Per Newly Insured ($)

$101,900 $124,100
$4,400
$2,700
Targeting

Average Age of Newly Insured
% Newly Insured Fair/Poor Health
Average Cost of Newly Insured
Spending Per $ of Insurance

32
10%
$3,400
$1.10

31
10%
$3,400
$0.81

Distribution of Federal Policy Benefits ($B)
<100% Poverty
100 - 200% Poverty
200 - 300% Poverty
300 - 400% Poverty
400 - 500% Poverty
> 500% Poverty

$50
$39
$14
$1
($1)
($3)

$63
$49
$20
$2
($0)
($2)

$63
$43
0
($28)
($28)
($87)

$63
$43
$0
$0
($21)
($87)

