                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          USING TAX EXPENDITURES TO ACHIEVE ENERGY POLICY GOALS

                                          Gilbert E. Metcalf

                                        Working Paper 13753
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13753


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




Erich Muehlegger, Curtis Carlson, and Jay Mackie, provided helpful comments on a preliminary draft.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Using Tax Expenditures to Achieve Energy Policy Goals
Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 13753
January 2008
JEL No. H2,H23,H24,Q42,Q48

                                              ABSTRACT

Tax expenditures are a major source of support for energy related activities in the federal budget exceeding
direct budget support for energy by a factor of nearly six. Focusing on the policy goals of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and petroleum consumption, I find these tax expenditures highly cost ineffective
at best and counterproductive at worse. The tax credit for ethanol is an example of a cost ineffective
subsidy. The cost of reducing CO2 emissions through this subsidy exceeded $1,700 per ton of CO2
avoided in 2006 and the cost of reducing oil consumption over $85 per barrel.


Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu
                 Using Tax Expenditures to Achieve Energy Policy Goals

                                         Gilbert E. Metcalf*

        Energy related tax expenditures are an important element of federal budget policy

towards energy. Nonna A. Noto (2004) points out that the outlay equivalent for energy

tax expenditures in the federal budget in FY 2002 was nearly nine times actual outlays

for energy activities in that year, the highest ratio of tax expenditures to outlays for any of

the budget functions in that year.1 The comparable ratio in FY 2008 is 3.4 though it rises

to 5.8 if the ethanol tax credit is included as a tax expenditure. This paper considers the

following questions. Can these tax expenditures be justified by important policy goals?

If so, are they cost-effective instruments for achieving those goals?

I.      Tax Expenditures for Energy

        Table 1 lists the energy-related tax expenditures for major fuel categories. Not

included in Table 1 is the 51¢ per gallon Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit for the

use of ethanol in motor vehicle fuels. Technically this is not a tax expenditure, a point I

return to below. Including it would add $3.46 billion in fiscal year 2008 and $14.17

billion over the period 2008 to 2012.




* Department of Economics, Tufts University, Medford, MA, 02155 and National Bureau of Economic
Research. Email: gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu. Erich Muehlegger, Curtis Carlson, and my discussant, Jay
Mackie, provided helpful comments.
1
  Strictly speaking one cannot sum tax expenditures due to interactions among them. But the main point
would be unaffected were one to make a more accurate measure of all energy tax expenditures taking into
account interactions: federal energy policy is driven more by off-budget subsidies than by on-budget
spending. This point is only reinforced if one takes into account implicit subsidies such as the Price-
Anderson Act for nuclear power.
                        Table 1. Energy-Related Tax Expenditures
                                                               2008                   2008-2012
         Alternative Fuels
         New technology credit                                  960                         5,530
         Credit for holding clean renewable energy bonds         80                           480
         Other: energy facility bonds, clean-burning
         vehicles, fuel cell, microturbine, and solar
         investments                                            400                           800
                                     Total: Alternative Fuels 1,440                         6,810
         Coal
         Capital gains treatment of royalties on coal           170                           840
         Credit for investment in clean coal facilities          50                           690
         Partial expensing for advanced mine safety
         equipment                                               20                            20
                                                  Total: Coal   240                         1,550
         Energy Conservation
         Exclusion of utility conservation subsidies            110                           540
         Allowance of deduction for certain energy
         efficient commercial building property                 170                           270
         Credit for energy efficiency improvements for
         new and existing homes                                 180                           210
                                 Total: Energy Conservation     460                         1,020
         Oil and Gas
         Excess of percentage over cost depletion, fuels        790                         3,860
         Expensing of exploration and development costs,
         fuels                                                  840                         2,910
         Other: alternative fuel production credit, partial
         expensing for new refinery investment,
         accelerated depreciation for certain natural gas
         pipelines and other investments                      1,110                         2,550
                                          Total: Oil and Gas  2,740                         9,320
         Source: Office of Management and Budget (2007). Amounts are in millions of dollars.
         Note that tax expenditures should not be summed due to interactions among them. The
         summing is done for illustrative purposes to indicate the relative importance of tax
         expenditures across different fuel sources.



         The first thing to note is that the largest share of tax expenditures for energy goes

to the oil and gas industry to encourage domestic production.2 Renewables are the


2
   If the ethanol tax credit were included as a tax expenditure, the renewables category would have the
largest share.


                                                                                                          2
second largest. The allocation is imperfect. The largest energy tax expenditure, the new

technology credit, is included in the alternative fuels category. This is a collection of

investment and production tax credits for renewable power sources (solar power, fuel

cells, wind power, etc.). In addition to subsidizing electricity production from renewable

sources, credits are available for advanced coal-based projects, refined coal, nuclear

power, hydropower, and coal extracted on Indian land. This is the single largest tax

expenditure category for energy.

       The next two largest tax expenditures are grouped in the oil and gas category. The

first is for percentage depletion. As natural resources are extracted from booked reserves,

the value of those reserves is diminished. This is a legitimate cost of business and a

Haig-Simons income tax would allow a deduction for the value of the resource extracted.

Rather than take deductions for the value of the extracted resource, oil, gas, and coal

producers are allowed to deduct a fraction of the revenue arising from sale of the

resource. Currently percentage depletion is allowed for independent producers at a 15

percent rate for oil and gas and 10 percent for coal. Percentage depletion is allowed on

production up to 1,000 barrels of average daily production of oil (or its equivalent for

natural gas). In addition, the depletion allowance cannot exceed 100 percent of taxable

income from the property (50 percent for coal) and 65 percent of taxable income from all

sources.

       The third largest item also applies to oil and gas production. Producers may

expense intangible drilling expenses (labor and material costs associated with drilling

wells). Normally the non-capital expenses associated with oil exploration and drilling

would be capitalized and the costs allocated as income is earned from the well over its




                                                                                            3
useful life. Corporations may only deduct 70 percent of the costs and must depreciate the

remaining 30 percent over five years. Additionally, geological and geophysical costs

associated with exploration can be amortized over a two year period.3

II.     The Economic Rationale for Energy Tax Expenditures

        I briefly review three arguments for energy-related tax expenditures: energy

externalities, national security, and market failures and barriers in energy conservation

markets.4

        A broad array of externalities is associated with our consumption of energy.

Burning fossil fuels contributes to air pollution (sulfur dioxides, nitrogen oxides,

particulates) and generates greenhouse gases. In addition, our use of petroleum in

transportation contributes to roadway congestion, accident externalities, and other traffic

related market failures (see Ian Parry and Kenneth A. Small (2005) for a fuller discussion

of driving related externalities). Economic theory suggests that we should tax

externalities directly. Alternatively one can subsidize clean alternatives to fossil fuels

through production and investment tax credits. This is an inefficient way to correct the

externality. While the subsidy lowers the price of renewable energy production relative

to the price of fossil fuels, it also lowers the price of energy on average and so encourages

increased consumption. Moreover the subsidy must be financed with distortionary taxes.

        A second broad rationale for government intervention in energy markets is

national security concerns. In 2006, the United States imported 66 percent of the 20.6

million barrels per day of the petroleum that it consumed (Energy Information


3
  The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 extended the period to seven years for the major
integrated oil companies.
4
    Gilbert E. Metcalf (2007) provides a more in-depth critique of federal energy tax policy.



                                                                                                      4
Administration (2007a)). Reducing oil imports, it is argued, will reduce our vulnerability

to unstable governments in the Middle East and other oil rich areas. The difficulty with

this argument is that oil is a commodity priced on world markets. Even if the United

States were to produce all the oil it consumes, it would still be vulnerable to oil price

fluctuations. A supply reduction in the Middle East would raise the price of domestic oil

just as readily as it raises the price of imported oil.

           Even if the United States were able to reduce its consumption of oil to zero, the

United States would not be fully insulated from oil price shocks elsewhere in the world.

First, an oil price shock that drives up the price of oil for Europe and China would lead

those countries to increase consumption of fuels that substitute for oil. Crops used to

produce biofuels would be in greater demand in world markets thereby driving up the

price of biofuels. Second, a slowdown in the world economy following a price shock

would likely have negative spillover effects for the United States.

           A third argument for government intervention in energy markets is the existence

of market barriers to energy efficient capital investment. A long-standing "energy

paradox" claims that consumers need very high rates of return on energy efficient capital

(appliances, housing improvements, lighting, etc.) and a variety of market barriers have

been proposed to explain this paradox and to motivate market interventions.5 Many have

argued that consumers are poorly informed about the potential for energy savings (as well

as the value of the savings) associated with new more expensive technologies. This is a

reasonable point given the public good nature of information acquisition and suggests the

value of government information programs. Programs such as energy efficiency labeling



5
    Gilbert E. Metcalf (2006) critiques this market barriers literature.


                                                                                               5
on new appliances can help overcome information failures at low cost. This argument

does not, however, justify using the tax system to support these investments.

       In summary, it is difficult to justify current energy-related tax expenditures on

economic grounds. In fact, policies that encourage increased domestic production of oil

and natural gas work at cross-purposes with the goals identified above.

III.   Defining Tax Expenditures

       Tax expenditures are defined as losses in federal revenue arising from provisions

of the tax code that allow a credit or deduction or some other exclusion that would not

arise in a baseline tax code. Tax expenditures, however, only are counted if they lead to a

reduction in corporate or personal income tax receipts. The ethanol tax credit is not

officially a tax expenditure because it reduces revenue for the federal motor fuels excise

tax rather than the income tax despite the fact that the impact on a business income

balance sheet is unaffected by providing the credit against the excise tax or against the

income tax. This raises the broader point that the limitation of tax expenditures to

income tax reductions is an arbitrary limitation. Only 60 percent of federal receipts come

from the personal and corporate income tax. Defining tax expenditures in terms of taxes

that comprise less than two-thirds of federal receipts suggests that we are missing

potentially important revenue losses elsewhere in the federal budget.

IV.    An Economic Assessment of the Ethanol Tax Expenditure

       Are tax expenditures a cost-effective way to achieve our energy goals? Here I

present some results for the ethanol tax credit focusing on carbon dioxide (CO2)

emissions and oil consumption. Table 2 presents information on ethanol and gasoline

consumption in 2005 and 2006 as well as CO2 reductions.




                                                                                             6
         Corn-based ethanol has a modest CO2 emissions impact leading to roughly 13

percent fewer CO2 emissions than gasoline (see studies by Alexander E Farrell et al.

(2006) and Jason Hill et al. (2006)). CO2 emissions from gasoline were 1,182 million

metric tons in 2005 (Energy Information Administration (2007b)). Given gasoline

consumption of 137 billion gallons in 2005 of which 4 billion were ethanol, CO2

emissions were reduced by 4.5 million metric tons.6 The increase in ethanol demand in

2006 led to greater emission reductions but the reduction is still small as a percentage of

total emissions. Ethanol contributes very little to a reduction in GHG emissions.

                       Table 2. Ethanol and Greenhouse Gases
                                                      2005                                 2006
       Ethanol Consumption (billion gallons)           4.0                                  5.4
       Gasoline Consumption (billion gallons)          137                                  142
       CO2 Emissions from Gasoline (million tons)     1182                                 1186
       CO2 Emission reductions (million tons)          4.5                                  5.9
       Percentage Reduction in CO2 Emissions          0.4%                                 0.5%
       Source: Ethanol consumption from Renewable Fuels Association (2007). Gasoline
       consumption from Energy Information Administration (2007a). CO2 emissions from
       Energy Information Administration (2007b). See text for description of CO2 emission
       reduction calculation.



         Petroleum consumption is reduced nearly gallon for gallon by substituting ethanol

for gasoline.7 Thus ethanol use reduced gasoline consumption by just under 3 percent in

2005 and oil consumption more generally by about 1.5 percent. For 2006 the comparable

percentage reductions are 3.8 percent and 1.9 percent.



6
   The emissions per billion gallons of gasoline consumption (x) is given by the solution to the equation
(.87x)(E)+(G-E)x = C where E is ethanol demand, G is gasoline consumption, and C is motor vehicle
related carbon dioxide emissions. The reduction in emissions due to ethanol use is then equal to .13Ex. A
similar answer is obtained by assuming EIA’s estimate that a gallon of gasoline contains 19.5 pounds of
CO2.
7
   Other energy sources are used to generate ethanol, primarily natural gas and coal in the refining process.
Ethanol production can be viewed as a process to convert coal and natural gas into a liquid transportation
fuel using corn as an input. In addition, ethanol has less energy content than gasoline. An E10 blend
reduces fuel mileage by approximately 3 percent.


                                                                                                            7
        How much of the decline in emissions and gasoline consumption can be attributed

to the ethanol tax credit? Probably very little. Ethanol demand historically has been

driven almost entirely by its use as an oxygenate in reformulated and oxygenated

gasoline as well as state mandates for E10.8 Adding oxygen to gasoline improves its

combustion properties and reduces CO emissions. Starting in 1992 the Clean Air Act

Amendments of 1990 required the use of oxygenated gasoline with minimum oxygen

levels of 2.7 percent during winter months. This could be achieved by adding Methyl

Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE) at a 15 percent mix or ethanol at an 8 percent mix.9 Most

states in the mid-west mandated the use of ethanol as an oxygenate while other states

used MTBE.

        Subsequent to the introduction of oxygenated gasoline, EPA mandated the use of

reformulated gasoline (RFG) in specified non-attainment areas of the country. Unlike

oxygenated gasoline, RFG was mandated on a year-round basis. RFG is used in parts of

California, much of the eastern seaboard from Virginia up to Southern New Hampshire

and a few major metropolitan areas in other parts of the country.10 RFG gas must meet a

variety of environmental criteria, one of which is a minimum oxygen standard of 2

percent. Historically the two percent standard could be met with ethanol blended at a 5.6

percent rate by volume or with MTBE. Increasingly states are banning MTBE because of

concerns over groundwater contamination. As of August 2007 twenty-five states have

banned MBTE statewide (Environmental Protection Agency (2007)). Other states have



8
   The Energy Policy Act of 2005 set annual ethanol use requirements in gasoline beginning FY 2006. I
discuss this further below.
9
   This information is taken from Erich J. Muehlegger (2004) who provides an excellent description of
environmental regulations and their impact on fuel additives.
10
   A map showing current RFG coverage is at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/rfg/whereyoulive.htm.


                                                                                                        8
mandated the use of ethanol as an oxygenate in RFG.11 As a result of concerns about

potential liability to litigation, the petroleum industry phased out the use of MTBE in

refining by mid-2006. Finally, a number of states are beginning to mandate the sale of

E10 or gasohol, gasoline blended with 10 percent ethanol. For 2005 only Minnesota had

such a mandate in place.

        For 2005, I assume that mandated ethanol blended RFG is blended at a 5.6

percent rate and Minnesota mandates E10 for all its gasoline.12 Given these state rules,

2.9 billion gallons of ethanol were required in 2005. This estimate is conservative as

some states required RFG with ten percent blend rates for ethanol. If the average ethanol

blend rate for RFG in 2005 was 7.7 percent then all of the demand for ethanol could be

explained by ethanol mandates.

        Assume that the remaining demand for ethanol (one-fourth of demand) was

attributable to the ethanol tax credit in 2005. What was the 2005 cost of the reduction in

CO2 and petroleum consumption from foregone tax revenue? The first column of Table 3

provides the answer. Given the CO2 and petroleum reductions measured in Table 2, we

can attribute 1.2 million metric tons of CO2 reductions to the tax credit (26.6 percent of

total reductions). At a cost to the U.S. Treasury of over $2 billion, the cost of CO2

emissions avoided due to the use of ethanol is over $1,700 per ton. A similar calculation

shows that the cost of reducing petroleum consumption is $85 per barrel. This is the cost

to the federal treasury due to lost tax revenue. It does not include the private cost of

producing ethanol nor any savings from displaced oil. Note that if the ethanol induced

11
  EIA's state energy profiles indicates which states mandate the use of ethanol as an oxygenate.
12
   According to the Energy Information Administration, states mandating use of ethanol in RFG in 2005
were Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Texas, Virginia,
and Wisconsin.


                                                                                                         9
by the tax credit is less than one-fourth of total demand, the costs go up considerably.

The costs for reductions in CO2 far exceed the price of CO2 emission permits in the EU

Emissions Trading Scheme and any reasonable measure of the marginal damages from

carbon emissions. These high costs arise from the large inframarginal aspect of the

policy.

          The cost of reducing CO2 through the tax credit is quite high even if all ethanol

production is driven by the credit. In that case the cost would be over $450 per ton CO2,

a cost that still exceeds the cost of an EU permit by over a factor of ten. In reality my

estimate is likely a lower bound on the cost of reducing CO2 emissions through the tax

credit due to my conservative assumptions on mandates.

          The second column provides calculations for 2006. The Energy Policy Act of

2005 removed the RFG oxygenate standard and replaced it with mandated amounts of

ethanol in gasoline beginning in 2006. The amount required in the first year of the law

was 4 billion gallons of ethanol. For the purposes of computing the value of the ethanol

credit, I assume that all ethanol produced in excess of the federal blending mandate is due

to the tax credit. The cost of CO2 reductions through the tax credit is unchanged. This

cost far exceeds any reasonable measure of the marginal damages from carbon emissions.




                                                                                              10
                 Table 3. Cost to U.S. Treasury of Achieving Energy
                          Goals Through Ethanol Tax Credit
                                               2005          2006
                Share of Ethanol Demand
                                              26.6%         26.0%
                  Induced by Tax Credit
                CO2 Saving Due To Credit
                                                 1.2           1.5
                   (million metric tons)
                 Total Savings In Crude
                                                90.5         121.7
                 from Ethanol use (mby)
                  Crude Saving Due To
                                                24.1          31.6
                       Credit (mby)
                      Cost Of Credit
                                              2040.0        2743.8
                       ($ millions)
                     Cost per ton CO2         $ 1,703       $ 1,796
                 Cost per barrel of Crude      $ 85          $ 87
                Source: Author's calculations. See text for details. I assume that .95
                gallons of gasoline are saved per gallon of ethanol produced.



V.     Conclusion

       Tax expenditures for energy provide over seventy-five percent of federal support

for energy in this country. It is unlikely that they contribute much to national security

goals by reducing petroleum and natural gas consumption. In fact, tax expenditures for

the oil and natural gas industry probably contribute to increased consumption of those

fuels. These tax expenditures may contribute to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions

through their support for the use of non-carbon based renewable fuels. An examination

of the ethanol tax credit, however, suggests that this credit is a particularly expensive

policy instrument for reducing CO2 emissions. A better policy would be to replace the

credit with a carbon price, either through a cap and trade system or a carbon tax.




                                                                                            11
References

Energy Information Administration. 2007a. Annual Energy Review 2006. Washington,
DC: EIA.

____. 2007b. Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United States 2006. Washington,
DC: EIA.

Environmental Protection Agency. 2007. "State Actions Banning MTBE (Statewide),"
Washington, DC: EPA EPA420-B-07-013.

Farrell, Alexander E; Plevin, Richard J.; Turner, Brian T.; Jones, Andrew D.;
O'Hare, Michael and Kammen, Daniel M. 2006. "Ethanol Can Contribute to Energy
and Environmental Goals." Science, 311. 506-08.

Hill, Jason; Nelson, Erik; Tilman, David; Polasky, Stephen and Tiffany, Douglas.
2006. "Environmental, Economic, and Energetic Costs and Benefits of Biodiesel and
Ethanol Biofuels." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103. 11206-10.

Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2006. "Energy Conservation in the United States: Understanding its
Role in Climate Policy," Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research No.
12272.
____. 2007. "Federal Tax Policy towards Energy." Tax Policy and the Economy, 21. 145-
84.

Muehlegger, Erich J. "Product Differentiation in Gasoline Markets: A Discussion of
Regional Gasoline Content Regulations," Cambridge, MA: MIT Department of
Economics, 2004.

Noto, Nonna A. 2004. "Tax Expenditures Compared with Outlays by Budget Function:
Fact Sheet," Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service RS21710.

Office of Management and Budget. 2007. "Budget of the United States of America,
Fiscal Year 2008," Washington, DC: OMB

Parry, Ian and Small, Kenneth A. 2005. "Does Britain or the United States Have the
Right Gasoline Tax?" American Economic Review, 95. 1276-89.

Renewable Fuels Association. 2007. RFA Industry Statistics.
http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/. (accessed Dec. 10, 2007).




                                                                                     12
