NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSTITUTIONAL ADAPTABILITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
THE PROPERTY RIGHTS REVOLUTION IN BRITAIN, 1700 TO 1830
Gary Richardson
Dan Bogart
Working Paper 13757
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13757

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

We thank Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Stergios Skaperdas, Linda Cohen, John Wallis, Tim Leunig, Richard
Sylla, Mauricio Drelichman, and Joel Mokyr for helpful comments on earlier drafts. We also thank
seminar participants at the University of British Columbia, New York University, and Washington
Area Economic History Seminar and conference participants at meetings of the Economic History
Society, the All-UC Group in Economic History, and the International Economic History Association.
We thank Francesca Labordo and Patricia Suzuki for research assistance. We thank the Parliamentary
Archives for assistance and advice. We thank the University of California for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Gary Richardson and Dan Bogart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Institutional Adaptability and Economic Development: The Property Rights Revolution in
Britain, 1700 to 1830
Gary Richardson and Dan Bogart
NBER Working Paper No. 13757
January 2008
JEL No. H1,K0,K1,N0,N43,P1,P10,P14,P16,P20,P26,P48
ABSTRACT
Adaptable property-rights institutions, we argue, foster economic development. The British example
illustrates this point. Around 1700, Parliament established a forum where rights to land and resources
could be reorganized. This venue enabled landholders and communities to take advantage of economic
opportunities that could not be accommodated by the inflexible rights regime inherited from the past.
In this essay, historical evidence, archival data, and statistical analysis demonstrate that Parliament
increased the number of acts reorganizing property rights in response to increases in the public's demand
for such acts. This evidence corroborates a cornerstone of our hypothesis.

Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
Dan Bogart
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
dbogart@uci.edu

… laws and institutions must go hand in hand with the progress of the human mind. As
that becomes more developed, more enlightened, as new discoveries are made, new
truths discovered and manners and opinions change, with the change of circumstances,
institutions must advance also to keep pace with the times. We might as well require a
man to wear still the coat which fitted him when a boy as civilized society to remain ever
under the regimen of their barbarous ancestors.
Thomas Jefferson 1

1. Introduction
Economists view secure property rights as necessary for economic development
(Acemoglu and Robinson 2005; La Porta et al. 2004). This observation initially arose from
studies of the property-rights system in nineteenth-century Britain (Coase 1960, 1974). The
British example, some scholars argue, proves that establishing secure property rights is not
merely a prerequisite, but is in itself sufficient, to trigger modern economic growth (North 1981,
North and Weingast 1989). This essay offers a new lesson regarding property rights and
economic progress. Britain’s economic ascent began after Parliament established institutions
enabling property rights to adapt to changing economic conditions and enabling land and
resources to be reallocated towards more productive uses. Adaptable property rights, in other
words, contributed to Britain’s economic development.
Britain’s medieval property system possessed characteristics common to landholding
systems in developing nations, past and present. Rights of families and ancestors received
prominence over the rights of individuals and descendents. A complex spectrum of overlapping
privileges (common, communal, clerical, feudal, familial, statutory, and royal) enforced by an
array of courts (manorial, county, clerical, and royal) pertained to most plots of land. These

1

Thomas Jefferson’s letter to Samuel Kercheval, July 12, 1816. This quote is inscribed on the south-eastern
interior wall of the Jefferson Memorial in Washington, DC.

1

venues lacked uniform records and a unified framework for determining ownership, transferring
rights, and adjudicating disputes.
Britain’s antiquated system posed problems for people trying to reallocate resources
towards more productive uses, particularly opportunities arising from technologies unanticipated
in the distant past. Holders of estates could neither mortgage, nor lease, nor sell much of the land
under their control. Holders under many types of tenures could only transfer property to
particular persons or members of a local community. Residents often had to keep land in
traditional uses. Residents could neither utilize resources in new ways, nor improve
infrastructure, nor repackage rights without reaching agreements with all other parties possessing
interests in a parcel, and such agreements could not, in most cases, be enforced by law, but
could, in many instances, be challenged through courts.
Britain’s medieval property system also inhibited localities from providing public goods,
particularly those extending beyond the bounds of traditional communities or those necessitated
by the expansion of commerce and cities. Communities lacked mechanisms for raising revenues
and powers of eminent domain. Communities struggled to overcome free-riding, which inhibited
the provision of public goods, and hold-outs, who withheld resources needed for public projects
unless paid exorbitant sums. Market transactions might have alleviated these inefficiencies, but
in most cases, the necessary transfers could not be consummated and the requisite contracts
could not be enforced because of the restrictive nature of the anachronistic rights regime, which
valued tradition and stability above innovation and flexibility.
English society struggled to improve the landholding system. In the six centuries
following the Norman Conquest, the nation reformed landholding laws repeatedly. But, the
principal problems persisted until the end of the seventeenth century, when Parliament embraced

2

novel ideas concerning property and began processing petitions from groups hoping to
reorganize rights to land and resources. Parliament reviewed requests from individuals, families,
and communities, and after considering the interests of all concerned and the general public,
rewrote rules regarding the use and ownership of property. Parliament enshrined these accords in
three types of acts: estate, statutory authority, and enclosure. Estate acts altered the rights of
individuals and families; eliminated restrictions on the uses to which property could be put;
authorized the sale, mortgage, and leasing of land; and facilitated the enforcement of contracts.
Acts establishing statutory authorities created new organizations that built, operated, and
maintained infrastructure and public services. Statutory authorities received new rights, such as
the authority to collect tolls, levy taxes, issue debt, and purchase land. These rights superseded
traditional rights, such as burgesses’ right to travel throughout the realm free from tax and toll,
enshrined for centuries in town charters and the Magna Carta. Enclosure acts disbanded
collectively-managed common-field villages and assigned to individuals rights to particular
pieces of property. Enclosure acts also shifted commonly-held agricultural land to new uses,
such as the construction of housing and workshops near growing towns and cities. Acts of all
three types embodied the public’s desire to reorganize rights and to reallocate resources towards
more productive uses.
This essay shows that individuals and groups – including aristocratic estate holders,
yeomen holding by custom of the manor, tenants on small plots, urban landlords, rural villages,
nascent corporations, and growing urban communities – approached Parliament and requested to
reorganize rights when economic opportunities made it profitable to do so and that Parliament
accommodated the public’s demands. Parliament favored petitions that left all pertinent parties
as well (or better) off than under previous arrangements; that engendered little or no opposition;

3

and that enhanced productivity, improved infrastructure, or provided public services. Parliament,
in other words, functioned as a forum for facilitating agreements among individuals that
reorganized property rights in ways that enabled resources to be put to more productive uses.
This forum enabled society to voluntarily and peacefully restructure traditional arrangements in
response to arising opportunities. This politically-fostered flexibility of property rights was, we
argue, a key institutional innovation in England in the century preceding industrialization.
A principal testable implication of our hypothesis concerns the relationship between
economic conditions and the passage of estate, statutory authority, and enclosure acts. If our
hypothesis is correct, then conditions that increased returns from reorganizing rights – for
example, economic booms that increased returns to investing in infrastructure or low interest
rates that decreased the costs of financing construction – should have encouraged people to
propose larger numbers of acts. Conditions that lowered returns from reorganizing rights should
have reduced the number of proposals. In turn, if our hypothesis is correct, Parliament should
have responded to increases (or decreases) in the public’s demand for acts by increasing (or
decreasing) the number of acts that it passed.
This essay tests these implications with new data on the number of acts that reorganized
property rights and new methods designed to exploit that information to the fullest possible
extent. Our methods begin with simple assumptions about the way in which Parliament and the
political process operated, or in other words, the processes through which people proposed and
Parliament passed acts. These assumptions yield a simple, structural model of the Parliamentary
process, which in turn, yields a series of reduced-form equations that can be estimated to identify
whether Parliament responded to changes in the public’s demand for estate, enclosure, and
statutory-authority acts. Mathematical propositions link the reduced-form and structural

4

equations, illuminating the logical way to interpret our estimates. These methods enable us to
account for econometric issues – such as the non-stationarity and heterogeneity of the statistical
series – that complicate the process of drawing inferences from the data. These methods also
enable us to eliminate plausible alternative explanations for the patterns apparent in the evidence,
and thus, to draw causal conclusions from the correlations in the data.
The rest of this essay carries out this endeavor. The second section reviews the literature
that sets the stage for our analysis. The third section describes the archival data that we employ
and the new times series that we analyze. The fourth section introduces our mathematical model
and statistical methods. The fifth section describes our empirical results. The concluding section
discusses how Britain’s gradual, consensual, and voluntary adoption of modern property rights
facilitated economic expansion in the century preceding the Industrial Revolution and whether
adaptable property-rights institutions can foster development in the world today.

1: Literature Review
Scholars have long studied the connection between politics, property rights, and
prosperity in early-modern Britain. In The Wealth of Nations, for example, Adam Smith writes
that “commerce could not flourish if people do not feel themselves secure in the possession of
their property.”2 Douglas North and Barry Weingast (1989) emphasize the role of the Glorious
Revolution of 1688, which they argue, created a constitutional consensus that prevented royal
governments from expropriating citizens’ property. Security of property rights encouraged
investment and innovation, initiating Britain’s industrial expansion.
Historians debate the accuracy of North and Weingast’s interpretation of the Glorious
Revolution. Critics include Gregory Clark and Patrick O’Brien. Clark (1996) argues that secure
2

Smith 1976, p. 910

5

property rights existed far into the English past. Expropriation occurred only in exceptional
circumstances, such as when individuals rebelled against the regime. O’Brien (1994) argues that
the Glorious Revolution weakened property rights. After the Glorious Revolution, Parliament
raised taxes, embarked on foreign wars, and regulated a wide-array of industries. Alternative
interpretations of Parliament’s impact on the economy abound. Paul Langford (1991) stresses
Parliament’s active involvement in local legislation and argues that after 1688 propertied
Englishman used their control of the political system to enact changes in property rights
arrangements which benefited themselves as well as the larger economy. Julian Hoppit (1996,
1997) finds that the success rate for personal, communications, and enclosure acts increased
significantly in the early eighteenth century, and argues that Parliament had a capacity to meet
private or local demands for legislation. Hoppit’s work documents the rapid expansion of
Parliamentary activity after the Glorious Revolution and builds upon a venerable tradition of
categorizing and counting acts. Examples include Tate (1967 and 1978), Turner (1980 and
1984), Innes (1997), and Wordie (1983).
We build upon this foundation by counting annual numbers of acts that altered property
rights between 1700 and 1830. We compare this count to economic and political variables that
influenced the benefits and costs of reorganizing rights to land. The spirit of this exercise
resembles the work of N.F.R. Crafts (1977) and Clark (2001). Both authors discuss the
correlation between the number of enclosure acts, wheat prices, and interest rates.
This essay extends that line of reasoning in several ways. First, it examines all types of
acts that altered property rights arrangements, rather than one type among many. Second, this
essay deals with crucial issues of statistical inference and identification. Its statistical methods
ensure that correlations between property rights and economic incentives arise for real reasons,

6

rather than statistical phenomena that frequently generate spurious correlations between timeseries variables that trend across time. Third, this essay derives its statistical tests from
straightforward economic models that reveal how to appropriately interpret the estimates. Fourth,
this essay examines both treatment and control groups. The control groups consist of acts that
were processed using the same procedures as estate, enclosure, and statutory authority acts and
that performed tasks similar to those acts, but which did not alter property rights. Overall, this
essay’s statistical methods yield robust conclusions about the nature, causes, and consequences
of Parliament’s behavior.
This essay extends the law and economics literature by emphasizing the importance of
adaptable property-rights institutions. Previous scholars emphasized the security of rights, which
historians believe existed long before the seventeenth century. We emphasize features of the
English political and legal system that arose after the Glorious Revolution at the end of the
seventeenth century. These novel features enabled Parliament to reform property rights on a
voluntary, gradual, and piecemeal basis. The Parliamentary forum that undertook this task
possessed no historical precedent.

2. Acts that Reorganized Rights to Land and Resources
This section describes estate, statutory authority, and enclosures acts, which comprised
over half of all legislation passed between 1688 and 1830. These acts possessed common themes.
All affected individuals’ and organizations’ rights. Some created new rights. Others altered or
annulled old rights. Some created new organizations, such as turnpike trusts. Others disbanded
existing organizations, including ancient entities, such as village councils and manorial courts.
2.1

Estates acts

7

Estate acts enabled holders of property to take some action prohibited by the rules under
which they had inherited their land. Estate acts were necessary because the inheritance system
limited estate holder’s power over their property, largely in an effort to adhere to the wishes of
the deceased (who bequeathed the property to their descendents as long as the latter fulfilled
conditions set out in the settlement), to protect the interests of dependents and heirs, and to
preserve a family’s estate for future generations (English and Saville, 1983, pp. 19-21). This
system of inheritance, known as strict settlement, solidified during the seventeenth century and
prevailed until the nineteenth century. A settlement was a generic name for a property
transaction and for the documents created in its consummation. While estimates vary, at the
peak, at least one-quarter and as much as three-fourths of land in England was held through strict
settlements (English and Saville, 1983, pp. 11-12, 30; Habakkuk 1994).
Three features of settlements generated a need for Parliamentary involvement. First,
without an act of Parliament, holders of settled estates could only change the terms of the
settlement when their heir came of age (i.e. reached the age of 21). Then, the holder and heir
(typically father and son) could join forces and amend the settlement via the process of common
recovery. Limited life spans meant that settlements could be changed only infrequently. A family
might wait decades (or generations) for an heir to come of age and for the holder and heir to
reach an agreement about restructuring the estate.
Second, settlements restricted the uses to which land could be put. The reason for these
restrictions was protecting the rights of dependents and future heirs. Holders of a settled estate
(who were just life tenants) could grant neither leases lasting beyond their lives nor leases from
which they benefited at the expense of their heirs (such as leases in which tenants paid lump
sums up front in return for concessions). Holders could seldom sell, swap, or mortgage property

8

under their control. Holders could not alter property, even if they considered the alterations to be
an improvement, without risking legal suits. The removal of trees, hedges, and buildings; the
mining of minerals, quarries, and peat bogs; and the conversion of arable lands into pasture (or
vice versa) could be considered waste, since these actions converted permanent resources into
current income. All those who benefited from such actions could be liable for damages if
dependents or heirs claimed to be harmed. Courts allowed sales, exchanges, mortgages,
improvements, and long-term leases only if the settlement contained specific clauses authorizing
such actions. Settlements written in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries seldom
provided such powers, although as the eighteenth century progressed and as the law concerning
settlements became increasingly sophisticated, settlements tended to provide broader powers.
Three, conducting transactions and enforcing contracts on settled land could be costly,
uncertain, and insecure. Settlements were long, complex documents, often unpunctuated and
repetitious.3 Interpreting settlements required experience, skill, detailed knowledge of the
document, and a large library of property laws, precedents, and legal texts estimated at 674
volumes in 1826 (English and Saville, 1983, p. 18). Settlements were not part of the public
record. Copies of the deeds were usually held by the settlers, trustees, and lawyers. Settlements
had to be consulted before taking out mortgages, drawing up leases, or completing sales, because
if the settlement did not specifically authorize a transaction, the transaction could be voided.
Ambiguities in settlements often deterred individuals from acting for fear that the transactions
would be disputed.
Estate acts solved these problems. Estate acts facilitated the enforcement of contracts by
clarifying permissible transactions and the rights of pertinent parties. Estate acts authorized

3

The fact that until the Conveyancing Act of 1881, solicitors were paid for conveyances by the word (1s for every
72 words in 1862), did not encourage conciseness (England and Seville, 1983, p. 18).

9

actions previously prohibited by settlements such as the mortgaging of property, cutting of oldgrowth timber, and mining of ores and minerals. Estate acts authorized the sale and leasing of
land. The authorization of sales and leases may have been one of the most significant effects of
estate acts, since large tracts of English land became exposed to competitive pressures provided
by the marketplace, and began to be used in a more productive manner.
2.2 Statutory Authority Acts
Statutory authority acts fostered the construction, improvement, and maintenance of
infrastructure and social services. Statutory acts focused on particular topics. Transportation acts
promoted roads, bridges, river navigation, ports, canals, and railways. Urban improvement acts
provided for street paving, gas lighting, garbage collection, sewage extraction, water provision,
and police protection. Government building acts fostered the construction of prisons,
courthouses, and county administrative offices. Poor relief acts provided assistance for the poor
and encouraged the construction of workhouses. Court of small request acts established legal
forums for adjudicating credit contracts valued at less than 40 shillings. Lighthouse acts
authorized whomever built lighthouses on particular plots of land to collect tolls from all ships
that passed.
To accomplish these tasks, statutory authority acts created non-profit organizations and
enjoined the trustees of these entities to serve the public interest.4 The trustees tended to be local
landowners and merchants, who served without remuneration. For canals and railways, however,
statutory authority acts established for-profit organizations such as joint-stock companies, whose
directors purchased shares of the organizations and profited from their investments.

4

See Webb and Webb (1963) for a description of the organizations established by statutory authority acts.

10

Statutory authority acts granted rights to these new organizations. One was the right to
levy user-fees and/or raise revenue through other means. A turnpike act, for example, authorized
a trust operating a turnpike to levy tolls on road-users and claim labor (or the equivalent in taxes)
from inhabitants along the road. The tolls marked a significant departure from the existing
system, in which parishes paid for road improvements with local labor and property taxes, and in
which individuals possessed the right of free passage, enshrined in medieval town charters and
confirmed by the Magna Carta. Trustees also received the right to issue debt and equity. The
bonds were secured by the tolls. If interest payments fell into arrears, bondholders could seize
the toll revenues.
Statutory authority acts gave organizations the right to purchase land along a route’s right
of way and defined procedures for doing so. The act authorized the organization to negotiate
with landowners. If the parties could not agree on the price for a necessary plot of land, the
organization could appeal to a body of commissioners who could compel the landowners to sell.
These procedures provided the legal origin for modern laws concerning eminent domain.
Statutory authority acts limited the powers of trustees. Turnpike acts, for example,
defined maximum tolls. In each act, a schedule distinguished different types of traffic and goods,
and for each group, a maximum permissible toll. Similar schedules regulated the issuance of debt
and terms of interest.
Statutory authority acts could be amended by subsequent acts which clarified the rights
and responsibilities of the organization. Canal acts were often amended in order to add branch
lines or to increase the authorized capital. Turnpike acts had to be renewed, since they expired
after 21 years. Renewals often expanded trustees’ authority, by allowing them to manage a larger
road network or altering the schedule of tolls.

11

2.3 Enclosure Acts
Enclosure acts reorganized rights to property, usually in open-field agricultural villages.
At the beginning of the eighteenth century, approximately one-quarter of the arable land in
England lay in such villages, where residents shared rights to communal assets, such as water,
pasture, and woods. Villagers also shared rights in the large open fields, which served as
common pasture during fallow periods and as cropland during the growing season. The cropland
was divided among the residents, who possessed the right to grow grain on acre-sized plots
scattered throughout the fields and intermingled with those of their neighbors. Villagers managed
these collective assets, such as the open arable fields, through village institutions, including
customary laws and manorial courts.
Enclosure acts replaced collective ownership of common resources with individual
ownership of particular plots of land, and replaced collective management through village
institutions by individual management of personal estates. An enclosure act appointed a
commission to implement the terms of the act.5 The commission employed surveyors to draw a
map of the village with its open fields and strips, tofts and crofts, waste and pasture, and other
physical features. The surveyors recorded the holders of rights to all of these assets. At a series
of public meetings, holders of land (and all other rights in the village) advanced claims as to
what they should receive under the new arrangements. The commissioners decided on the
validity of these claims. After they made their decisions, the surveyors created a map of the new
village, displaying the new features, such as fields, roads, fences, and irrigation channels, and the
owners of each.

5

In 1801, the first General Enclosure Act simplified the administration of enclosure bills by providing guidelines
for those drafting enclosure bills and parameters for permissible outcomes.

12

2.4

The Process of Passing Acts
In the 1690s and early 1700s, Parliament standardized procedures for processing estate,

statutory authority, and enclosure bills. Estate acts began with a petition from an individual or
family desiring to change the rules regarding their estate. The petitioner hired a lawyer
specializing in estate law to prepare their paperwork. A Parliamentary committee investigated
the merits of the petition and issued a report. Petitions deemed beneficial to all interested parties
were written into bills, read to the public three times, passed through both Houses of Parliament,
and then sent to the King for royal assent. Public notice ensured that individuals with interests in
the estate knew about the proposal. Parties could oppose the bill by submitting counter-petitions
to either house of Parliament. Parliamentary committees considered the contending proposals,
and then passed one of the bills, modified the original bill to satisfy the opposition, or rejected
both proposals. The multiple layers for review and numerous opportunities for opposition
ensured that Parliament considered the interests of all concerned before coming to a decision
(English and Saville, 1983, p. 50).
Statutory authority acts began with a petition from a community stating a problem, such
as insufficient road capacity between two places, and proposing a solution, such as the creation
of a turnpike between the cities. A Parliamentary committee considered the petition and drafted a
bill on this issue. The bill was read publicly three times before both houses of Parliament. The
readings allowed potential opponents to express opinions and propose amendments. Advocates
and opponents typically hired solicitors to present their cases and promote their interests. Like
modern-day lobbyists, these solicitors maintained regular contact with members of the
committees working on these issues.

13

Enclosure acts went through a similar procedure. Parities interested in an enclosure held a
series of public meetings in their village to discuss the issue, and then drafted a petition signed
by a sufficient group (typically four-fifths) of individuals possessing rights to the land under
consideration. Advocates submitted the petition to Parliament, where the bill was read publicly
three times and considered by both houses.
Parliament employed similar procedures for many types of acts that did not alter property
rights arrangements. The procedures for estate acts, for example, were identical to the procedures
for private acts of all types, including divorces, marriages, naturalizations, and appointments to
official positions that provided salaries or pensions.

3. Data
The Parliamentary Archive is the principal repository for historical information on acts of
Parliament. The Archive maintains a computerized catalogue, Portcullis, which indicates the
clerical title, calendar year, regal year, and parliamentary session for all acts passed since the
sixteenth century.6 Clerks inscribed clerical titles on the exterior of a roll of parchment
containing the full text of an act when Parliament reviewed the original legislation. The clerical
title summarized the act, usually in a concise paragraph containing enough information for the
clerks to identify the act and its principal provisions amidst thousands of similar pieces of
parchment, without opening the rolls to read the full text.
An earlier paper explains our process for converting the clerical title of every act of
Parliament into a vector of variables (Bogart and Richardson, 2007). In this essay, we convert
those vectors of variables into time series suitable for statistical analysis. Tables 1 through 3

6

http://www.portcullis.parliament.uk. The clerical titles within Portcullis were first published in two nineteenth
century compilations of Parliamentary legislation, Statutes of the Realm (Great Britain, 1800) and Statutes at
Large (Great Britain, 1807), which were computerized during the 1990s.

14

describe those series. The top-half of Table 1 describes estate acts. Row (a) refers to the series
indicating the total number of estate acts passed each year. Column (1) indicates that ALL of
these acts altered property rights. Column (2) indicates that SOME of these acts also altered
personal rights. Columns (3) through (6) describe the statistical properties of the series. We refer
to this as the series in “levels”, since it is based on the raw series indicating the annual number
(or level) of acts passed. Column (3) indicates the annual average. Column (4) indicates the
standard deviation. Column (5) indicates the minimum number passed in a single year. Column
(6) indicates the maximum number. Columns (7) through (10) present the same information for
the series in differences (i.e. the change in the number of acts passed from year t-1 to year t).
Row (b) describes a time series indicating the annual number of estate acts that authorized the
sale of property. Row (c) indicates the annual number of estate acts that authorized the leasing of
property. Row (d) indicates the annual number of acts that authorized either sales or leases. Our
analysis emphasizes estate acts authorizing sales and leases because these acts placed land long
bound by the fetters of the past onto the market, which was (and is) one of the most efficient
methods for reallocating resources.
The bottom-half of Table 1 describes data that serve as a comparison (or control) group
for estate acts. These non-estate private acts dealt with issues of marriage, naturalization, and
appointments to office. These appear in rows (e) through (g) respectively. The sum of these
series appears in row (h). Marriage acts permitted individuals to marry and/or divorce in
contravention of secular and religious statutes. Naturalization acts provided foreign-born
denizens with the rights of native-born citizens. Office acts appointed individuals to positions in
the royal household, courts of law, executive agencies, and other positions that provided
government-funded livings. Important similarities existed between these marriage,

15

naturalization, and office acts (collectively called non-estate private acts) and the estate acts
examined in the top of the table. When processing all of these acts, Parliament followed common
procedures. Similarities also existed in the clientele that requested these acts, the demographic
and social forces that generated demand for these acts, and the political factors that influenced
the supply of these acts. A key feature, however, distinguishes estate and non-estate private acts.
The value of estate acts varied with economic conditions that influenced the costs and benefits of
reorganizing rights to land. The value of marriage, naturalization, and office acts did not.
The top-half of Table 2 describes statutory authority acts. Row (a) indicates the annual
number of statutory authority acts passed each year. Row (b) indicates the annual number of acts
pertaining to transportation, principally roads, canals, harbors, rivers, bridges, and railways. Row
(c) indicates the annual number of acts pertaining to urban improvements, principally the
provision of water, sewers, market infrastructure, public buildings, gas lighting, garbage
collection, church maintenance, courts of small request, poor relief, prison construction, and
police protection. Column (1) indicates whether these acts reorganized rights to land and
resources. Column (2) indicates whether these acts facilitated or financed the improvement of
infrastructure (I) or the provision of public services (S). The definitions of the columns (3)
through (6) and (8) through (11) are identical to the definitions of the corresponding columns in
Table 1. Columns (7) and (12) indicate whether the series are stationary, as determined by an
Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test. While several series are non-stationary in levels, all of the series
are stationary in differences.
The bottom-portion of Table 2 describes data that serve as a comparison (or control)
group for statutory authority acts. We refer to the control group as finance acts. These acts dealt
with national government expenditure and taxation. Most pertained to excise, customs, and land

16

taxes; the development of economic and military infrastructure; and the provisioning of military
forces. Like statutory authorities, these acts financed the provision of public goods, and their
passage through Parliament required balancing local and broader interests. Unlike statutory
authority acts, however, demand for these acts depended largely on the dictates of foreign affairs,
and little on the costs and benefits of reorganizing rights.
Table 3 describes enclosure acts. The last row of the table describes a useful control
group, amendments to enclosure acts. Amendments serve as an illuminating comparison because
their passage followed procedures identical to initial enclosure acts, but demand for amendments
arose primarily after random instances when errors crept into original legislation during the long
process of passing Parliament.
The accuracy of the data depicted in Tables 1 through 3 depend upon our ability to
accurately determine the date on which acts passed. For most of our sample period, a convention
dated all acts passed by a session of Parliament as if they passed on the opening day of the
session. This convention lingered from an earlier period when Parliament met infrequently at
royal request and handled a limited volume of business in a short time period. In the eighteenth
century, Parliament met annually. Sessions began in the fall, usually in the months of October,
November, or December; lasted throughout the winter; and adjourned in the spring.
Complications arose, however, in the winters of 1714-1715, 1751-1752, and 1760-1761, when
the monarch died, and/or Parliament opened late. In 1714, for example, Queen Anne died.
George I assumed the throne. His ascension delayed the opening of Parliament until January of
1715. This parliament adjourned in the spring and another opened on schedule during the next
fall. So, in the year 1715, the conventional dating method assigned the acts passed in two
Parliamentary sessions – the winters 1714-15 and 1715-16 – to one calendar year, 1715. We

17

correct for this confusion in two ways. First, we run regressions with the raw data, while
assigning dummy variables to the years in which Parliament did not meet and the years in which
Parliament met twice. Second, we drop the period of problematic dating from our sample, and
run regressions for the years 1763 through 1830, when all acts are precisely dated. The two
methods yield similar results.
Table 4 lists the explanatory variables. Rows (a) and (b) refer to two variables, the real
interest rate and the volume of foreign trade, which influenced the demand for estate, enclosure,
and statutory authority acts. The real interest rate determined the cost of investment and rate of
intertemporal exchange, which were principal factors determining the returns from reorganizing
property rights.7 The volume of foreign trade was a good measure of aggregate economic
activity, which was a principal determinant of revenues earned by improving infrastructure and
reallocating resources towards new and more productive uses. The volume of trade also
measured the health of the industrial and mercantile sectors relative to the agricultural economy.8
Rows (c), (d), and (e) refer to variables that influenced the number of days that
Parliament sat in session and legislators’ incentives for passing large volumes of local
legislation. Together, these variables – years when the monarch died, years when a new prime
minister assumed office, and years when Parliamentary elections occurred – were principal
factors propelling annual variation in Parliamentary productivity.9 Additional explanatory
variables, listed in Rows (f) through (k), include indicators for years when Britain was at war,
when Britain suffered disease epidemics, and when Britain changed the structure of its land tax
7

8

9

Our real interest rate is the nominal interest rate, measured as the yield on long-term government bonds, known
as 2 ½ % consols from Neal (1990), minus inflation, measured as a three-year moving average of the percentage
change in Clark’s (2001) consumer price index.
Our measure of the volume of foreign trade, like most scholars, is the sum of the official value of imports plus
exports (Mitchell, 1988). The official values reflect changes in the quantity of imports and exports weighted by a
particular set of prices fixed at the outset of the eighteenth century.
We take these variables from histories of England and its government by Holmes (1993), Holmes and Szechi
(1993), and Evans (2001).

18

system. The set of explanatory variables also includes (g) the land tax rate in shillings per acre,
(h) an index of climatic conditions, based on tree ring measurements, which reflects exogenous
factors effecting agricultural productivity. Year-to-year changes in these variables were driven
principally by natural phenomena, such as weather and mortality, and international events, such
as relations with colonies and foreign rebellions. Thus, year-to-year changes in these variables
were largely exogenous to the British economy.

4. Methods
This section establishes a framework for analyzing data described in the preceding
section. The goal is to derive straightforward statistical tests that yield robust results with broad
implications. The analysis begins with intuition standard among social scientists. Private parties
desired Parliament to pass acts. Their desires fluctuated as the value of acts fluctuated. Economic
conditions which altered the costs and benefits of acts propagated those fluctuations. Economists
summarize such relationships with an inverse demand function.
(1)

p d = F (q d , X )

In this equation, pd indicates the maximum amount that the public would expend to secure the
passage of a certain quantity of legislation, qd. X indicates the array of economic factors that
influenced the costs and benefits of legislation. X ={x1, x2, …, xI}, where xi represents the ith
factor. To keep the notation clear, assume 0 < ∂F ∂xi < ∞ ∀ i = 1,..., I . Since F represents

demand, ∂F ∂q < 0 .
The number of acts depended upon the time, effort, and resources that the legislature and
bureaucracy expended in the approval process as well as factors that influenced legislative
productivity, such as elections, changes in governments, monarchial mortality, and the need to
devote time to alternative matters, such as discussing military and international affairs. The
19

number of acts passed also depended upon the lawyers, lobbyists, and peripheral personnel that
supplicants employed to prepare and advance their petitions as well as the procedures, payoffs,
and side payments – both in London and the local community – that lubricated lawmaking in
London. We summarize this complex process with a supply function.
(2)

ps = G (qs , Z )

ps indicates the costs of passing a quantity of legislation, qs. Z indicates the array of factors
influencing the supply of legislation. Symbolically, Z ={z1, z2, …, zJ}, where zi represents the jth
factor. To keep the notation clear, assume ∂G ∂z j > 0 ∀

j = 1,..., J . In the short run,

increasing the quantity of acts required more intensive employment of factors with diminishing
returns and rising costs. So, ∂G ∂q ≥ 0 .
The interaction of supply and demand determines the quantity of acts that Parliament
passes. This equilibrium occurs when the demand price, pd, equals the supply price, ps, plus some
markup, m.
(3)

pd = ps + m

If the markup exceeds zero, then someone in the act-passing process (either lobbyists, opponents
of the legislation, or members of Parliament) were able to extract some of the surplus generated
by the legislation, and the equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the supply and marginal
revenue curves. If the markup equals zero, then the act-passing process was completely
competitive, and the equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the demand and supply curves.
Substituting Equations (1) and (2) into Equation (3) reveals the number of acts passed in
equilibrium.
(4)

F (q*, X * ) − G (q*, Z * ) = m

20

Here, the asterisk superscript indicates quantities of variables in equilibrium. Rewriting the
equilibrium condition emphasizes the implicit relationship between the equilibrium values of the
variables.
(5)

H (q*, X * , Z * ) ≡ F (q*, X * ) − G (q*, Z * ) = m

The implicit function theorem describes the relationship between the function, H, the equilibrium
level of quantity demanded, q*, and the variables that shift supply and demand, X and Z.

(

)

(6)

q* = Q X * , Z *

(6’)

∂q *
∂H (q*, X * , Z * )/ ∂xi
− ∂F (q*, X * )/ ∂xi
= (−1)
=
∂xi
∂H (q*, X * , Z * )/ ∂q* ∂F (q*, X * )/ ∂q * −∂G (q*, Z * )/ ∂q *

(6’’)

∂q *
∂H (q*, X * , Z * )/ ∂zi
− ∂G (q*, Z * )/ ∂zi
= (−1)
=
∂zi
∂H (q*, X * , Z * )/ ∂q * ∂F (q*, X * )/ ∂q * −∂G (q*, Z * )/ ∂q *

The total differential of (6) provides a linear approximation of the relationship in the
neighborhood of the equilibrium.
(7)

(

J
∂q *
∂q *
dxi + ∑
dz j
i =1 ∂xi
j =1 ∂z j

)

I

Dq* = DQ X * , Z * = ∑

This relationship can be estimated with the data described in the preceding section. The change
in the quantity of acts, Dq*, is the change in the number of acts passed from year t-1 to year t.
The changes in the independent variables, dxi and dzj, are changes in variables that influence
demand and supply from year to year. The estimating equation is
(8)

I

J

i =1

j =1

ΔAt = ∑ α i Δxi ,t −1 + ∑ β j Δz j ,t −1 + ε t

where ΔAt is the change in the number of acts from t-1 to t. Δxi,t-1 is the change in the ith demand
shift variable from t-2 to t-1. αi is an estimate of ∂q* ∂xi . Δzj,t-1 is the change in the jth supply
shift variable from t-2 to t-1. βj is an estimate of ∂q* ∂z j . εt is an error term.
21

While the series, At, xi,t-1, and zj,t-1, exhibit trends and are non-stationary, the differences
of those series, ΔAt Δxi,t-1 Δzj,t-1, which enter the estimating equation, are stationary. The error
term, εt, is auto correlated and heteroskedastic. Because of these characteristics of the residual,
the Newey-West procedure for estimating a heteroskedastic and autocorrelation consistent
covariance matrix is the appropriate method for calculating the standard errors of our estimates.10
Our estimates of ∂q * ∂xi and ∂q * ∂z j do not allow us to recover the parameters of the
underlying supply and demand curves, F and G. However, our estimates do enable us to
characterize the shapes of those curves. Propositions 1 and 2 indicate how.
Proposition 1. If ∂q* ∂xi ≠ 0 for some i, then ∂G (q* , Z* ) / ∂q* < ∞ .
Proof. This is a proof by contraposition. Assume ∂G (q* , Z* ) / ∂q* = ∞ . Then,
∂q*
− ∂F (q* , X * ) / ∂xi
=
= 0 ∀ i = 1,..., I because ∂F (q* , X * ) / ∂q < 0 and
∂xi ∂F (q* , X * ) / ∂q* − ∞
∂F (q* , X * ) / ∂xi < ∞ .
In prose, Proposition 1 indicates that if the quantity of acts fluctuated in response to fluctuations
of one (or more) of the factors that influenced the demand for acts, then the supply curve for acts
was not perfectly inelastic.
Proposition 2. If ∂q* ∂z j ≠ 0 for some j, then ∂F (q* , X * ) / ∂q* > −∞ .

Proof. This is a proof by contraposition. Assume ∂F (q* , X * ) / ∂q* = −∞ . Then,
− ∂G (q* , Z * ) / ∂z j
∂q*
=
= 0 ∀ j = 1,..., J because by definition ∂G (q* , Z * ) / ∂q* ≥
∂z j − ∞ − ∂G (q* , Z * ) / ∂q*
0 and ∂G (q* , Z * ) / ∂z j < ∞ .

10

Whitney K. Newey; Kenneth D. West. “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 3. (May, 1987), pp. 703-708.

22

In prose, Proposition 2 states that if the quantity of acts fluctuated in response to fluctuations of
one (or more) of the factors that influenced the supply for acts, then the demand curve for acts
was not perfectly inelastic.
Determining whether αi, our estimate of ∂q* ∂xi , and βj, our estimate of ∂q* ∂z j , differ
from zero involves hypothesis tests. For the null hypothesis αi = 0, the alterative hypothesis is αi
≠ 0. For the null hypothesis βj = 0, the alterative hypothesis is βj ≠ 0. The test statistic has a tdistribution.
In addition to being straightforward, our tests have desirable properties. They are
consistent with almost any plausible structure for the system that produced Parliamentary acts.
They assume little about the data generating process and remain robust to a wide range of
statistical complications. They use the data at hand to answer the questions that we posed. Did
increases in the benefits of reorganizing property rights induce the passage of more estate,
enclosure, and statutory authority acts? Did Britain’s Parliament accommodate the public’s
demand to reorganize property-rights and reallocate resources towards more productive uses?

5. Results

Table 5 presents results of this exercise for estate acts. Column (1) regresses the year-toyear change in the annual number of estate acts on year-to-year changes in variables that
influence the demand for acts: the real interest rate and the volume of trade. The regression spans
the 124 years for which we have data suitable for statistical analysis. The initial year, 1705, lies
close to the point where Parliament formalized procedures for processing acts regarding property
rights. The final year, 1830, lies close to the nationwide reform of Parliamentary elections and
procedures enshrined in the Great Reform Act of 1832. The regression reveals a correlation
between changes in the number of acts and changes in the real interest rate. When the interest

23

rate rose and the cost of investing increased, the number of estate acts fell, as our hypothesis
predicts. The correlation is significant in statistical terms and substantial in magnitude. Column
(2) adds year-to-year changes in three explanatory variables that influenced the productivity of
parliament: election years, changes of the prime minister, and the death of a monarch. In this
specification, as in all others, the coefficient on the real interest rate remains statistically and
economically significant. Column (3) adds additional explanatory variables, including the yearto-year changes in the real land tax rate, years where the tax code changed, tree ring growth,
epidemic mortality, and war years.11
Columns (4) through (6) perform the same exercise for a control group: marriage,
naturalization, and office acts. These non-estate private acts resembled estate acts in many
dimensions – including typical clientele and procedures for passing parliament – but the value of
acts in the control group did not depend upon returns from reorganizing property rights. Why do
we need a control group? It is possible that the regressions in Columns (1) through (3) do not
control for some unobserved factor correlated with both the real interest rate (our independent
variable) and with the number of estate acts (our dependent variable). The exclusion of this
unobserved variable might make it appear as if the real interest rate influenced the demand for
estate acts, when in actuality, the excluded variable was the source of the correlation. Columns
(4) through (6) address this issue by indicating whether correlations existed between the
economic forces that influenced the passage of estate acts and non-estate private acts, for which
the demand did not depend upon factors that influenced the returns from reorganizing property
rights. If such correlations existed, then the coefficient on the real interest rate in columns (4)
11

An array of robustness checks that we report in earlier versions of this paper demonstrate that the regressions are
robust to a wide range of alternative specifications. Neither the signs nor the significance levels of the
coefficients change when the endpoints of the analysis change by up to two decades. The signs and significance
levels are also invariant to the inclusion of additional explanatory variables such as year-to-year changes in the
level of population, industrial production, Parliamentary majorities, and military conflicts.

24

through (6) would be statistically and substantively significant. The coefficients are, however,
insignificant, indicating that excluded variables that influenced private acts’ passage through
Parliament did not drive the results of specifications (1) through (3).
Columns (7) and (8) reinforce this result. Column (7) employs non-estate private acts as
an explanatory variable. Column (8) employs the residual from a regression of all non-estate
private acts on the explanatory variables in columns (4) through (6). The results of these
regressions indicate that non-estate private acts were correlated neither with the real interest rate
nor with acts that reorganized property rights. These results can be restated. In our analysis,
interest rates affected the treatment group but not the control group.
Table 6 replicates these results for the years 1763 to 1830, which span the generations
during which the Industrial Revolution began, spread, and accelerated. The years also span the
period for which all acts are accurately dated and other statistical series pose the fewest
problems. Columns (1) through (3) and (6) through (10) demonstrate that the results of Table 1
hold for this key period and for the cleanest data. Column (4) shows that these results hold when
the dependent variable is limited to acts that authorized sales of strictly-settled land. Column (5)
shows that these results hold when the dependent variable is limited to acts that authorized the
lease of strictly-settled lands. Overall, Tables 5 and 6 indicate that changes in the interest rate
coincided with changes in the number of acts authorizing the sale, lease, and reorganization of
land.
Table 7 presents the results of this exercise for statutory authorities. Column (1) regresses
the change in the number of statutory authority acts on the variables that influence the demand:
the change in the real interest rate and the change in the level of trade. Column (2) adds to the
regression variables that shift the supply curve including years of elections, changes in the prime

25

minister (and thus, the coalition controlling Parliament), and the death of the monarch. Column
(3) adds to the regression a vector of control variables including changes in climate (derived
from tree-ring data), changes in the disease environment (as measured by the onset and end of
epidemics), and changes in the real value of the land tax. Column (4) regresses the same
variables for the years 1763 to 1830, for which the dating of acts poses no problems. Column (5)
regresses changes in the number of transportation acts on the full spectrum of independent
variables introduced in the previous column. Column (6) regresses changes in the number of acts
pertaining to urban services and infrastructure on the full spectrum of independent variables.
The results reveals a strong statistical correlation between economic conditions that
influenced the value of statutory authorities and the number of statutory authorities passed by
Parliament. The magnitude of the coefficients on our demand shift variables averages a little less
than -1.0 for the change in the real interest rate and a little below 1.0 for the change in trade. The
standard errors on those variables average about 0.30 and 0.28 respectively. The small size of the
standard errors relative to the magnitudes indicates that the coefficients are measured precisely.
The null hypothesis that the coefficients equal zero is rejected at the 1% significance level. This
result holds for all specifications, including numerous permutations which we examined to
determine the robustness of our result, but which to save space, have not included in this essay.12
How responsive was Parliament to changes in the demand for acts reorganizing rights? A
few calculations reveal the answer to this inquiry. The standard deviation of the change in the
12

The regressions are robust to a wide range of alternative specifications which to save space, we have not
included in this essay. Neither the signs nor the significance levels of the coefficients change when the endpoints
of the analysis change by a decade or more. Regressions employing data only for the period for which we can
date acts precisely (1764 to 1830) yield coefficients nearly identical to those for the full sample. The estimates
are also unaffected by the inclusion of additional explanatory variables. When the change in industrial
production appears as an explanatory variable, the results remain the same, and industrial production is
insignificant, unless trade is excluded. In the latter case, the coefficient on industrial production becomes
statistically and substantively significant and explains about as much of the variation in the dependent variable as
had trade. Adding indictors for the onset and cessation of military hostilities does not alter the results. Interacting
years of military conflict with the principal explanatory variables strengthens the results.

26

real interest rate is 4.90. The average of coefficient on the real interest rate in columns (1)
through (3) is -1.03. Multiplying those numbers indicates that a one standard deviation decline in
the real interest rate coincided with an increase of 5.03 in the number of statutory authority acts.
The standard deviation of the change in the number of statutory authority acts is 16.84. Thus, a
one standard deviation decline in interest rates explains approximately 30% (~5.03/16.84) of a
standard deviation change in the number of statutory authority acts. Similarly, the standard
deviation of the change in trade is 4.66. The average of coefficient on trade in columns (1)
through (3) is 0.99. The product of those numbers is 4.61. Thus, a one standard deviation change
in the volume of trade explains 27% of a standard deviation change in the number of statutory
authority acts. In total, the two demand-shift variables in the regressions explain more than half
of the variation in the number of statutory authority acts. Parliamentary accommodation of the
public’s demands, in other words, explains the majority of the annual fluctuation in statutory
authority acts.
Columns (4) and (5) indicate that this finding holds for subcategories of statutory
authorities associated with the modernization of the English economy: transportation
improvements and urban expansion. Multiplying the standard deviation of the real rate with the
coefficient in Column (4) and dividing by the standard deviation of transportation acts (11.9)
indicates that fluctuations in the real rate explain 24% of the fluctuation in transportation acts.
Similar calculations indicate that fluctuations in the real rate explain 21% of the fluctuation in
acts for improving infrastructure and public services in urban communities. Fluctuations in trade
explain 21% of the variation in transportation acts and 23% of the variation in urban acts.
Political variables also have substantial correlations with the number of statutory
authorities passed by Parliament. The number of acts fell during election years and during years

27

in which monarchs died and rebounded one year later. Together, these perturbations in the
political process explain a little more than one quarter of the variation in statutory authorities.
Columns (7) and (8) examine a control group: changes in the number of government
finance acts. The control group is uncorrelated with changes in interest rates and changes in the
volume of trade. Adding the control group as an explanatory variable alters neither the signs nor
the magnitudes of the other explanatory variables.
Table 8 examines enclosure acts. Columns (1) through (3) show the number of enclosures
increased when interest rates fell. The number of enclosures fell when interest rates rose. This
result reinforces the decades-old observation of the inverse correlation between interest rates and
enclosures. We show that this relationship exists even after controlling for confounding variables
and autocorrelation. Column (4) shows that there is no correlation between enclosure
amendments and interest rates, which suggests that the variation in the number of enclosure acts
was not driven by changes in unobserved factors correlated with our explanatory variables (i.e.
factors that altered the costs or benefits of creating acts).
Together, Tables 5 through 8 illuminate several important patterns. First, the equilibrium
number of acts reorganizing property rights changed in response to changes in the interest rate
and volume of trade, two of the principal factors influencing the returns from reorganizing
property rights. Proposition 1 reveals how to interpret this result. The supply curve for acts of
Parliament sloped upwards, but was not vertical. The political process, in other words, responded
flexibly to demands to reorganize property rights. When the public requested more acts,
Parliament passed more acts. When the public requested fewer acts, Parliament passed fewer
acts. Second, the equilibrium number of acts reorganizing property rights also changed in
response to changes in the productivity of Parliament, as measured by factors that shifted the

28

length of time that Parliament sat in session and legislators’ incentives for passing local
legislation. Proposition 2 reveals how to interpret this result. The demand curve for acts of
Parliament sloped downwards. When economic conditions increased (or decreased) returns from
reorganizing property rights, the number of acts that the public desired increased (or decreased).
In sum, as the economy evolved, the public desired to adopt property-rights arrangements
that enabled them to reallocate resources towards more productive uses. Parliament
accommodated those desires.

6. Discussion

At the opening of the eighteenth century, Parliament established a forum for reorganizing
rights to land and resources. This venue enabled individuals, families, and communities to
exploit opportunities that could not be accommodated by the inflexible rights regime inherited
from England’s past. During the next two centuries, Britain experienced agricultural and
industrial revolutions. The timing suggests a connection between Parliament’s revolutionary
approach to property rights and the economic events that followed. Evidence from an array of
sources indicates that Parliament’s actions did, in fact, foster economic development.
Estate acts – particularly those authorizing the sale and lease of land – exposed land to
the invisible hand. Freeing resources from the shackles of the past loosened constraints on
landowners, facilitated the reallocation of physical and financial assets to new and lucrative uses,
and enabled the exploitation of opportunities arising in a dynamic economy. The lowering of
transaction costs enhanced efficiency and encouraged investment. The lowering of such barriers
has long been considered a principal force propelling European economic progress (North,
1981).

29

The benefits of estate acts extended beyond the persons and property involved. Estate
acts established precedents. Knowledge of what Parliament would decide when confronted with
a case helped to resolve disputes within families, to safeguard the interests of investors, to
determine the distribution of rents within ongoing business arrangements, and to prevent the
holding-up of new projects by those seeking an inordinate share of the profits. The development
of institutions solving such problems has long been considered to be one of the principal
institutional innovations underlying modern capitalist economies (Williamson, 1985).
Statutory authorities played a large role in two transcendent developments: urbanization
and commercialization. In rapidly expanding urban areas, statutory authorities provided fresh
water, removed garbage, aided the indigent, operated forums for dispute resolution, and financed
police forces. Large numbers of people living in small areas required these services. For
domestic and international commerce, statutory authorities established the high-volume, longdistance transportation network. Turnpike trusts reduced freight charges and travel times by
widening, resurfacing, and maintaining thoroughfares (Bogart, 2005). Canal companies enabled
coal to reach emerging manufacturing centers, such as Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham, and
Leeds. Harbor-improvement authorities increased the number and draft of ships which could
dock in port, facilitating the expansion of maritime commerce.
Statutory authorities of all types played a pivotal role in the accumulation of capital. In
1810, for example, the value of capital raised by statutory authorities for canals, rivers, turnpikes,
water works, docks, and gas lighting equaled 41 million pounds, or nearly 6.5% of the total
capital stock (Harris 2000, p. 195).
Enclosures have been studied by numerous scholars. Many consider enclosures a catalyst
for increasing agricultural productivity (Richardson, 2001). Enclosures enabled farmers to

30

introduce new crops, improve livestock, reduce overuse of common resources, and react to
market opportunities. Robert Allen (1992) and Gregory Clark (1998) find these factors’ impact
on the productivity of arable land to be positive, but limited. Enclosure acts had additional
effects. Enclosures authorized the recovery of wastelands, the drainage of fens, and the
construction of irrigation channels. Enclosures also transferred agricultural land to urban and
industrial uses, particularly near expanding towns and cities.
Britain’s system for reorganizing property rights was unique among European nations. In
other nations, the transition from medieval to modern landholding systems involved spasms of
reform and rebellion. In France after 1789 and Russia after 1917, for example, revolutionaries
annulled laws binding land and labor to traditional tasks; voided privileges possessed by nobles,
clergy, and corporations; redistributed political power; and restructured anachronistic propertyrights regimes.
Before these revolutions, inflexible property-rights regimes prevented entrepreneurs from
exploiting emerging opportunities. In France, for example, the sclerotic landholding system
impeded the construction of infrastructure, such as canals, even when returns from their
operation would have substantially exceeded construction costs (Rosenthal, 1992). The principal
problem involved establishing rights of way. Local groups who opposed projects (or hoped for a
larger share of the profits) could perpetually delay construction by repeatedly suing in slow and
inefficient courts. Only after its revolution did France simplify procedures for establishing rights
of way.13
Britain established procedures for establishing rights of way more than a century before
France and other countries on the continent. Britain created these procedures at the same time
13

Evidence also indicates that during the eighteenth century, French cultivation continued as it had in the Middle
Ages. In England, however, “agriculture entered a dynamic period of rapid and far reaching change (Sexauer
1976).”

31

that Parliament established procedures for passing estate, statutory authority, and enclosure acts.
Why did Parliament act at that time? The proximate answer is the Glorious Revolution of 1688,
after which Britain became a constitutional monarchy, and the political system changed in
fundamental ways.
Parliamentary supremacy triggered transcendent political and intellectual developments.
The Bill of Rights in 1689 (and subsequent legislation) encouraged the expansion of legislative
activity. Parliament began meeting on a predictable, annual schedule. Parliament began setting
its own agenda. Parliament established a permanent bureaucracy and procedures for processing
petitions. Streamlined procedures reduced the cost of submitting bills and increased the
predictability of passage. A cadre of professional solicitors and clerks emerged to help petitions
through the Parliamentary process. By the 1720s, capacity expanded to the point where the
legislative process could effectively accommodate almost any demand for legislation
reorganizing property rights.
The political system that solidified at that time internalized a balance of political power
between landowning, mercantile, courtly, and aristocratic interests. That balance enabled
individuals interested in economic development to pass acts restructuring property rights and
promoting economic progress. Political stability ensured that those acts would not be overturned
by the ascension of new regimes, via either violent revolution or Parliamentary election.
Parliament’s decisions became the law of the land.
The security of property rights was not absolute. Parliament felt free to alter rights
regarding resources that could be put to more productive uses. Parliament did not, however,
expropriate rights to resources without compensation. Our research indicates that individuals
often received remuneration for the rights that they lost. Remuneration typically left all parties as

32

well off as before. Parliament, in other words, provided security for income derived from rights
to property, but not security for the rights themselves. Rights typically defined who could use a
piece of property, what they could employ the property for, when they could employ the
property, and who would share in the resulting benefits. These rights were pliable. These rights
could be altered by common consent and political decisions. This flexibility of rights enabled
society’s institutional foundations to adapt to new conditions and emerging opportunities.
This notion of security differs from the type of security discussed by North and Weingast
(1989), which referred to protection from arbitrary royal expropriation.14 The difference between
their ideas and our ideas stems from differences in opinion over the relative importance of
clauses in the British Bill of Rights. North and Weingast emphasize the Bill of Right’s initial
affirmative clause, which prohibited the monarch from interfering with the operations of the
legislature and judiciary, and which was a direct refutation of the reign of King Charles II. This
clause, however, reiterated similar clauses that appeared in the Magna Carta of 1215; in a
multitude of subsequent corroborating charters, confirmation, and statutes, passed during the
reigns of King Henry III through Elizabeth I; and the Petition of Right, a parliamentary
declaration in 1628 of the liberties of the people, assented to by King Charles I. We emphasize
clauses in the Bill of Rights that were new additions to the English constitutional lexicon. These
clauses enabled Parliament to sit in session for prolonged periods each year, to determine what
bills to consider during each session, and to set its own agenda. These clauses guaranteed
freedom of speech within Parliament and allowed opposition politicians in exile to return home.
These returnees brought with them new ideas about property and government. These changes in

14

Like many economists, we believe that security from arbitrary expropriation is a prerequisite for progress. But,
like most historians of early-modern Britain, we believe that such security existed in England long before the
Glorious Revolution, which reestablished a status-quo that had existed before the Stuart’s attempted to impose
an absolute monarchy on their united kingdoms.

33

the political system enabled Parliament to contemplate complex issues concerning property
rights and to establish a system that protected rights to income, which minimized opposition to
the reorganization of rights, and a system that encouraged institutional adaptability, which
facilitated the reallocation of resources to new and more productive uses.
The seminal studies of Ronald Coase (1960, 1974) illuminate the importance of Britain’s
adaptable property-rights regime. Coase argues that in the presence of transaction costs, attaining
economic efficiency requires the proper definition and allocation of property rights. In “The
Problem of Social Cost (1960)” Coase argues that nineteenth-century British common and
statutory law recognized these principles, and that Britain’s courts and Parliament reallocated
property rights to encourage economic efficiency. In “The Lighthouse in Economics,” Coase
(1974) argues that in the nineteenth century, Parliament’s creation of statutory authorities
encouraged the provision of public goods and services. Coase illuminates his assertion with an
example. Parliament assigned ‘lighthouse rights’ to certain plots of land. Lighthouse rights
allowed anyone operating a lighthouse to collect tolls from passing vessels. The customs service
collected these tolls when merchants submitted customs forms, which indicated their port of
origin and arrival, and thus all of the lighthouses that they passed along the way. These new
lighthouse rights superseded ancient rights enshrined guaranteeing merchants transit free from
tax or toll. Our research suggests that Parliament began to operate in the way that Coase
described in the early eighteenth century, following the Glorious Revolution, when Parliament
gained control of government and political enlightenment reached England.15

15

Previous scholars emphasized the first half of Coase’s essay, “The Problem of Social Costs (1960),” which
models a world without transaction costs in which any assignment of secure property rights results in an efficient
outcome. We emphasize the second section of Coase’s essay, which models a world with transaction costs. In
such a world, some distribution of property rights lead to efficient outcomes, while others trap people in poverty.
The market alone may not alleviate this affliction. Some institution, such as Parliament, must lower transaction
costs and/or reassign rights in order for efficiency to arise.

34

Puzzles remain concerning the causes and consequences of the property rights revolution
in Britain. One puzzle concerns redistribution. Changing property rights increased some group’s
incomes, but potentially lowered the incomes of others. Vested interests that could be harmed
would naturally lobby against legislation. Acts reorganizing property rights, however, often
passed without opposition and with the support of all concerned. Why? Parliament appears to
have overcome opposition by establishing mechanisms for ensuring that all pertinent parties
benefited from the legislation. Parliament, in other words, ensured that legislation contained
side-payments sufficient to satisfy vested interests.
A second puzzle concerns the effort which members of Parliament put into designing and
passing estate, enclosure, and statutory authority acts. Parliament spent on acts affecting specific
individuals and communities as much time and energy, if not more, than Parliament did on acts
concerning war, taxation, trade, and colonies. Why did Parliament devote so much effort to
issues affecting localities and individuals? A possible explanation is that members of Parliament
devoted themselves to passing such legislation because it increased their chances of reelection
and their personal incomes. Localities supported members of Parliament who advanced local
interests. Competition for seats in Parliament, therefore, may have been a key factor underlying
political support for institutional adaptability.
A third puzzle concerns the connection between the property-rights revolution and an
intellectual revolution occurring at that time: the Enlightenment. The essence of the
Enlightenment was the notion that natural laws could be identified and harnessed for the
betterment of society (Mokyr 2002, 2005a, 2005b, 2005c). The reform of parliamentary process
in the early eighteenth century coincided with the rise of prominent enlightened English thinkers
including John Locke. In December 1689, Locke published his magnum opus, Two Treatise of

35

Government. The second treatise focused on the concepts of property and legislature. Locke
wrote that property should be used industriously and rationally. Rights to property formed the
foundation for civil society. These rights existed by consent of the citizenry. That consent formed
the law of the land (Locke, Second Treatise on Government, Chapter V, On Property, Sections
34 and 35). Locke’s concepts of property rights, civil government, and consent of the governed
informed the individuals who reformed Britain’s political system in the late-seventeenth and
early-eighteenth century. These reforms allowed all citizens (not just the King and his
appointees) to utilize forms of petitions previously employed for the reorganization of royal
estates, appointments to royal offices, and the assignment of rights to aristocratic estates and
chartered towns. The principal modification of the old form was the addition of clauses
indicating that the acts would enhance the wealth of the realm and enable individuals and
communities to prosper. These clauses provide textual evidence that Enlightenment ideals
influenced estate, enclosure, and statutory authority acts.
What are the broader lessons from Britain’s property rights revolution? Adaptable
property-rights may be as important as secure property-rights. Both may be necessary for
economic development. The pair may be sufficient to trigger modern economic growth. One way
to create adaptable property-rights is to establish political procedures that generate consent for
change and ensure that vested interests do not oppose development. Piecemeal actions that
address specific problems facing individuals and communities may be easier to implement than
widespread reforms that addresses general problems. Overtime, a piecemeal process may reveal
general patterns that could serve as the foundation for nationwide reforms. The Parliamentary
procedures that triggered the property-rights revolution in Britain (and which remain embedded

36

within Anglo-Saxon legal systems today) may have useful applications in modern developing
nations.

37

Table 1: Estate and Other Private Acts, Summary Statistics
Δ Rights

Series in levels

Series in differences

Land

Personal

Avg

SD

Min

Max

Avg

SD

Min

Max

Type of Acts

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(a)

Estate Acts
All Estates

All

Some

22.7

11.1

0

66

0.2

13.0

-55

65

(b)

Estates that authorizes sales

All

Some

11.1

6.3

0

33

0.1

7.2

-33

30

(c)

Estates that authorizes leases

All

Some

3.3

2.9

0

22

0.4

3.0

-11

15

(d)

Estates that authorizes sales or leases

All

Some

14.5

7.9

0

40

0.1

8.7

-40

37

(e)

Comparison Group
Non-Estate Private Acts
Marriage

No

All

1.6

2.0

0

10

0.1

2.2

-9

7

(f)

Naturalization

No

All

7.2

6.3

0

36

0.0

7.2

-29

22

(g)

Office

No

All

0.4

0.9

0

7

0.0

1.2

-6

7

(h)

Sum (Marriage, Naturalization, Office)

No

All

9.1

7.6

0

46

0.1

8.7

-34

25

Notes: Column (1) indicates acts that changed rights to land and resources, marked “yes” for acts that did and “no” for
acts that did not. Column (2) indicates acts that altered personal rights, marked “yes” for acts that did, and “some” if the
act sometimes affected personal rights. Columns (3) through (6) describe the statistical properties of the original series.
Columns (7) through (10) describe the statistical properties of the series in differences, i.e. where the observation in year
t-1 is subtracted from the observation in year t. Columns (3) and (7) indicate the average. Columns (4) and (8) indicate
the standard deviation. Columns (5) and (9) indicate the minimum value. Columns (6) and (10) indicate the maximum
value.

38

Table 2: Statutory Authority and Finance Acts, Summary Statistics
Series in levels
Δ Rights
To Land
(1)

Provide
I&S
(2)

(a)

Statutory Authority Acts
All

All

(b)

Transportation Only

(c)

Urban Only

(d)

Comparison Group
Finance Acts

Series in differences

Avg

SD

Min

Max

Stat?

Avg

SD

Min

Max

Stat?

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

All

46.1

42

0

187

No

0.9

15.9

-53

45

Yes

All

All

33.7

29.8

0

126

No

0.8

11.3

-37

32

Yes

All

All

9

10.5

0

53

Yes

0.1

6.6

-22

26

Yes

None

Some

22.7

22.3

0

94

Yes

0.2

15.8

-87

54

Yes

Notes: Column (1) indicates acts that changed rights to land and resources, marked “All” for acts that did and
“none” for acts that did not. Column (2) indicates whether the acts authorized the provision of infrastructure or
services, marked “All” for acts that did and “some” for categories in which some acts authorized infrastructure
and services. Columns (3) through (7) describe the statistical properties of the original series. Columns (8)
through (12) describe the statistical properties of the series in differences, i.e. where the observation in year t-1
is subtracted from the observation in year t. Columns (3) and (8) indicate the average. Columns (4) and (9)
indicate the standard deviation. Columns (5) and (10) indicate the minimum value. Columns (6) and (11)
indicate the maximum value. Columns (7) and (12) indicate whether the series is stationary, indicated “yes,” or
whether the series is non-stationary, indicated “no.” An augmented Dickey-Fuller test is used to determine
whether the series possesses a unit root.

39

Table 3: Enclosure Acts and Amendments, Summary Statistics
Series in levels

(a)

Enclosure Acts

(b)

Enclosure Amendments

Δ Rights
To Land
(1)

Correct
Error
(2)

All
Some

Series in differences

Avg

SD

Min

Max

Stat?

Avg

SD

Min

Max

Stat?

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

None

27.4

35.7

0

135

No

0.6

12.7

-50

37

Yes

All

0.2

0.7

0

5

Yes

0

0.7

-3

5

Yes

Notes: Column (1) indicates acts that changed rights to land and resources, marked “all” for acts that did and “some”
for categories in which some acts changed rights to land and resources while other acts did not. Column (2) indicates
whether the acts amended or corrected earlier acts changing rights to land and resources, marked “all” for acts that
did and “none” for acts that did not. Columns (3) through (7) describe the statistical properties of the original series.
Columns (8) through (12) describe the statistical properties of the series in differences, i.e. where the observation in
year t-1 is subtracted from the observation in year t. Columns (3) and (8) indicate the average. Columns (4) and (9)
indicate the standard deviation. Columns (5) and (10) indicate the minimum value. Columns (6) and (11) indicate the
maximum value. Columns (7) and (12) indicate whether the series is stationary, indicated “yes,” or whether the series
is non-stationary, indicated “no.” An augmented Dickey-Fuller test is used to determine whether the series possesses
a unit root.

40

Table 4: Economic and Political Explanatory Variables, Summary Statistics
Series in Differences
Avg

SD

Min

Max

Description

Sources

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.1

4.9

-15.1

12.9

Yield on 2½ % consols minus inflation.

Neal (1990) and Clark (2001)

0.7

4.5

-24.2

18.3

Sum exports plus imports at official prices.

Mitchell (1988)

(a)

Interest Rate, Real

(b)

Foreign Trade, Volume

(c)

Election Year

0

0.6

-1

1

Indicator for years with elections.

H.HS (1993) and Evans (2001)

(d)

Monarch Dies

0

0.3

-1

1

Indicator for years in which monarch dies.

H.HS (1993) and Evans (2001)

(e)

Prime Minister Changes

0

0.5

-1

1

Indicator for years in which PM changes.

H.HS (1993) and Evans (2001)

(f)

Epidemic Mortality

0

0.3

-1

1

Indicator for years with epidemic mortality.

H.HS (1993) and Evans (2001)

(g)

Land Tax Rate, Real

0

0.6

-2

4

Tax rate in shillings per acre.

H.HS (1993) and Evans (2001)

(h)

Tax Code Change

0

0.1

-1

1

Indicator for year when tax code changes.

H.HS (1993) and Evans (2001)

(i)
(j)

Tree Ring Growth
War Years

3.3
0

178.5
0.3

-468
-1

496
1

Index. 0 equals no growth. 1000 is average.
Indicator for years when Britain fights wars.

Baillie (1986)
Rodger (2004), H.HS (1993),
and Evans (2001)

Notes: Definitions for Columns (1) through (4) identical to definitions for Columns (8) through (11) in Table 3. All of these
differenced series are stationary. H.HS (1993) refers to the texts by Holmes (1993) and Holmes and Szechi (1993).

41

Table 5: Estate Acts, 1705-1830, Regression Results

Variable

Sales+
Leases
(1)

Δ Estate Acts
Sales+
Leases
(2)

Δ Non-Estate Private Acts
Sales+
Leases
(3)

Marriage
(4)

Naturalize
(5)

Office
(6)

Δ Estate Acts
Sales+
Sales+
Leases
Leases
(7)
(8)

Δ Real interest rate

-0.24
[0.09]

-0.26
[0.10]

-0.26
[0.09

-0.03
[0.05]

-0.16
[0.18]

0.01
[0.01]

-0.24
[0.10]

-0.26
[0.10]

Δ Trade

-0.07
[0.08]

-0.13
[0.10]

-0.01
[0.09]

0.03
[0.03]

0.02
[0.12]

0.02
[0.01]

-0.13
[0.09]

-0.13
[0.09]

Δ Election

-0.49
[1.85]

-0.46
[2.03]

-0.58
[0.44]

-1.01
[1.16]

0.06
[0.12]

-0.29
[2.03]

-0.46
[2.03]

Δ New Prime Minister

-1.09
[1.25]

-1.16
[1.30]

0.76
[0.39]

1.30
[1.22]

0.37
[0.30]

-1.34
[1.27]

-1.16
[1.34]

Δ Monarch Dies

-1.86
[2.03]

-1.92
[2.31]

-0.82
[0.46]

2.65
[1.90]

0.85
[0.55]

-2.01
[2.20]

-1.92
[2.20]

Δ Non-Estate Private Acts

0.09
[0.07]

Residuals from Estimated Δ Non-Estate Private Acts

0.09
[0.07]

Additional Controls ?

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

# Observations
F-test (deg. freedom)
F-test statistic

124
(2,113)
478

124
(5,110)
2114

124
(9,105)
372

124
(9,105)
44

124
(9,105)
21

124
(9,105)
518

124
(10,104)
859

124
(10,104)
341

Bold face indicates significant at the 5% level. Italic indicates significance at the 10% level. Standard
errors calculated using the Newey-West procedure with 9 lags.

42

Table 6: Estate Acts, 1765-1830, Regression Results

Variable

Δ Estate Acts
Sales+ Sales+ Sales+
Leases Leases Leases
(1)
(2)
(3)

Δ Non-Estate Private Acts
Sales Leases
(4)
(5)

Marriage Naturalize Office
(6)
(7)
(8)

Δ Estate Acts
Sales+ Sales+
Leases Leases
(9)
(10)

Δ Real interest rate

-0.33
[0.09]

-0.38
[0.09]

-0.37
[.08]

-0.17
[0.08]

-0.21
[0.11]

-0.10
[0.08]

-0.29
[0.25]

-0.00
[0.01]

-0.37
[0.09]

-0.38
[0.09]

Δ Trade

-0.06
[0.08]

-0.15
[0.09]

-0.15
[.09]

-0.02
[0.08]

-0.13
[0.05]

0.04
[0.04]

0.03
[0.12]

0.01
[0.01]

-0.16
[0.09]

-0.15
[0.09]

Δ Election

-2.92
[1.82]

-2.85
[1.91]

-1.89
[1.39]

-1.03
[0.73]

-0.97
[0.64]

-0.17
[1.94]

-0.10
[0.09]

-2.84
[1.79]

-2.92
[1.85]

Δ New Prime Minister

-2.27
[0.90]

-2.33
[1.04]

-1.55
[0.97]

-0.73
[0.50]

-1.55
[0.56]

1.67
[1.80]

0.49
[0.32]

-2.38
[0.90]

-2.27
[0.94]

Δ Monarch Dies

3.01
[1.76]

3.43
[1.99]

3.20
[0.95]

-0.19
[1.13]

-0.32
[0.68]

3.99
[1.80]

0.27
[0.16]

2.87
[1.64]

3.01
[1.77]

Δ Non-Estate Private Acts

0.03
[0.05]

Residuals from Estimated Δ Non-Estate Private Acts

0.03
[0.05]

Additional Controls?

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

# Observations
F-test (deg. freedom)
F-test statistic

66
(2,64)
6

66
(5,61)
84.15

66
(8,58)
8.34

66
(5,61)
24.2

66
(5,61)
24.15

66
(5,61)
11.28

66
(5,61)
0.02

66
(5,61)
0.71

66
(6,60)
21.73

66
(6,60)
21.73

Bold face indicates significant at the 5% level. Italic indicates significance at the 10% level. Standard errors calculated using the
Newey-West procedure with 9 lags.

43

Table 7: Statutory Authority Acts, Regression Result
Δ Statutory Authorities
All
All Transport
(3)
(4)
(5)

All
(1)

All
(2)

Δ Real interest rate

-0.988
[0.307]

-1.019
[0.295]

-1.075
[0.305]

-1.13
[.56]

Δ Trade

1.015
[0.313]

0.995
[0.262]

0.959
[0.266]

Δ Election

-6.658
[2.457]

Δ New Prime Minister
Δ Monarch Dies

Variable

Δ Finance
Urban
(6)

All
(7)

(8)

-0.588
[0.195]

-0.302
[0.139]

-0.861
[0.229]

-0.040
[0.308]

0.967
[.295]

0.531
[0.2549

0.341
[0.087]

0.795
[0.332]

0.578
[0.768]

-6.688
[2.460]

-8.931
[4.328]

-5.323
[1.662]

-0.661
[1.065]

-5.749
[2.290]

-1.827
[2.370]

4.476
[3.157]

4.305
[3.299]

6.880
[5.091]

4.303
[2.361]

0.550
[1.156]

4.728
[3.775]

3.229
[3.264]

-5.196
[2.662]

-5.590
[2.679]

-9.871
[6.488]

-2.214
[1.969]

-2.908
[1.706]

-6.145
[3.415]

0.026
[3.790]

Δ Finance acts

0.173
[0.158]

Additional Controls?

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

# Observations
F-test (deg freedom)
F-test statistic

124
(2,121)
9.23

124
(5,118)
5.78

124
(8, 115)
3.67

66
(8,58)
22.67

124
(8, 115)
3.73

124
(8, 115)
4.06

119
(9,110)
3.62

119
(8, 110)
0.99

Bold face indicates significant at the 5% level. Italic indicates significance at the 10% level. Standard errors calculated
using the Newey-West procedure with 9 lags.

44

Table 8: Enclosure Acts
Variable

Δ Enclosure
Acts
(1)
(2)

(3)

Δ Enclosure
Amendments
(4)

Δ Real interest rate

- 0.99
[0.17]

-0.51
[0.30]

-0.53
[0.31]

0.04
[0.03]

Δ Trade

0.50
[0.34]

0.57
[0.39]

0.59
[0.40]

-0.06
[0.02]

Δ Election

-5.51
[2.89]

-5.57
[2.95]

0.20
[.45]

Δ New Prime Minister

3.17
[3.55]

3.12
[3.60]

0.15
[0.24]

Δ Land Tax Rate

-12.77
[6.88]

-12.63
[7.02]

-0.45
[0.56]

Δ Tax Code

-16.18
[4.72]

-15.54
[4.97]

-2.06
[0.27]

Δ Enclosure Amendments

0.31
[0.76]

Additional Controls?

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

# Observations
F-test (deg freedom)
F-test statistic

66
(2,64)
17

66
(10,56)
16

66
(11,55)
15

66
(10,56)
32

Bold face indicates significant at the 5% level. Italic indicates
significance at the 10% level. Standard errors calculated using the
Newey-West procedure with 9 lags.

45

References

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113 (October 2005), pp. 949-995.
Allen, Robert. Enclosure and the Yeoman. New York, 1992.
Baillie, Michael L.. European Oak Tree Ring Series from Lockwood, Britain, 1652-1975. QUSP
- ITRDB BRIT008, World Data Center for Paleoclimatology Data Contribution Series.
NOAA/NCDC Paleoclimatology Program, Boulder, Colorado, USA. 1986.
Bogart, Dan. “Did Turnpike Trusts Increase Transport Investment in Eighteenth Century
England,” Journal of Economic History, 65 (June 2005), pp. 439-468.
-----

“Turnpike Trusts and the Transport Revolution in Eighteenth Century England,”
Explorations in Economic History, 42 (October 2005), pp. 479-508.

Bogart, Dan and Gary Richardson. “Parliament, Property Rights, and Public Goods,” Working
paper, 2007.
Clark, Gregory. “The Political Foundations of Modern Economic Growth: England, 1540-1800.”
Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 26 (1996), pp. 563-588.
----- “Common Sense: Common Property Rights, Efficiency, and Institutional Change.” Journal
of Economic History, 58 (March 1998), pp. 73-102.
-----

“The Enclosure of English Common Lands, 1475-1839,” Journal of Economic History,
61 (December 2001), pp. 1009-1036.

-----

“Farm Wages and Living Standards in the Industrial Revolution: England, 1670-1850,”
Economic History Review, 54 (August 2001), pp. 477-505.

Coase, Ronald. “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, 3 (October 1960):
pp. 1-44.
-----

“The Lighthouse in Economics,” Journal of Law and Economics, 17 (October 1974), pp.
357-76.

Crafts, N.F.R. “Determinants of the Rate of Parliamentary Enclosure,” Explorations in Economic
History, 14 (1977), pp. 227-249.
English B, and Saville, J. Strict Settlement: a Guide for Historians. Hull, 1983.
Evans, Eric. The Forging of the Modern State: Early Industrial Britain, 1783-1870. Longman,
2001.

46

Great Britain. Statutes of the Realm, 1225 to 1713. London: Dawsons of Pall Mall, 1807.
-----

Statutes at Large, 1223 to 1806. London: Mark Baskett, Robert Baskett, Henry Woodfall,
and William Strahan, 1800.

Habakkuk, John. Marriage, Debt, and the Estates System. Oxford, 1994.
Harris, Ron. Industrializing English Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Holmes, Geoffrey. The Making of a Great Power: Late Stuart and Early Georgian Britain.
1660-1722. Longman, 1993.
Holmes, Geoffrey and D. Szechi. The Age of Oligarchy: Pre-industrial Britain, 1722-83.
Longman, 1993.
Hoppit, Julian. “Patterns of Parliamentary Legislation, 1660-1800.” The Historical Journal, 39
(March 1996), pp. 109-131.
-----

Failed Legislation, 1660—1800. London: Hambledon Press, 1997.

Innes, Joanna. “The Local Acts of a National Parliament: Parliament’s Role in Sanctioning Local
Action in Eighteenth-Century Britain.” pp. 23-47 in Parliament and Locality,1660-1939,
edited by David Dean and Clyve Jones. Edinburgh University Press, 1998
Langford, Paul. Public Life and the Propertied Englishman. Oxford, 1991.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Christian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer.
“Judicial Checks and Balances.” Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2004), pp. 445-470.
Locke, John. Second Treatise on Government. Chapter V, On Property, Sections 34 and 35.
Mitchell, Brian. British Historical Statistics. Cambridge, 1988.
Mokyr, Joel. Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2002.
----

“Mercantilism, the Enlightenment, and the Industrial Revolution.” Presented tot eh
Conference in Honors of Eli F. Heckscher, Stockholm, May 2003. Ronald Findlay, Rolf
Henriksson, Hokan Lindgren, and Mats Lundahl (eds), Eli F. Heckscher (1879-1952): A
Celebratory Symposium. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 2005.

-----

“The Intellectual Origins of Modern Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic History,
Vo. 65, No. 2 (June) 2005, pp. 285-351.

-----

“The Great Synergy: The European Enlightenment as a Factor in Modern Economic
Growth.” Mimeo, April 2005.

47

Neal, Larry. The Rise of Financial Capitalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West. “A simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica 55
(May 1987), pp. 703-708.
North, Douglass C. Structure and Change in Economic History. London: W. W. Norton and
Company, 1981.
North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast. “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of
Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England.” Journal of
Economic History, 49 (December 1989), pp. 803-832.
O’Brien, Patrick. “Central Government and the Economy, 1688-1815.” In Floud and
McCloskey, The Cambridge Economic History of Britain since 1700, I, 2nd Edition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Richardson, Gary. “The Prudent Village: Risk Pooling Institutions in Medieval English
Agriculture,” Journal of Economic History, Volume 65, Number 2, (June 2005), pp. 386–
413.
Rodger, N. A. M. The Command of the Ocean: A Naval History of Britain, 1649-1815. New
York: W. W. Norton and Company, 2004.
Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent. Fruits of the Revolution: Property Rights, Litigation, and French
Agriculture, 1700-1860. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Sexauer, Benjamin. “English and French Agriculture in the Late Eighteenth Century.”
Agricultural History, Volume 50. No. 3. (July 1976), pp. 491-505.
Smith, Adam. The Wealth of Nations. Modern Library: New York, 1994.
Tate, William Edward. A Domesday of English Enclosure Acts and Awards. Reading: University
of Reading, 1978.
-----

The Enclosure Movement. New York: Walker, 1967.

Turner, Michael. English Parliamentary Enclosure: Its Historical Geography and Economic
History. Folkestone: Dawson-Archon Books, 1980.
-----

Enclosures in Britain: 1750 to 1830. London, 1984

Webb, Sidney, and Beatrice Webb. Statutory Authorities for Special Purposes, with a summary
of the development of local government Structure. Hambden, 1963.

48

Williamson, Oliver. The Economics Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, and Relational
Contracting. New York: Macmillan Free Press, 1983.
Wordie, J. R. “The Chronology of English Enclosure, 1500-1914.” The Economic History
Review, New Series, Vol. 36, No. 4, (Nov. 1983) pp. 483-505.

49

