                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      OPTIMAL TAXATION BY ThE
                         MONETARY AUTHORITY


                           Carl E.   Walsh



                      Working Paper No. 1375




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 198L




I would like to thank Alan Blinder, Jeffery Carmichael, Larry
Kantor, Karlyn Mitchell, Douglas Pearce, and Harvey Rosen for help-
ful comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1375
                                                    June 1984


                Optimal Taxation by the
                                               Monetary Authority

                                       ABSTRACT



    Reserve requirements
                         imposed against bank deposits, nominal interest
 payments on bank reserves (or
                               on base money), and inflation can all be
 viewed as generating tax
                              effects. Any analysis of
                                                         optimal monetary pol-
 icy in a steady-state
                             equilibrium needs to consider the simultaneous
choice of all the tax
                            instruments controlled by the
                                                            monetary authority.
Such an analysis is carried out in this
                                        paper.         It is shown that when
the tax system is not
                            indexed, the optimal nominal interest rate on the

monetary authority's liabilities is likely to be zero. Iore
                                                             important-
ly, any discussion of the
                           payment of interest on reserves and
                                                               currency
must take into account the nature of the tax
                                             system         and the rate of in-V
flation in a   nonindexed   economy.




                                                    Carl E. Walsh

                                                    Department of Economics

                                                    Princeton University

                                                    Princeton, NJ 08544

                                                    (609) 452-4026
            OPTIMAL TAXATION BY THE MONETARY AUTHORITY




     Economists often analyze monetary
                                       policy in steady state equilibrj
  by treating the rate of inflation as a tax
                                                        (Johnson[l9681   Fried-
  man[l969], Phelps[l973},
                                Marty[l978J, Drazen[l9791      Summers[l981})
  Higher rates of inflation increase
                                         the opportunity cost of holding non-
  interest bearing
                     money, leading individuals to reduce their real money

  balances. By viewing inflation as a tax on liquidity, it is
                                                                   possible to
  draw on the optimal taxation
                                  literature in analyzing the rate of infla-
  tion that would maximize
                              the steady state utility of a representative
  individual (Phelps[1973J,
                              Drazen[l979])



    The rate of monetary
                         expansion, and hence inflation, is not the only
 policy instrument available to
                                 the monetary authority, nor is it the
 only policy instrument which can be viewed as
                                                    generating tax effects.
 Reserve requirements imposed
                                 against bank deposits, for example, act as
 a tax on the holding of such
                                deposits (Fama[l980J)    In addition, if the
tax system is not indexed,
                               changes in the rate of inflation influence
the effective tax rate on real capital (Feldstein[19761,
                                                             Summers[1981J)
This in turn implies that
                             the payment of nominal interest on money is
 generally not a perfect substitute for
                                         a steady state rate of deflation
 as a means of achieving a
                           given real return on money. The tax on capital
will depend on the composition of the real return
                                                   on money between nomi-
nal interest payments and deflation.




                                   —1—
                                           the rates of taxation on capi-
  If the monetary authority can affect
                                       the use of its policy instruments,
tal, liquidity, and deposits through
                                       state monetary policy needs to con-
then any analysis of optimal, steady
                                                                        The
sider the simultaneous choice of all the authority's instruments.
                                                                It is shown
purpose of this paper is to carry out such an analysis.
                                                                 central
that with a nonindexed tax system, it may not be optimal for the

bank to pay interest on its liabilities.



   The basic framework utilized to study optimal policy is presented in

section II. Discussed in that section is the choice problem of the rep-

resentative consumer who must allocate income between consumption and
                                                                 and mon-
 saving and must allocate wealth between capital, bank deposits,
                                                          authority can
 ey. Section III considers the case in which the monetary
                                                             currency).
 pay an explicit rate of return on base money (reserves plus
                                             currency is not technologically
 The case in which explicit interest on
                                                                    the
 feasible is treated in section IV. Section V is a brief summary of

 paper's results. The next section reviews the previous literature on

 optimal inflation.



 I. BACKGROUND


                                              of inflation utilized a partial
     Initial analyses of the optimal rate
                                                                 achieved
  equilibrium framework (e.g., Friedman[l969]). Optimality was
                                    of holding money was equal to the so-
  when the private opportunity cost
                                              the latter cost to be zero and
  cial cost of producing money. Assuming
                                             of interest, the basic result was
  the former cost to be the nominal rate

  that optimality would be achieved with a zero nominal rate of interest.




                                       -2-
  The optimal rate of deflation
                                       was then equal to the real rate of
  interest.   If an explicit rate of interest was paid on nominal
                                                                  money
  balances, the optimality condition
                                         simply required that the real rate of
  return on money equal the real rate of return on capital.
                                                                     Letting rk
  denote the real return
                           on capital, ii the steady state rate of inflation,
  and i the policy determined
                                 nominal return on money, equating I - ii to

  rk defines a linear combination of values for      and ir which achieve the
  optimum degree of liquidity.




    Subsequent analyses of the optimal rate of inflation generally fo-

 cused on the partial equilibrium
                                      nature of the above result. The most
 influential has been the
                            argument made by Phelps [1973]' that the Fried-
 man result implicitly assumes the
                                      existence of lump-sum taxes. If such
 nondistortionary taxes are not available, and if the analysis of
                                                                  a
 change in the rate of inflation is
                                       carried out under the assumption that
 total government revenue must
                                  remain fixed, then the optimal rate of in-
 flation may result in a positive
                                    tax on real money balances. The intui-
 tion behind this result is
                              quite simple; if only distortionary taxes can
be used to meet a fixed
                            revenue requirement, deviations from the first
order efficiency conditions will
                                      generally be required for all goods
(Sandmo[l976])   Recognition of the need to
                                                simultaneously consider the
setting of the inflation tax together with
                                              other distortionary taxes led
to the use of optimal tax models
                                     to study the question of the optimal
rate of inflation (Phelps[l973}
                                    Marty[l978], and Drazen[1979])



   An alternative approach has focused on the Tobin effect
                                                                     whereby
changes in the rate of inflation lead
                                         to variations in the steady state




                                   -3-
capital-labor ratio.    If money is not superneutral, and if the existing

capital-labor ratio is below the golden rule value that maximizes steady

                                          rate of inflation may lead to an
state per capita consumption, a higher
                                    the capital-labor ratio. Welfare may
increase in welfare by raising
                                          increases the inefficiencies due
rise even though the higher inflation
                                    social cost of production and its pri-
to the divergence between money's
                            This effect has been emphasized by Summers
vate opportunity cost.

[19811.2 However, this conclusion is called into question by the results

of Stockman[19&ll who shows that a rise in the rate of inflation may re-

                                        ratio in an economy facing a Glower
duce the steady state capital-labor

 cash-in-advance constraint (Clower[19671).



    A number of authors (Feldstein[l9761, Green and SheshinSki[197fl,
                                         inflation can have real effects due
 Summers[198l1) have pointed out that

 to the nonneutrality of the tax system.      Although specific conclusions

                               nonindexatiOn of the tax system, the optimal
 depend on the nature of the
                                         be that associated with a zero op-
 rate of inflation will generally not

 portunity cost of holding money.



    Previous authors have dealt only with the case in which all money is

  a liability of the central bank (see Summers[l98l11 for an exception).
                                                 it has also been convenient
  In the absence of privately produced money,
                                             interest. Once inside money is
  to assume that money earns no explicit

  introduced, a number of new issues arise which have not previouslY been
                                            supplied by the banking industry
  systematically analyzed. If deposits
                        determined rate of interest while outside money does
  pay a competitively
                                        of return on the two types of money
  not, the wedge between the rates




                                      -4-
  will depend on the rate of
                              inflation. The wedge will also be affected
  by any reserve requirement that
                                  forces banks to hold non-interest bear-
  ing reserves. Further effects
                                     arise if inflation has a direct effect on
  the return to capital because of a nonindexed tax
                                                    system. In this case,
  all values of i and it   for   which i -   it = rk   are not equivalent since it
  affects the wedge between the returns on capital and base
                                                              money (re-
  serves plus currency). The optimal rate of inflation will also
                                                                  depend
  on whether the central bank
                              pays interest on base money or only on re-
  serves.




    In the model to be analyzed in this paper, the
                                                    monetary authority is
 viewed as having three
                        policy tools: the steady state rate of inflation,
 a reserve requirement ratio, and the interest rate paid
                                                         on bank reserves
 (Or reserves plus currency).
                                   The monetary authority is also assumed to
 be subservient to the fiscal
                                   authority in that any deficit implied by
 the fiscal authority's choice of tax rates and spending level
                                                               must be
 financed through what can be described as monetary policy
                                                           revenue sourc-
 es. Because all three policy
                                    instruments affect the revenue generated
by monetary policy, their optimal values must generally be
                                                           jointly de-
termined. For example, the
                           optimal rate of inflation will not be inde-
pendent of the choice of the
                                 reserve requirement ratio.



II. THE MODEL



   The basic framework is a
                               neoclassical growth model populated by     iden-
tical individuals with infinite
                                      planning horizons, profit maximizing
firms operating in perfectly
                                 competitive markets, and pure financial in-
termediaries called banks.




                                    -5-
a) ndividuaIS


   Individual   behavior is assumed to be directed towards maximizing,

subject to constraints,
                          futeótdt, where u is the instantaneous level

                                   the subjective rate of time preference.
of utility at time t and 6 is
                                              where c is the rate of per cap-
Instantaneous utility is given by u(c)
                                        produced in this economy.
ita consumption of the single good


                                                                       of con-
    Individuals maximize total utility subject to two types
                                       constraint. Each individual is assumed
 straints. The first is a budget
                                 unit) of labor and to receive a real wage
 to supply a fixed amount (one

 income bf w.    In addition, individuals earn a nominal pre-tax return of
                                             nominal interest rates on deposits
 rk + iT per unit of capital, while the
                                                             it will be assumed
 and base money are       and i respectively. Initially
                                             i on both reserves and currency.
 that the monetary authority can pay

 Section IV examines the case in which i is paid only on reserves.


                                                              the struc-
     The budget constraint faced by the individual depends on
                                       are assumed to be levied only on
  ture of taxes which, for simplicity,
                                             (including nominal capital
  households.    If nominal personal income

  gains) is taxed at the rate ,     after    tax, real, per capita income equals

  (1-T)[W + (rk+1T)k + idd + im]
                                   -   iik   + d + m] where k, d, m are real per

                                   deposits, and currency.      Feldstein[l9761,
  capita holdings of capital,
                                 and Auerbach[l9831 show how the interaction
  Green and Sheshinski[19771,
                                                                        by
  of inflation and the tax system may fail to be adequately represented
                                    the real returns to capital are taxed
  a simple formulation that assumes
                                 capital gains. To keep the present analysis
   at the same rate as nominal




                                         -6-
  uncomplicated yet allow a bit more generality, the tax rate on nominal

  capital gains on individuals' holdings of capital will be allowed to

  differ from the rate applied to other
                                             components of income. Hence, af-
  ter tax real per capita income is defined as
                                                         (l_'rl)[w+rkk+idd+±m] +
  (l-i2)irk   -
                  iT[k+d+mJ.



       In order to adopt a specification
                                            which makes money essential to the
 economy, a modified Clower-cash-inadvance constraint
                                                            will be assumed to
 hold (see Clower{1967]).          That is, an individual's current spending
 plans are limited by current holdings of
                                               cash and deposits. Rather than
 writing this constraint as m + d        c + k where a     denotes a time de-
 rivative, a more general specification will be used to capture the no-

 tion that cash and deposits
                                  may not be perfect substitutes in the carry-
 ing out of all transactions.
                                        The transaction technology will be
 represented by a constraint of the form




 (1)      h(m,d)       c + k




where h(      )   is   a concave, twice continuously differentiable function

which can be thought of as a liquidity production function. It is as-

sumed that h > 0,
           m
                         h > 0, h 0, and h O.
                          d      mm      dd


   The representative individual is assumed to maximize total utility

subject to a budget constraint which, when the rate i is paid on both

bank reserves and currency, can be written as4




                                      -7-
                                                                 - C -   k    -   d       -   m   =   0
(2) (lTl)[w+rkk+idd+im]+(l_T2) (n)[k+d+mI



where n is the exogenous rate of population growth.



                                                           individuals hold all three as-
   Assuming an interior solution in which
                                                     d =                              m       =           the
sets and considering only steady states in which k =

first order conditions for the maximization of utility subject to the
                                                       constraint (2) can be written as
budget constraint (1) and the liquidity



                               u'(c) =
 (3)




 (4)                           Xh            p(ó + n -     r)

                                             i(ö + n   -
                                                           rd)
 (5)                            Xhd



 (6)            (l_'rl)rk -   t2lT = ó(p+X)/p + n


                                                           where i and X are the Lagrangi-
 together with (1) and (2) with equality,

 an multipliers associated with the income and liquidity constraints re-

 spectively, and r =    (l-t1)i     -   11    and rd =      (ltj)id      -   IT   are the real, af-

 ter tax returns on currency and deposits.



  b) Firms



       Firms are assumed to operate in competitive factor and output mar-
                                                                is summarized by a neoclassi-
  kets. The economy?s productive technology

  cal production function, taken to be homogeneous of degree one in capi-




                                               -8-
     tal and labor. Thus,
                                      per capita output is given by f(ka) with ft    0,
     fU     0, where ka is the aggregate stock
                                                        of capital per capita.



     The assumption that firms are competitive and maximize
                                                             profits im-
  plies that workers are paid their
                                    marginal product and that capital is
  hired to the point where its
                                           marginal product equals
                                                                     rk. Hence,


                 w =   f(ka)
  (7)                           -
                                    ft(ka)ka

                            a
 (8)             rk= f (k ).



 c) Banks


       Banks are taken to be pure financial
                                                       intermediaries (see Fama[l980]),
 producing deposits at constant marginal
                                                       cost (assumed equal to zero for
 simplicity). On the asset side of their
                                                       balance sheets, banks hold cap-
 ital and reserves. It is assumed
                                                  that banks, like nonfinancial firms,
are not taxed directly by the fiscal
                                                      authority. However, banks must
hold a fraction p of their deposits in the form of reserves.
                                                                            Excess re-
serves are taken to be zero.
                                               All income generated by bank assets is
paid out to depositors. This implies



(9)       'd =     + (l-p)(r +



d)    Equilibrium




                                               -9-
                                   economy's steady state equilibrium is
   Using equations (3)-(9), the

characterized by



(10) ph =     6 + n -   r


(11) hd =     p(6+n-r)+(lP)[(i   -t2)ii-óI



                                + n
(12) (lTl)f(ka) - 1211 = 6(1+P)


                                     +(l-p)(12 - ¶1)11d + (r-n)(m+pd)
 (13) h(m,d)=(l 1)f(k)(12r1)k


                                                    stock iii the economy, and
 where ka =   k + (l-p)d is the aggregate capital
                                         shadow price of transaction services
 4' /ii.    4' is equal, then, to the

 relative to the shadow price of income.



    The equilibrium conditions (lO)-(13) each have a straightforward in-
                                         require that the net of tax returns
 terpretation. Equations (l0)-(12)

 on all assets equal 6 + n.      The form of the after tax return, however,

  is different for each asset. Currency, for example, yields an explicit

  after tax interest return of r.        It also produces liquidity services

                                                    in the production of such
 with the marginal productivity of currency
                                                                   the
  services given by h. The value of these services is 4'hm so that
                                                                        6
  total return to currency is 4'h + r, and (10) says this is equated to

  + n if currency is held.


                                                      On unit of real deposits
     The return on deposits has three components.
                                    of currency in the form of bank reserves
  represents a claim on p units




                                     -   10 -
  and (l-p) units of bank held
                                            capital. Deposits also produce liquidity
  services valued at               The total after tax return on deposits is
                           hd.                                               then
         + pr +   (l-p)(1-t1)(f'    +   ). Setting          this equal to 6 + ii and rear-
  ranging, using (12), yields (11).



        Equation (12) equates the net of tax return on directly held capital

 to 6 + n, while (13) is just the
                                                  budget constraint with c replaced by
 h(m,d) since (2) will be binding
                                              along the optimal consumption path.



    From (10) and (11), the marginal rate of substitution between
                                                                  curren-
 cy and deposits, hd/h, would equal p if holding a unit of deposits was

 just equivalent to holding
                                    p units of currency and (l-p) units of capi-
 tal.     This equivalence fails because
                                                        deposits, unlike capital, yield
 transaction services at the rate 6p                  and, if T1      t, the tax treatment
of income from capital held
                                        directly by individuals differs from the
treatment of income from capital held by banks. Nominal capital gains

on directly held capital are taxed at the rate t2                    while   nominal capital
gains on the capital held by banks is paid out to depositors and taxed

at the rate T.        If   these two tax rates differ, this
                                                                        unequal tax treat-
ment affects the opportunity cost of holding deposits when
                                                                                  •6

   It    will be useful in       preparation          for the analysis of optimal policy
in the next section to determine how
                                                  steady state utility is affected by
the three policy variables         ,    p, and i. In order to highlight the             tax
effects induced by inflation when the opportunity cost of currncy is

held constant, the monetary
                                   authority's policy instruments will be taken
to be r, p and r since a choice of i, given ,                  is   equivalent to a choice




                                        —    11   —
                                                           cannot be
of r.     Assuming real currency and bank reserve balances
                                                  choice of ii and r is
directly taçed, I must be nonnegative so that any
                                   that r         -   with   equality if i = 0.
constrained by the requirement



   Making use of (l0)-(13), it can be shown that




(16) 3u/iT u'(hrn + hdd.ff)
                                                             + (1-p)(Tz -T)d)
              =(ô(l+)k+5m +o(p_(l-p))d-t2k


                           + óm + (p_1P(lp))dr + m + pd}
 (15) 3u/3r= (o(l+)k


                           + ôm + o(-(l-))d + (rn+(Ti_tz))d}
 (16) u/p co(l+)k:

                                                             (14)-(16) will be used Ifl
                          m/3TT, etc. Equations
 where k:=akaRlT, m
                                                                     which must be sat-
 the next section to evaluate the necessary conditions

  isfied by the optimal policy.



                                    ON RESERVES AND                           CURRENCY
  III. OPTIMAL POLICY WITH INTEREST


                                  assumed to choose a level of real purchases,
        The fiscal authority is
                                                                       then con-
                              and t2         The monetary authority is
  g, and the tax rates
                                       .




                                                      budget identity which requires
  strained by the consolidated government
                                                               expenditures
   all deficits to be financed by base money creation. Total
                                                         i(m+pd). Tax rev-
                        interest payments on base money,
   are equal to g plus
                                                         (T1_Tz)(lP)d. If B is the
   enues equal 1f(ka)+ t2k + t1i(m+pd) +

   rate of growth of base money, g -              1f(ka)       -
                                                                   T2ka   + (l_T1)i(m+pd)

                     = O(m+pd).    In the steady state, B
                                                                     =   +n   so the govern-


   ment's budget constraint can be written as



                                           - 12   -
  (17)                                           +       (ti-t2)(lp)d     0.




 The values chosen by the
                                 monetary authority for its policy instruments,
 ir, p, and r must satisfy (17).




      An optimal policy is defined as a choice of (lr,r,p) which maximizes

 the steady state utility of the
                                                  representative individual subject to
 (10)-(13), the household sector's
                                                     budget constraint, the government's
 budget constraint (17), and the requirement that p and i be nonnegative

 (r   -Tr).




      Equations (l4)-(l6) give the partial derivatives of steady state

 utility with respect to the policy variables.
                                                                Letting        be the Lagrangi-
 an multiplier associated with the
                                                 government's budget constraint and as-
suming initially an interior solution with r + i
                                                                           0 and p     0, the
first order conditions can be written as



(18) S[TZka+(l_P)(Tl_12)d} =
                                     tbb + tdd + tkka


              tbbr + tdd
(19) -sb =
                           + tkk



(20) s[(t2-T1)r+n-r]d =                          +
                           tb(m      p       )
                                                     tdd + tkk


where s(p-)/ is the relative cost of lump-sum taxes to distortionary

taxes measured in terms of utility, tb =
                                                                 pó/ + n - r,              td =
                 - pó/J,    tk
                                 =
                                     pó(1+)/              + 11ft(ka) + t, and b =      m   + Pd
is the monetary base.      The form in which (18)-(2o) are written high-




                                         -   13      -
                                                           choice of monetary policy
lights the parallel between the optimal
                                                     taxation.7
instruments and the literature Ofl optimal commodity


                                                                     The rate of time pref-
                                     tax on base money.
   The quantity tb is the net
                           the marginal cost of raising revenue through dis-
erence, corrected for
                                                                        represents the cost
tortionarY taxes, plus the rate of population growth
                                unit of base money.                  The difference between
of holding an additional
                                                                           and reserves, is
                                 tax real return on currency
this cost and r, the after
                                 and, since the social cost of producing base
the net cost of base money,
                           difference measures the tax on money. Using (12),
 money is zero, this

 this tax can be written as tb
                                     =
                                          k    -         + so]   -
                                                                     (l-t1)i where   k is the

                                                                        brackets is the nom-
                                  capital and the term in
 after tax nominal return on
                                                                             services neces-
                                  of the value of transaction
 inal return on capital net
                                                                       and corrected for the
                            additional unit of capital
 sary to purchase an
                                         (l-1)i is the after tax explicit nominal
 cost of distortionarY taxes.
                                                                     considered in the liter-
  interest rate on base money.           The case normally
                                                            base money), s = o (lump-sum
  ature assumes i      0 (no interest paid on
                                                          explicitly mod-
  taxes available),    and P = 0 (no transaction services
                                              the tax on money is simply the nominal
  elled). Under these assumptions,

  rate of interest



                                          the tax on money should be set equal to
      Friedman[l9691 argued that
                                                                                 From equation
   zero in order to achieve the optimal degree of liquidity.

   (19),



                       -             -
   (21) tb =   -sb/b       tddr/br




                                              - 14   -
 If lump-sum taxes are available, s = 0 and it is likely that t t 0.

 Hence, in this case tb = ó+n-r and (20) becomes



 (22) tb =
             (lP)Pódr/b
                          -
                              (f_n)ka/b


 where use has been made of (10) and (12).
                                                   By noting that (12) implies
 ka = 0 if     = 0, and (10) implies 4        0 if ó   n -   r,   it follows that
 (22) is satisfied when tb =     0.   This is essentially Pheip's result: if

 nondistortionary taxes are available, the optimal tax on outside money

 should be zero, and the real after tax return on currency and reserves

 should be set equal to ó + n, the after tax return on capital.



      With only distortionary taxes, s       0 and tb will generally be nonze-

ro. The optimal value of tb is given by equation (21). The first term

in (21) parallels the standard partial equilibrium result for the opti-

mum commodity tax. In the present case, the optimum tax is inversely

proportional to the own interest rate effect on the demand for base mon-

ey.    If the cross-elasticities embodied in dr and ka are ignored and

the two rates t and 12 are assumed equal, then (21) can be manipulated

to show that the optimal after tax real return on base money is equal to

[ó(l+S)+flh/{l_5/b,r1 where Cb,r is the elasticity of b with respect to
r. To evaluate this expression, an estimate            C1,r is needed. Since
neither currency nor reserves have recently earned explicit interest in

the U.S., an estimate must be inferred from evidence on the elasticity

of currency and reserves with respect to interest rates on alternative

nonmoney assets.




                                  -   15 -
                                                                        Currency consti-
  Because b =     m    + pd, Cbr =     m,r(m/d,r(1_(m)L
tutes roughly 70 of the monetary base, so rn/b .7.                        Goldfeld{1976]

                                                            with respect to the rate on
found the long-run elasticity of currency

time deposits to be -0.19.             If own elasticities exceed cross elastici-

                                       reasonable estimate of                Interpreting
ties, 0.25 might represent a

d broadly to incorporate both demand and time deposits, Goldfeld'S re-
                                                     approximately 0.5l. Taken togeth-
suits would imply a value for Cdr of

                               0.33. If 0.04, n=0.Ol, and s              -0.3,° the op-
er this implies Ebr
                                                                  is 0.02.    This is a
timal real return on currency and reserves
                                                          For comparison, the real before
relatively high real, after tax return.
                                                                                           -
tax return on 3-month Treasury bills averaged only 0.008 during 1960:1

1982:4.       If r =   0.02,   the tax rate on base money, tb, is 0.018.



                                                          this estimate of r must be ad-
   If d and ka are not equal to zero,
          r        r
                                                                                      If t
 justed to take into account the last two terms in equation (21).
                                                           to be the case for the optimal
  t and ii      0 (as we shall see is likely

 11), then td      0.      The optimal tax on deposits is actually a subsidy.
                                                          is a component of b and is taxed
 This is so for two reasons. Because pd
                                                                                           If
 at the rate tb, td is really the tax on bank holdings of capital.
                                                     directly held capital is less than
 the tax on nominal capital gains on
                                                               deflation results is a tax
 the tax rate on other components of income,
                                                           via bank deposits. In addition,
 advantage to holding capital indirectly

 such indirectly held capital has a higher social marginal product be-
                                                                  does
 cause it yields transaction services which directly held capital
                                                                                      0 and
 not provide. Hence, if d and br are positive, tdr
                                                 d /b
                                                   r                         0 if r
                                   r
                                                             r) in order to partially off-
  this tends to raise the optimal tb (lower
                                                          by reducing the return on bank
  set the subsidy going to bank capital

  reserves.



                                            -   16    -
       Using the same parameter values as before and continuing to ignore

 the last term in (21), it can be shown that r                    0.02 + .486n    -
                                                                                      .O6lik.
 The optimal r rises with 'IT       to   offset the resulting tax increase on de-

 posits, and declines with p, the value of the transaction services

 yielded by currency and deposits. For example, if the rate of inflation

 is 0.05 and p equals 0.1, r rises to 0.038. If                  'rr =
                                                                         -0.05, r falls to
 -0.012. Since r must exceed -ii, however, this last result suggests that

 a corner solution may occur if the optimal value of ir is negative. If a

 high rate of deflation is necessary to achieve the
                                                                  optimal capital-labor
 ratio, the real return on base money resulting from the deflation may be

sufficiently large that no explicit interest payments on the monetary

authority's liabilities are necessary.



      The effect of the last term in (21), tkka/b, is more difficult to

judge. A portfolio substitutIon argument would suggest that ka                         0.

As Stockrnan[198lJ shows, however, an increase in money holdings leads to

a rise in the net of transaction costs return to capital and can lead to

a rise in the capital-labor ratio. A negative value for ka will in-

crease the optimal tb and lower r.



      To further consider the possibility of a corner solution in which

(21) would no longer apply, we must examine equation (18), the first or-

der condition for the optimal choice of ir.



      When the banking sector's zero profit condition is incorporated into

the     household       sector's                                 the
                                   budget         constraint,             later   becomes
           a        a
(l-t1)f(k )-i2k         -nk a+(r-n)b -(Ti-i2)(l-p)d - c         = 0.
                                                                          Consequently,




                                         —   17   —
                                                                  the
acts as a tax on a base of T2ka + (t1_t2)(l-p)d and this explains

form of the left hand side of (18).      Since r is also being optimally set

                                                  does not act as a tax on base
(if the solution is an interior one), 11

money as in standard analyses.



   Examining first the case in which t1 = T2, (18) can be rewritten, us-

ing the definitions of tk and td as



         = ft                            (l+s)ô(lP)d/ti -          (l+s)(l+)
(23) '          + ska/k -   tbb/t1k+

where ii' is the optimal rate of
                                     inflation. Friedman's conclusion in a

static framework was that the optimal rate of deflation equaled the mar-
                                      reducing the opportunity cost of hold-
 ginal product of capital, thereby
                                                                   dif-
 ing money to zero. The first term in (23), _ft(ka), appears for a
                                                                      of
 ferent reason. Since r can be adjusted to produce the desired degree
                                    solution), i is set to achieve the opti-
 liquidity (assuming an interior
                                                  of ii then determines the steady
 mal tax on capital income. The choice

 state capital-labor ratio.      If rr =   -f'    ,   the after tax real return on
                                                                            If the
 capital is simply f' and the effective tax on capital is zero.
                                                            taxed. This
 sum of the last four terms in (23) is positive, capital is
                            ka is somewhat similar to that discussed by Sum-
 role of ¶ in affecting
                                                                      k
 mers[l98l1. In his model, which assumed a fixed savings rate so that
                                                              -f' could
 was not optimally chosen, a rate of inflation greater than
                                    substitution of capital for money, there-
  maximize welfare by inducing a
                                  capital-labor ratio. However, such an in-
  by raising the steady state
                                                                  the pri-
  crease in the rate of inflation above -f' simultaneously raises

  vate opportunity cost of holding money                above its social cost of




                                     -   18   -
  production.   In the present model, r can be adjusted to achieve the

 desired opportunity cost of liquidity. Note, however, that          -f' im-
 plies r    f' which is inconsistent with
                                              an equilibrium in which both
 capital and money are held.



    To provide some orders of magnitude figures to the rate of inflation

 implied by equation (23), suppose f               a
                                           0.1, f(k )   = (ka.
                                                             )   , and   assume

            0. With these assumptions, together with the parameter values

 used earlier, (23) becomes



 (24)             -.139 + .0007b/b -   .0003d/d


 where .07 has also been used as a rough estimate of b/ka, and
                                                               tb has
 been set equal to 0.02. The sign of d is ambiguous if T1        t2, since a
 rise in ir reduces the return to deposits via the tax effect but simulta-

neously raises the return on reserves relative to capital. Because b =

m+ pd, b is also ambiguous in sign, although it is
                                                          more likely to be
positive.    In any case, the last two terms in (24) are likely to be

small so that the implied optimal rate of inflation is of the order of

-.10.




   Such high rates of deflation, however, are inconsistent with the as-

sumption that r is held fixed. This suggests that the
                                                          optimal policy is
likely to be at a corner solution in which the nominal interest rate on

currency and bank reserves is set equal to zero. This is consistent

with Feldsteints argument that the tax effects of inflation dominate any

inefficiencies produced by a divergence between the private and social




                                - 19   -
                                                                   Calls for the
opportunity costs of base money             (FeldsteiflEl976]).

                                                        be warrented if
payment of interest on central bank liabilities may not
                                     nominal return to capital and the infla-
the income tax system taxes the

tion rate is chosen optimally.



                                             constant as 11 is varied, the effect
   If i cannot be adjusted to keep r

                     on steady state utility is du/d =            au/   -
                                                                            3u/r,   and
of a change in
                                 the optimal choice of i becomes,
the first order condition for




 (25) 5[T2ka+(Tl_Z)(lP)d+b1
                                =
                                     tbbr) + td(ddr) + tk(kkr)
                                        On the left side of (25), the tax base
 which can be compared with (18).
                                      includes b. On the right side, the terms
 subject to an inflation tax now
                                                           the two channels by
                   and k-k now appear to capture
 b.tbr d.TTdr)
                                                                                     im-
                                                  and deposits. Equation (25)
 which iT affects holdings of currency

 plies that



                   + (sb + tbb + tdd + tkka)/k
  (26) tk =   tk

                                 for tk when i         0. It can be shown that the
 where tk is the expression

  second term in (26) has the same sign
                                                  as -k. With k     0, tk       tk
                                    liquidity effects of a variation in ii means
  The inability to offset the
                                       is necessary at the optimum.            This is
  that a higher tax on capital
                                        inflation (smaller, in absolute value,
  achieved with a higher rate of
                                             parameter values, however, the effect
  rate of deflation). For plausible

  is likely to be quite small.




                                        -    20   -
       The monetary authority's final tax instrument, the required
                                                                   reserve
  ratio, is, like r, important in
                                         influencing the compositioj of liquidity
  holdings by the public between directly held currency and indirectly

  held bank reserves. The after tax real return on deposits is
                                                               a weighted
  average of the returns on reserves and bank
                                                        capital with weights p and
  (l-p) respectively.      If the return on bank holdings of capital exceeds

  the return on reserves, this
                                        rate of return differential on the two
 sources of liquidity will lead individuals to economize on the use of

 currency relative to deposits. This social
                                                        inefficiency was discussed
 by JohnsonL 1968] who viewed it as
                                          arising when currency paid no nominal
 return. It continues to occur even if, as in the present case,
                                                                reserves
 and currency pay a nominal return less than that available to banks
                                                                     from
 holding capital. This inefficiency can be reduced by the monetary au-

 thority if it optimally sets      p.     Note that p = 0 maximizes the return
 differential between currency and deposits but (when t1T2)
                                                                        minimizes
 the differential between the
                                   returns on deposits and capital. At the
 other extreme, p = 1 forces the yields on deposits and
                                                        currency to be
equal but maximizes the spread between the
                                                    yields on capital and depos-
its.




   Equation (20) can be rewritten as



(27) td =         +   s[n-r+(T2-T1)]d/d     -
            Ptb                                 tbm/d
                                                        -
                                                            tkk/d

where [n-r+(t1—T2)Jd is the partial derivative of the governments def-

icit with respect to p.      The total tax on deposits is given by td +
                                                                             Ptb
which, from (27), is




                                 —21-
(28) td+Ptb =    s[n-r+(tit2)1d/d
                                        -
                                             tbm/d
                                                        -
                                                            tkk/d.

The first term in (28) corresponds to the standard expression for an op-

timal commodity tax in the absence of cross demand effects. Since m
                                                       the second term in (28) tends
and d are likely to be of opposite sign,
                                                       since individuals are able to
to increase the optimal tax on deposits

substitute currency for deposits in the production of liquidity. Assum-

            t2   and   ii   0 at the optimum, the tax on deposits varies posi-
ing T1

tively with p.



   Equation (28) can be used to evaluate the optimal value of p if it is

 assumed, for purposes of illustration, that i
                                               =                     ka = 0,   the   elas-


 ticity  of d with respect to p is -l and that of m with respect to p is
 +1. In this case, with m/d .07, i = 0 and 11 set equal to -.10, the op-
 timal    reserve ratio is approximately 11%.
                                                        This is above the current ra-

 tio    of required reserves to time deposits and about equal to the ratio

 of required reserves to large transaction accounts.



       While the first order conditions for each of the monetary authority's

 three tax instruments have been discussed individuallY the optimal val-
                                                                simultaneously. This is
 ues of i, p, and r must generally be determined
                                                            a corner solution in which i
 obviously the case when, as seemed likely,

 = 0 occures.



  IV.   OPTIMAL POLICY WITH NO INTEREST PAID ON CURRENCY




                                            - 22   -
    The payment of interest on bank reserves is certainly technologically

 feasible; tile payment of interest on currency may not be. This section

 briefly examines optimal policy when the monetary authority pays inter-

 est only on the reserve component of base money.              The results of the
 previous section suggested that a corner solution might occur in which

 nominal interest is paid on neither reserves nor currency.
                                                                            In this
 case, the restriction the i be paid only on reserves is irrelevant. It

 is useful, however, to study the form of the interior solution when in-

terest is paid only on reserves. The failure of currency to earn an ex-

plicit rate of interest will tend to increase the demand for bank depos-

its, relative to currency, as a means of
                                                  producing liquidity. However,
the extent to which this substitution of
                                                    deposits for currency takes
place is dependent on the monetary authority's
                                                         setting of its policy in-
struments. The attractiveness of holding money in the form of deposits

rather than currency will depend on both the rate of interest paid on

reserves and the reserve requirement ratio.
                                                     In addition, a change in ¶1
now has a direct effect on the real return on currency as well as on the

rate of return on capital.



   The first order conditions for the representative individual's maxim-

ization problem now take the form, in equilibrium,



         = + n + '


         = p(ö + n -
   Phd                 r)   +   (l-p)[(t   -
                                                   qo}


 h(m,d) =   (l_T)f(ka)      -
                                (T2+I)ka   + (l-p)(t1-t2)d +   (r-n)pd -   (+n)m



                                      -   23 -
(l_T1)fe(ka) —          6(l+)    + n




  The   monetary   authority's revenue constraint is given by




  g -   i1f(k)             + (r-n)d - (ir+n)m       -
                                                        (t1—t2)(1-p)iid    0




  With these modifications, the first order conditions for the optimal

choice of r, p, and r can be written as



(29) s[m + T2ka + (t1-t2)(l-p)d] =         thm      + td + tkk


            Sp4 —
(30)                tbmr   + tddr + tkk



(31) s[(T2—t1) + n -       ri    tbm + tdd + tkk


where tb' =         + n + u, and td and tk are defined as before.



   Comparing (29)-(31) to the first order conditions obtained when in-

terest was paid on both reserves and currency, equations (18)-(20), re-

veals several important differences. As (29) makes clear, the revenue

base subject to an inflation tax now includes m, real currency holdings.
                                                                          of an increase
This factor alone, by raising the marginal revenue yield

 in IT would raise the optimal rate of inflation.               However, changes in n,

                                                            before) and tb' and affect
 given r, simultaneously increase both tk (as

 not only the choice between capital and liquidity, but also the choice

 between deposits and currency even when T1                   t. Reducing the social

 inefficiency in the provision of deposit services generated by inflation




                                       -   24   -
  would lower the optimal rate of inflation below that obtained in the

  previous section when currency yielded explicit interest.



     Because r is paid only on reserves, spd appears on the left side of

  (30), rather that sb   s(m+pd) as in (19). The results obtained for the
 earlier case are modified in two ways.
                                              First, paying interest only on
 reserves reduces the marginal revenue cost of paying interest; this

 should tend to increase the optimal value of r. The second modification

 is due to the distortions introduced
                                           in the deposit/currency choice by
 the payment of interest only
                                on reserves. Accounting for this effect
 would tend to lead to a higher tax on deposits (a lower r).



    Equations (31) and (20) are identical in form although the definition

 of the tax on currency differs as tb' =
                                              tb   +   (l-t1)1.   Since tbt   tb
 for any r and ii, the higher tax rate
                                           on currency, considered in isola—
 tion, tends to increase the optimal reserve ratio on deposits.



V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS



   This paper has utilized an optimal taxation framework to
                                                            analyze the
choice by the monetary authority of its policy instruments. These in-

struments, the rate of inflation in the steady state, the interest rate

on reserves and currency, and the reserve requirement ratio on deposits,

all have characteristics in common with commodity taxes. By its choice

of policy instruments, the monetary authority can affect the rJtes of

return on capital, bank deposits, and currency. In general, the optimal

rate of inflation is not independent of the
                                                   interest rate paid on base
money or the required reserve ratio.



                                -   25 -
  Unlike previous analyses of the optimal rate of inflation, the model

used in   this   paper assigns distinct roles to explicit interest on base

money and the rate of inflation. The former is set to achieve the opti-
                                                  the latter is used to achieve
mal opportunity cost of liquidity, while
                                                    the analysis suggests that
the optimal capital-labor ratio. However,

the optimal nominal interest rate on the central bank's liabilities may
                                                   of the payment of interest on
be zero. More importantly, any discussion
                                          account the nature of the tax sys-
reserves and currency must take into

tern and the rate of inflation in a nonindexed world.




                                     -   26   -
                                        FOOTNOTES




 1.    See also Green and Sheshinski[ 1977] and Drazen[1979].



 2. Also relevant is the paper by 'eiss[l98Q].



 3. A subscript i on a function denotes
                                                         the partial derivative with re-

       spect to its ith argument. Note that h and hd are assumed to be

       strictly positive. For a similar approach, see Grandrnont and Yon-

       nes[1973]. This framework ignores the role of trade inventories, em-

       phasized by Clower[1970].



4. Because only steady state equilibria are considered, no distinction

       is made between actual and expected inflation.



5. See Benhabib and Bull[1983] for
                                                 an analysis of optimal inflation al-
      long the path to the steady state.



6.    It is interesting to contrast the equilibrium conditions (lO)-(13)

      with those which would arise if a
                                                      money-in-the-utility function ap-
      proach had been adopted. If u                  u(c,h(m,d)), for example, P is re-

      placed by uh/u in (10) and (11) while P drops out of (12). In this

      case, for given r and p,     ir   affects       ka if and only if t2   0. If the
      tax system is indexed, money is superneutral (see Sidrauski[1967]).

      In addition, ka = kd    0.
                                        The cash-in-advance approach leads to
      real effects of r, p, and ir even if             'r2 =   0.




                                        -   27   -
                                                            (7), page 41 of Sand-
7. For example, compare (18)-(20) with equation

     mo[l976]



                                                'tax rate' in the inflation tax
8. As pointed out by Phelps[1973], the

     is the nominal rate of interest, not the rate of inflation.




9.   If m+d is identified with M, tM2       =c         (r/M2)+t
                                                                  d,r
                                                                        (d/M2). d/M2 is
                                                 M,r
     approximately 0.93 while Goldfeld finds the elasticity of M with
                                                                        If         =   0.25,
     respect to the rate on time deposits to be 0.49.

     this implies d,r 0.51.



10. Ballard, Shoven, and Whalley[19821 estimate the deadweight loss

       from distortioary taxes to range from $0.34 to $0.48 per dollar of
                                                                             - 1       -0.3.
       revenue. Taking $0.40 as an estimate implies s =             1/1.4




                                   -   28   -
                                REFERNCE



 1.    Atkinson, A. B, ad J. E. Stigiltz, "The Structure of Indireqt

       Taxes and EcQnomic fficiencyt*, Jotrnal qf Public Economic 1, No.

       1 (April 1972), 97,119



 2.    At1cinso A. B, and J. E. Stiglitz, "The Design Qf Tax Struczre:

      Direct versus Indirect Tacation, Journal of Public Econocs 6,

      No. 1,2 (July-August 1976), 55-75



 3.
      Auerbach, Alan J., "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the

      Cost of Capital", Jqrnal of Economic Literature 1, Nq. 3

      (Saptembar 1983), 905-940,



4.    Ba11ard qharles L., John B, Shoven, and John ha1ley ttThe

      Welfare Cost of Distortions in the United States Tax System: A

      General Equilibrium Approach", National Bureau of Economic

      Research Working Paper No, 1043 (December l98).



5.    Baumol, %iillim J. and Dayjd F. Bradford, "Optimal Departures from

      Marginal Cost Pricing", American Economic Review 60, No. 3 (June

      1970) ,265!283,




                                -   29   -
6.         Benhabib, Jess and Clive Bull, "The Optimal Quantity of Money: A

           Formal Treatment", Internation Economic Review 24, No. 1 (February

           1983), 101-ill.




7.         Clower, Robert W. "A Reconsideration of the MicrofoundatioflS of

                                                  Journal 6, No. 1 (December
           Monetary Theory", Western c
           1967), 1—9.



8.         Clower, Robert W., "Is There an Optimal Money Supply?", Journal of

           Finance 25, No. 2 (May 1970), 425-433.



 9.        Deaton, Angus, "The Distance Function in Consumer Behaviour with

            Applications to Index Numbers and optimal Taxation", The Review of

            Economic Studies 46, No. 3 (July 1979), 391-405.




 10.        Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and
                                                          Review 61, I is in No.
            Public Production I-TI", American Economic

            1 (March 1971), 8-27, II is in No. 2 (June 1971), 261-278.




     11.    Drazen, Allan, "The Optimal Rate of Inflation Revisited", Journal

            on Monetary Economics 5, No. 2 (April 1979), 231-248.



     12.    Fama, Eugene, "Banking in the Theory of Finance", Journal of

            Monetay Economics 6, No. 1 (January 1980),



     13.     Feldstein, Martin, "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation",

             Journal of Political Econojy 86, No. 2, Pt. 2 (April 1978),

             529-551.



                                       -   30 -
 14,    Feldstein, Martin, "The Welfare Cost of Permanent Inflation and

        Optimal Short-Run Economic Policy", Journal of Political Economy

        87, No. 4 (August 1979), 749-768.



 15.    Fischer, Stanley, "Money arid the Production Function", Economic

        Inquiry 12, No. 4 (December 1974), 517-533.



 16!   Friedman, Milton, "The Optimum Quantity of Money," in The Optimum

       Quantity of Money and Other Essays Aldine, Chicago, 1969.



17.    Grandmont, J. M. and Y. Younes, "On the Efficiency of a 4onetay

       Equilibrium", The Review of Economic Studies 40, No. 2 (April

       1973), 149-165.



18.    Green, Jerry, and Eytan Sheshinski, "Budget Displacement Fffects

       of Inflationary Finance", American Economic Review 67, No. 4

       (September 1977), 771-782.



19.    Helpman, Elhanon, and Ednaim Sadka, "Optimal Financing of the

       Government's Budget: Taxes, Bonds, or Money?", American Economic

       Review 69, No. 1 (March 1979), 152-160.



20.    Johnson, Harry G., "Problems of Efficiency in Monetary

       Management", Journal of Political Economy 76, No. 5

       (September/October 1968), 97 1-990.



21.    Johnson, Harry G., "Is There an Optimal Money Supply?", Journal of

       Finance 25, No. 2 (May 1970), 435-442.



                                  - 31   -
22.     Marty, Alvin L., "Inflation, Taxes and the Public Debt", Journal

        of Money, Credit, and Banki 10, No. 4 (November 1978), 437-452.



23.     McCallum, Bennett, "The Role of Overlapping Generations Models in

        Monetary Economics" in         Money Policy, and Financial

        Institutions K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer (eds.) Carnegie-

        Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 18 (Spring

        1983).




24.     Phelps, Edmund S., "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance",

         Swedish Journal of Economics (March 1973), 67-82.



                                               Introduction to the
 25.     Sandmo, Agnar, "Optimal Taxation - An

         Literature", Journal of Public Economics 6, No. 1,2 (July-August

         1976), 37-54.



 26.     Sidrauski, Miguel, "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a

         Monetary Economy", American Economic Review 58, No. 4 (May 1967),

         534-544.



 27.     Siegel, Jeremy J., "Notes on Optimal Taxation and the Optimal Rate

         of Inflation", Journal of               Economics 4, No. 2 (April

          1978), 297-305.



  28.     Stockman, Alan C., "Anticipated Inflation and the Capital Stock in

          a Cash-in-Advance Economy", Journal of Monety Econom 8, No. 3

          (November 1981), 387-393.




                                      - 32   -
9.    Summers, Lawrence H., "Optimal Inflation Policy", Journal of

      Monetary Economics 7, No. 2 (March 1981), 175-194.



30.
      Weiss, Laurence, "The Effects of Money Supply on Economic Welfare

      in the Steady State", Econometrica 48, No. 3 (April 1980),

      565-576.




                              -   33   -
