                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        TRADE AND EMPIRE

                                         Kris James Mitchener
                                          Marc Weidenmier

                                         Working Paper 13765
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13765


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2008




A version of this paper is forthcoming in Economic Journal. We thank Tai-Yu Chen, Mitch Frass,
Justin Jones, Julie Van Tighem, and Maria Revutsky for research assistance, and the Dean Witter Foundation,
Santa Clara University (Presidential Research Grant), and the National Science Foundation (NSF Grant
0518661) for financial support. We also thank Carolyn Evans, Jeffry Frieden, Alan Taylor, and seminar
participants at the Harvard Business School, University of Michigan, UCLA, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, and the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank for comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Kris James Mitchener and Marc Weidenmier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and Empire
Kris James Mitchener and Marc Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 13765
January 2008
JEL No. F15,F33,N20,N23,N40

                                              ABSTRACT

Although many modern studies find large and significant effects of prior colonial status on bilateral
trade, there is very little empirical research that has focused on the contemporaneous impact of empire
on trade. We employ a new database of over 21,000 bilateral trade observations during the Age of
High Imperialism, 1870-1913, to quantitatively assess the effect of empire on trade. Our augmented
gravity model shows that belonging to an empire roughly doubled trade relative to those countries
that were not part of an empire. The positive impact that empire exerts on trade does not appear to
be sensitive to whether the metropole was Britain, France, Germany, Spain, or the United States or
to the inclusion of other institutional factors such as being on the gold standard. In addition, we examine
some of the channels through which colonial status impacted bilateral trade flows. The empirical analysis
suggests that empires increased trade by lowering transactions costs and by establishing trade policies
that promoted trade within empires. In particular, the use of a common language, the establishment
of currency unions, the monetizing of recently acquired colonies, preferential trade arrangements,
and customs unions help to account for the observed increase in trade associated with empire.


Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

Marc Weidenmier
Department of Economics
Claremont McKenna College
Claremont, CA 91711
and NBER
marc_weidenmier@claremontmckenna.edu
                                            Trade and Empire
I. Introduction


        What factors determine the size of trade flows between countries? To assess the

determinants of bilateral trade flows, many empirical studies employ a standard augmented

gravity model that includes mass, distance, and a host of economic and political variables often

including currency unions, tariffs, wars, and exchange-rate regimes. One empirical finding of

many studies is that a country’s prior colonial status exerts a large and statistically significant

positive effect on current bilateral trade.1 This result raises several interesting additional

questions that, to date, have received comparatively little attention by economists. First, to what

extent was trade influenced by colonial status when these former colonies were still part of

formal empires? Second, if we could examine the contemporaneous impact, would membership

in an empire increase or reduce trade? Third, what are the channels through which colonial status

impacts trade?

        To gain some perspective on these questions, this paper provides a thorough examination

of the contemporaneous effect of empire on trade during the Age of High Imperialism, 1870-

1913.2 Although a few previous studies have attempted to control for the contemporaneous

effects of empire on trade using historical data sets (Estevadeordal, Frantz, and Taylor, 2003;

Lopez-Cordova and Meissner, 2003), they did not focus on understanding how empire impacted

trade, in part because their samples lacked adequate bilateral trade data on colonies and global


1
 For example, see Baldwin (2005), Glick and Taylor (2006), and Rose (2000, 2002).
2
  This paper also relates to a growing body of scholarship that examines how empires and colonial relationships
affect economic outcomes (Ferguson 2004; Lal 2001, 2004; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001).Whereas
some of these studies re-examine the institutional legacies of empire and their impact on economic development
while others provide an overall accounting of the economic effects of colonial relationships, the main objective of
this paper is a narrower one: to provide an empirical assessment of how they affect trade. We acknowledge that our
empirical approach focuses on total trade flows, and may not account for the extent to which some of the trade
between metropole and colony was based, not on mutual exchange, but on coercion.


                                                         1
trade.3 To examine empire’s effect on trade, we first construct a new bilateral trade database of

over 21,000 observations from 1870-1913 that is nearly 20 times larger than existing databases

for this sample period. We then estimate the impact of empire on trade using an augmented

gravity model of trade, and examine some channels through which this effect may have operated.

         Our results suggest that being in an empire roughly doubled trade relative to those

countries that were not part of an empire. Moreover, the positive effect of empire on trade does

not appear sensitive to whether the metropole was Britain, France, Germany, Spain, or the

United States, nor does it appear to be sensitive to a variety of different econometric

specifications or robustness checks (including endogeneity, multilateral resistance, propensity

score matching, and selection models). We further examined whether tariff policies and

transactions costs help account for the observed boost in bilateral trade.4 We find that

preferential trading agreements, customs unions between colonies and metropoles, empire-based

currency unions, and sharing a common language increased bilateral trade. Consistent with

earlier studies, our analysis also confirms that, in most specifications, the gold standard had a

positive effect on bilateral trade flows during the period 1870-1913; however, the effect of

joining the gold club is substantially smaller than the empire effect.5 Although our paper does not

claim to capture the overall welfare costs or benefits of belonging to an empire, it provides new

estimates of the contemporaneous effect of empire on trade and examines the mechanisms

through which this effect may have operated. In addition, our results shed light on the historical


3
  Accominotti and Flandreau (2005) and Flandreau (2000) have employed gravity models to examine the effects of
bilateral trade agreements and currency unions on trade during the nineteenth century.
4
  Relatedly, Ferguson (2002, 2003) has argued that England “enforced” free trade during the gold standard period
while other countries moved towards more protectionist policies near the end of the century.
5
  In a similar vein, Ferguson and Schularick (2004) find a large empire effect for British colonial bonds during the
classical gold standard period. Membership in the British Empire significantly reduced the cost of capital for
colonial borrowers since the mother country guaranteed the bonds of its possessions. Flandreau and Zúmer (2004)
find that adherence to the gold standard did not lower the cost of capital for sovereign borrowers during the gold
standard period.


                                                          2
origins of the large legacy effect of empire often reported in studies examining recent bilateral

trade flows.

       In the next section, we review the empirical literature on bilateral trade, present an

augmented gravity model of trade, and describe the data we use to test it. Section III provides

empirical estimates of the effects of empire, non-empire currency unions, and the gold standard

on bilateral trade. Section IV identifies the channels of empire and the effects of these

mechanisms on bilateral trade. The last section offers some concluding comments and discusses

how empire may have imparted a positive effect on trade.



II. Explaining Bilateral Trade Flows During the Classical Gold Standard Era


A. Empirical Research on Bilateral Trade



       Empirical research has drawn attention to the effects of policies, institutions, and

geography on trade. Using augmented “gravity” models of trade, economists have examined the

importance of tariffs, transport costs, exchange-rate volatility, and transactions costs in

explaining the cross-country variation in bilateral trade flows. Numerous studies utilizing the

gravity model framework (with data from different time periods and for different country

samples) have reported on the costs of trade-policy frictions, the tyranny of distance, and the

benefits of being part of a common currency area (Estevadeordal, Frantz, and Taylor (hereafter

“EFT”), 2003; Glick and Rose, 2002; Rose, 2000). Reviewing the empirical evidence and

performing a meta-analysis of earlier studies, Rose (2004) finds that belonging to a currency

union has a positive and statistically significant effect on trade, and that this result appears robust




                                                  3
to various econometric specifications, definitions of currency union, measures of distance,

exchange rate volatility, and country samples.6

           EFT (2003) has argued that historical episodes, such as the gold standard era and the

interwar period, may be even better suited for testing the effects of currency unions on trade

since there was considerable variation in trade flows that existed during these periods and since

the gold standard represented “the formation of the largest currency arrangement in history.”

Using quinquennial panel data for the period 1870-1910, Lopez-Cordova and Meissner (2003)

(hereafter “LCM”) test for the effects of currency unions and gold-standard membership on

bilateral trade. After controlling for other influences such as distance, language, and a common

border, they find a large, positive effect for historical currency unions, similar to what Rose and

others find using more recent samples, as well as a large effect from gold-standard membership.

EFT (2003) and Flandreau and Maurel (2001) report similar results for historical currency

unions.

           One puzzle that arises from this empirical literature is that exchange-rate volatility

appears to be unimportant in explaining bilateral trade flows; some studies have found that

exchange rate volatility impacts trade negatively, but no consensus has emerged. Even in studies

where the coefficient is negative, the size of the effect is generally small, and the statistical

significance varies widely.7 Many of the gravity model studies (including those examining

historical periods) include a currency union indicator variable as well as a measure for exchange

rate volatility as independent variables. If we assume that multicollinearity is not a severe

problem, then the high degree of statistical significance on the currency union indicator variable

must reflect a benefit other than exchange rate stability. Rose (2000) suggests that currency


6
    See Baldwin (2005) for a more recent survey.
7
    Edison and Melvin (1990) review the empirical studies.


                                                             4
unions could also reduce transaction costs that arise from operating with various currencies, and

that they provide a more serious and durable commitment than simply having a fixed rate.

Nevertheless, he professes ignorance as to why the estimated effects of currency unions on trade

are so large: “It is wisest to conclude that we simply don’t know why a common currency seems

to facilitate trade.” (Rose, 2000, p.24). This leaves open the possibility that currency union

dummy variables are proxying for omitted influences.8

         As we suggested in the introduction, one institutional factor that may have affected

bilateral trade flows in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and that has received

little attention in previous empirical studies is empire. The notion that trade and empire are

linked is certainly not new. Scholarly debate reaches back at least a century to the era of High

Imperialism, when France, Germany, and Great Britain (and to a lesser extent Russia, Portugal,

Belgium, and the United States) renewed their quest for territorial acquisition. Even though the

British Empire, which spanned five continents, was still unrivaled during the 19th century,

continental European countries began to more actively challenge Britain’s role on the world

stage in the latter half of the century. New imperial powers sought overseas territories to

complement their growing economies, which had been stimulated by the industrial revolution.

Colonial acquisitions during this phase of expansion included Britain extending its holdings in

Burma, Malaysia, and Africa, France consolidating its Indo-Chinese Empire and its foothold in

Madagascar, and Germany carving out an empire in Africa. The Age of High Imperialism also

included the United States, which had acquired the Philippines and Hawaii after its war with

Spain.




8
 Although studies examining the period 1870-1913 confirm the salutary effects of currency unions on trade, they
provide little direct evidence that the gold standard reduced transaction costs or payments frictions.


                                                        5
        A careful reading of the economics and history literatures suggests a variety of reasons

why membership in an empire could have affected trade flows during the gold standard era

(Bairoch, 1989; Ferguson, 2002; Frieden, 2006; Lal, 2004; Porter, 1999). These include

preferential trade policies and other transaction costs, which arise from monetary arrangements,

developing marketing or distribution networks, or sharing a common language. In order to

determine whether trade among empire members differed from non-empire countries and to

assess the relative importance of empire versus other institutional factors, such as currency

unions and monetary regimes, we now turn to estimating an augmented gravity model of trade

for the Age of High Imperialism.



B. Gravity Model of Bilateral Trade


        The gravity model is the workhorse empirical model of studies examining trade flows,

and continues to be used widely by economists due in part to its straightforward implementation

and theoretical underpinnings.9 In its simplest form, the gravity model captures two main forces

affecting trade: mass (a force of attraction) and distance (a force of resistance). Mass (measured

here by the size of countries) is proportional to trade whereas distance varies inversely. The

model thus predicts that, all else equal, larger economies ought to trade more than smaller

economies, and those that are located closer to each other will also experience greater trade. The

second prediction seems particularly relevant to our sample period, since transportation costs

declined dramatically during the nineteenth century and appear to have been an important driver

of trade during this period (EFT, 2002; O’Rourke and Williamson, 1999).


9
  There are a variety of theoretical models used to justify the implementation of a gravity model of trade. See
Deardorff (1998), Evenett and Keller (1998) and Feenstra, Markusen and Rose (1998) for discussion and additional
references.


                                                        6
         We augment this basic model with an additional set of covariates to capture the effects of

differences in geography, institutions, tastes, and preferences on bilateral trade. In particular,

previous studies have argued that, holding other factors constant, having a common border ought

to boost trade while being landlocked will reduce trade with other countries. Following earlier

work, we include a measure of exchange-rate volatility since more volatility ought to reduce

trade. Finally, we include historical-institutional variables: whether countries were on the gold

standard, whether they were part of a “formal” currency union, and whether they were part of an

empire, all of which may have boosted trade between countries. Given our greatly expanded

trade database, our model will also allow us to comment on the reliability of previous empirical

studies focusing on currency unions and gold standard membership during the late nineteenth-

and early- twentieth centuries. Our basic estimation equation takes the following form:


(1) ln(BITRADEijt) = β0 + β1ln(RRiRRj)t + β2lnDistanceij + β3Lndlckij + β4Borderij +
             β5ExVolatilityijt + β6ln(PopiPopj)t + β7Warijt + β8Goldijt + β9NONEMPCUijt +
             β10Empireijt + εijt,

where i and j denote countries, t denotes time, and other variables are defined as follows:

     •   BITRADEijt denotes the average value of real bilateral trade between i and j at time t;10
     •   RR is railroad track miles;
     •   Distance in miles between i and j;
     •   Lndlck is the number of landlocked countries in the country-pair dyad (0,1, or 2);
     •   Border is a binary variable which is unity if i and j share a border;
     •   ExVolatility is exchange rate volatility;
     •   Population is a nation’s population;
     •   NONEMPCU is a binary variable which is unity if both countries are part of either the
         Latin or Scandinavian currency unions;
     •   Gold is a binary variable which is unity if i and j both are on the gold standard;
     •   War is a binary variable which is unity if countries i and j are at war;
     •   Empire is a binary which is unity if both countries are part of the same political empire;
     •   β are estimated coefficients;
     •   and ε is a white noise error term capturing other influences on bilateral trade.

10
  The average value of real bilateral trade is either the average value of one or two dyadic trade pairs, depending on
data availability.


                                                          7
   For this study, the key coefficients of interest are β8 - β10, which show the effects of the gold

standard, non-colonial currency unions, and empire on trade. We estimate equation (1) using a

variety of econometric specifications: pooled ordinary least squares and fixed-effects models.

The fixed effects model, or within estimator, is equivalent to adding a complete set of dyad-pair

or country-specific intercepts to the estimating equation (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003). The

dyad or country-pair fixed effects are designed to capture bilateral trade resistance. Time

dummies can also be added to the dyad fixed effects models to control for annual shocks that

impact bilateral trade flows. Country-fixed effects are included to capture the idea that each

country may have a different general resistance to trade. The country-fixed effects can also be

interacted with year dummies to allow for time-varying multilateral resistance to trade such as

distance.



C. Dataset


       To estimate equation 1, we created a new, large database of annual bilateral trade that

draws most extensively on a consistent set of British statistical sources published by the Board of

Trade. In particular, we relied on numerous volumes of the Statistical Abstract for the United

Kingdom, the Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies, Possessions, and

Protectorates, and the Statistical Abstract for the Principal and other Foreign Countries for the

period 1870 to 1913. Some additional data for French colonies is from the Tableau General du




                                                 8
Commerce Exterieur. Overall, the data consist of more than 21,000 bilateral trade observations

and 880 distinct country pairs or dyads.11

        The trade data we collected from British Board of Trade publications are converted into

current pounds using annual exchange rates from the Global Financial Database and Ferguson

and Schularick (2004). We deflated the data using the UK PPI and expressed the figures in

₤2000.12 Although we would like to have included GDP to measure “mass” in our gravity model,

reliable annual estimates for a wide range of non-OECD countries prior to 1914 (including

smaller colonies) are scarce. We therefore used population to capture mass. Total railroad miles

are employed to measure a country’s transportation network that proxies for internal transport

costs that might affect bilateral trade flows. These data series (as well as population) are from

Banks (1976) and the aforementioned Board of Trade publications. Data on (log) distance in

miles are from Rose (2002) and an online distance calculator that employs U.S. Geographical

Survey information.13 Data on when countries joined the gold standard and joined the Latin and

Scandinavian Monetary Unions are from Flandreau and Muriel (2001), Bae and Bailey (2003),

Ferguson and Schularick (2004), Meissner (2005), and Officer (2004). We computed exchange-

rate volatility following the methodology of Rose (2000), but using the exchange rate sources

listed above.14 We limit our definition of empire to include only formal empires and only those

with more than one dependency, which rules out Sweden-Norway, but otherwise initially code

11
   The colonies included in the sample are Aden, Algeria, Australia (New South Wales, Western Australia,
Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria), Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium Congo, Bermuda, British Guiana,
British Honduras, Brunei, Canada, Ceylon, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dutch Guiana, Egypt, Falkland Islands, Fiji,
French Guiana, French Indochina, Gambia, German East Africa, German SW Africa, German West Africa,
Gibraltar, Gold Coast, Guadeloupe, Hawaii, Hong Kong, India, Jamaica, Labuan, Lagos, Madagascar, Maldives,
Malta, Martinique, Mauritius, Morocco, Netherlands East Indies, New Caledonia, New Hebrides, New Zealand,
Newfoundland, Nyasa, Philippines, Portonovo, Portuguese West Africa, Puerto Rico, Reunion, Sarawak, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa (Natal Province, Cape Province, and Transvaal), Southern Nigeria,
St. Helena, St. Pierre/Miquelon, Straits Settlement, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunis, Uganda, UK East Africa, and
Zanzibar.
12
   We thank Moritz Schularick for generously sharing his data with us.
13
   We use information from www.wcrl.ars.usda.gov/cec/java to calculate great circle distance.


                                                        9
data for all empires that existed during this period and for which trade data existed.15 We use

information on empire affiliation from the Correlates of War Database (COW) described in

Sarkees (2000), Olson (1991), O’Brien (1991), and the online historical encyclopedia available

at http://regiments.org/nations/index.htm. Following Glick and Taylor (2006), the COW database

is also used to code interstate conflicts between bilateral trading partners during the gold

standard period.

         Our database significantly improves upon the trade data used in earlier studies of the

classical gold standard period in that it is better suited for sorting out the relative impact of

belonging to a monetary standard or an empire. The first reason is its sheer size. To date, the

most comprehensive bilateral trade database for the gold standard period, at least in terms of

country coverage, is LCM (2003), which augmented Barbieri’s (1996) trade data with

information from general statistical compendiums.16 It is roughly 20 times smaller than the one

we have constructed. Flandreau and Muriel (2001) use annual data, but limit it to a sample of

sixteen European countries, and EFT (2002) uses only one year of data from the pre-World War

I period.

         Our data are superior to LCM in both dimensions of the panel – number of years and

number of country pairs. LCM (2003) constructed trade for five-year intervals from 1870-1910

whereas our trade data are annual. Moreover, nearly 70 percent of the observations in LCM

come from just four years. Perhaps even more significant is that the early years in the sample are

drawn overwhelmingly from intra-European trade. For example, in 1875, 70 percent of the

14
   Rose (2000) computes exchange-rate volatility as the standard deviation.
15
   Belgium, Italy, Japan, Portugal, and Russia also had colonial empires during this period. We have very limited
bilateral trade data for the Belgian, Italian, Japanese, and Portuguese colonial empires. We do not have any bilateral
trade data for members of the Russian Empire. As a result, we could not consider these empires in the empirical
analysis.




                                                          10
observations are European trade pairs. Even in later periods, only a small portion of the sample

involves trade pairs that are both non-European and non-US. This is an important omission

considering that non-European/non-US and colonial trade constituted more than 21 percent of

world trade in 1903 and nearly 23 percent of world trade in 1913 (Colonial Tariff Policies,

1922). Hence, existing databases are insufficient in country and colony coverage to permit an

analysis of empire on trade.

         In contrast, our database contains the universe of readily available bilateral trade data

reported in the British Board of Trade Statistics, which contains a significant portion of non-

European, non-US, and colonial bilateral trade flows. This distinction is nontrivial if one is

attempting to estimate the impact of belonging to an empire and joining the gold standard. In this

case, it is important to have identifying variation in the cross-section and time-series coming

from two different sources: (1) trade pairs that consist of colonies and non-colonizers and (2)

colonies that are both on and not on the gold standard. Since our database provides both types of

identifying variation we should be able to provide new insight into the importance of empire and

monetary arrangements for trade.



III. Analysis of Bilateral Trade Flows, 1870-1913


A. Gravity Model Estimates



         Table 1 displays pooled, ordinary least squares regressions with clustered standard errors

(since we cannot assume that εijt is independent over the country pair or dyad). The most basic


16
  Barbieri’s (1996) data set was merged with data from at least a dozen other sources to create LCM (2003). The
authors do not describe how they reconciled the differences in statistical presentation of data across sources and
countries.


                                                         11
specification explains approximately 40 percent of the variation in bilateral trade flows. Most

variables enter with the correct expected signs and are, for the most part, statistically significant

at conventional levels. In terms of geographical influences on trade, all else constant, sharing a

border boosts bilateral trade whereas being landlocked or far away from your trading partner

reduces trade flows. Most of the specifications also show that larger countries (as measured here

by population and railroad networks) trade more. Finally, with respect to our institutional

variables, being part of an empire, being on the gold standard, or belonging to a non-empire

currency union all seem to have significant positive effects on bilateral trade flows. For example,

being part of an empire resulted in more than 2.5 times as much trade (270 percent) compared to

those areas that were not part of an empire. In the initial specification, those countries on the

gold standard realized a boost in their bilateral trade, although the effect is relatively small (less

than 20 percent), when compared to the effect on empire. On the other hand, being a member in

a currency union increased trade by more than 90 percent. We find little evidence that interstate

conflicts reduced bilateral trade during the gold standard period. This may reflect the fact that the

gold standard period is generally considered a period of economic and political stability

characterized by the absence of a global conflict.17 Indeed, there are only 29 dyads exhibiting

conflict between bilateral trading partners in our sample. Interstate conflict probably did not have

an effect on bilateral trade until the outbreak of World War I, as shown by Glick and Taylor

(2006).

          Column 2 adds year dummies to the initial specification while Column 3 additionally

includes exchange rate volatility. The basic tenor of the results remains unchanged. Countries

that share a border have higher trade and countries that are landlocked or far away from its


17
  The Age of High Imperialism (1870-1913) is also part of the period that is commonly referred to as Pax
Britannica (1825-1913), the era of British peace.


                                                        12
trading partner have lower bilateral trade flows. Countries with greater population and more

railroad miles also have larger trade flows. Membership in an empire more than doubles trade

and belonging to the gold standard or a non-empire currency union boosts trade by 30 and 86

percent, respectively. Exchange rate volatility does not have a statistically significant effect on

bilateral trade flows. Including exchange rate volatility, however, reduces the sample size by

more than 50 percent since we do not have data on bilateral exchange rates for all trade pairs in

our sample.18 Interstate conflict generally does not have a statistically significant effect on

bilateral trade.

        Table 2 examines alternative specifications of the regression model and performs some

robustness checks to provide additional information on the size and significance of the empire

effect. Column 1 considers whether the empire effect is significant for all the major empires that

existed in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. We coded separate indicator

variables for whether dyads were part of the British, Spanish, French, German, or American

empires. The statistically significant and positively signed coefficients on all the empire indicator

variables suggest that empire consistently boosted trade, but as the point estimate indicates, the

effects were not uniform across empires. As we discuss later in the paper, differences across

empires in terms of their effects on empire may relate to metropoles requiring their colonies to

establish common tariff policies, other trade policies that biased trade in favor of within-empire

trade, or the extent to which an empire succeeded in reducing transactions costs.

        Columns 2 and 3 exploit the panel nature of the data by estimating country-fixed effects

and country-year fixed effects. Columns 4 and 5 report the results from the dyad-pair and dyad-

pair-year, fixed-effects models. The results are robust to these alternative specifications in that

18
  Foreign countries often report their bilateral trade in pounds sterling during the classical gold standard period.
This explains why the sample shrinks nearly 50 percent when we include exchange rate volatility. We were forced to



                                                        13
all the models show a strong positive association between empire membership and bilateral trade

flows. Depending on the specification, the point estimates suggest that empire boosted bilateral

trade between 54 and 486 percent.19 Including a term for time-varying multilateral trade

resistance also does not reduce the size of the empire effect (Anderson and van Wincoop,

2003).20

         In terms of other determinants of trade, being on the gold standard increases bilateral

trade by between 18 to 57 percent. The currency union variable is significant and positive in the

three out of the four specifications. Exchange rate volatility has a negative and statistically

significant effect on bilateral trade flows in the two country-pair fixed effects models. Interstate

conflict generally does not have a statistically significant effect on trade in the different empirical

specifications even when the joint significance of the lagged variables is tested.

         The possibility that the flag may have followed trade could produce biased results in the

OLS and panel regressions. That is, empires may have colonized areas where there were already

well-established trade ties or where there was potential for strong trade linkages between the

region and the metropole.21 To control for this source of endogeneity, we use an instrumental

variables model. Our instrument for empire is the five-year lagged value of the size of other

empires (measured by area). Our constructed instrument suggests that an empire, such as

England, may have increased its size, in part, because it felt threatened – economically,


rely on other primary and secondary sources for bilateral exchange rate data.
19
   As a robustness check, we also estimated a difference-in-differences model. By differencing the dependent
variable and including year dummies we are able to control for country-specific and global trends in trade that might
be driving the large empire effect found in the OLS and panel regressions. The difference-in-differences estimator
shows that membership in an empire (and its 5-and 10-year lagged effects) increased trade approximately one
percent per year (not reported). The empire effect is statistically significant at the one-percent level of significance
in all regressions.
20
   It may be the case that some bilateral trade is zero or close to zero in our sample. To deal with this issue, we also
estimated a series of Tobit and median regressions. For both of these specifications, the empire effect on trade
remains large, positive, and statistically significant.
21
   Frieden (2006, p.74) suggests that it is a matter of “continuing controversy how important foreign economic
interests were in colonial expansion.”


                                                          14
politically, or militarily – by France or Germany’s territorial acquisitions. Historians have noted

that this was a primary reason why the “Great Powers” sought out new colonies during the

second half of the nineteenth century. For example, historians have described the dramatic

expansion by European powers in Africa as a “scramble” that was unsuccessfully held in check

by the failed partition arrangement of the Berlin Conference in 1884-5. Germany’s expansion

beyond Africa and into the Middle East and Far East led British policymakers to worry about this

new European colonial rival; Bismarck, in turn, seemed to have decided to engage Germany in

territorial expansion as a response to what he saw as aggressive actions of European rivals

(Townsend, 1996, p.71, 87). America’s growing naval power and acquisitions in the Caribbean

and the Philippines in 1898 signaled the presence of a new rival to the West and led to territorial

disputes in South America. And Britain and France competed in Asia over areas once occupied

by China (Porter, 1999).

         Since our instrumental variable tracks the growth of other empires, it is likely to be

highly correlated with the empire dummy variable, but uncorrelated with bilateral trade of a

given empire. The first stage regression suggests that we likely do not suffer from a “weak”

instrument problem.22 The results from the instrumental variables estimation are very similar to

the baseline regressions as well as the fixed effect specifications. Empire membership

significantly increases trade.

         To provide some additional insight into the effects of colonization on trade, consider the

trade of West Africa an area of new colonization in the late nineteenth century. Exports, such as

groundnut oil, which was used as a substitute for olive oil and palm oil to lubricate machinery,

more than quadrupled between 1897 and 1913. The export boom was especially pronounced in


22
  The five-year lagged value for the land area of other major empires is significant at the one-percent level as an
instrument in the first stage regression. The R-squared in the first stage regression is approximately 90 percent.


                                                          15
the British colonies of Nigeria and Gold Coast and the French colonies of Senegal and Ivory

Coast. In Nigeria, groundnut exports went from a few million pounds to over 130 million

pounds. Cocoa exports boomed in the Gold Coast and timber exports from the Ivory Coast

increased by a factor of six in twenty years (Frieden, 2006). In return, these colonies began to

import European manufactures. In Indochina (under the French colonial regime), the land under

cultivation dramatically increased, allowing it to become the third largest producer of rice in the

world. In British Malaya, tin became the most important commodity export, supplying half of the

world’s demand, and after 1900, Malay and British Ceylon (already exporting large quantities of

tea and coconuts) became major exporters of rubber (Frieden, 2006).



B. Robustness Checks



       To test whether our results are sensitive to the specification of the econometric model, we

also conducted a series of robustness checks. We first test whether the inclusion of gross

domestic product (GDP) – a measure of country “mass” that is widely used in gravity models

that analyze the modern period (when estimates of GDP are widely available for most countries)

– changes our results. We include GDP for all countries and colonies for which reliable historical

estimates have been assembled by employing the data set of Clemens and Williamson (2004).23

Their data set includes estimates for 35 countries and colonies and is assembled using a variety

of sources including Maddison (1995). The inclusion of GDP reduces the sample size to

approximately 6,700 observations; however, as shown in Appendix Table 1, membership in an

empire still has an economically large and statistically significant effect on bilateral trade flows.

Using this more limited sample of countries and colonies, membership in a colonial empire




                                                 16
raises trade between 158 and 779 percent in the dyad and country fixed-effects specifications.24

The other variables in the gravity model generally have the correctly predicted signs and are

statistically significant at conventional levels. GDP is positive and statistically significant.

Bilateral trade flows are lower for countries/colonies that are located farther away from each

other and in cases where they are landlocked. Countries and colonies that border one another

have greater trade, and membership in a non-empire currency union raises trade in three out of

the four specifications. Although adherence to the gold standard raises bilateral trade flows, the

effect is only statistically significant in the dyad fixed-effects model. The most notable change in

the empirical results from the baseline regressions is the statistical insignificance of the

population variable, which has a correlation coefficient of nearly 90 percent with the GDP

variable. The fact that these two variables are so highly correlated suggests that we are losing

very little in our analysis when we include population to analyze the broader sample of countries

and colonies contained in our bilateral trade database.



IV. What explains the “Empire Effect”?


           Our empirical results suggest that being part of an empire in the late-nineteenth and early-

twentieth centuries had a large positive and statistically significant effect on trade. In this section,

we hope to shed further light on this finding by exploring some of the channels through which

empire may have boosted bilateral trade flows. Although there are many possible ways in which

a particular colony’s trade was directly impacted by “membership” in an empire, our aim is to

examine general effects that can be discerned across empires and over time. We focus on two



23
     We thank Michael Clemens for generously providing these data.
24
     We estimated a country fixed effects model with year dummies.


                                                         17
channels that both economists and historians have highlighted as important determinants of

trade: (1) trade policy and (2) transactions costs.



A. Trade Policy



        Trade policies of metropoles may have been shaped by colonial ties. Economists have

recently suggested that European powers viewed colonies as a way of setting up preferential

trading relationships (EFT, 2002) and of ensuring markets (Alesina, 2002).25 This system of

trade preferences and agreements between an empire and its colonies often took three different

forms: (1) policies of tariff assimilation/customs union, (2) preferential tariff policies, and/or (3)

“open door” policies. The policy of tariff assimilation is a policy regime where the tariff rates on

goods are the same in the metropole and the colony. Under this arrangement, the metropole and

colony form a customs union. A preferential tariff system describes a trade policy where colonies

and the mother country have differential tariffs, but non-empire goods are generally taxed at a

higher rate. An “open door” trade policy refers to a tariff regime where there is no distinction

made between the products of the mother country and non-empire trading partners. In other

words, a colony or metropole with an “open door” trade policy does have not a preferential tariff

policy or trade agreement (i.e., customs union) with some of its trading partners. The open door

trade policy should not be confused with a free trade policy, however. Many countries with




25
  Alesina (2002, p.20) quotes the British premier’s response to the French ambassador in 1897 to make his case: “If
you were not such persistent protectionists you would not find us so keen to annex territories.” One could perhaps
also view the motivation for preferential trade arrangements in light of the earlier literature on economic
imperialism. Hobson (1902) and Lenin (1916) suggested that capitalist economies needed to acquire colonies in
order to sustain themselves; securing favorable terms for trade with colonies may have been another way to sustain
their economies. Of course, these writers emphasized flows of financial capital rather than trade flows as the
motivation for acquiring colonies.


                                                        18
“open door” policies levied duties to protect local industries or to raise revenue for the fiscal

authority (Colonial Tariff Policies, 1922).

       From the colonizer’s perspective, Britain was the least protectionist of the imperial

powers as of 1913.26 According to Bairoch (1989, p.139), average tariff rates on imported

manufacturers were around 13 percent in Germany, over 20 percent in France, over 40 percent in

the United States, and more than 80 percent in Russia. Table 3 breaks down the trade policies of

the major empires during the era of high imperialism. Great Britain generally maintained an open

door policy during the gold standard period, while many of the British colonies in the West

Indies (such as Jamaica, British Guiana, and the Bahamas) adopted differential import duties to

promote domestic industries. The British Dominions – Canada, Australia (in particular, Victoria)

, New Zealand, and South Africa – also implemented preferential trading agreements in favor of

Great Britain between 1898 and 1907 – to protect domestic producers and manufacturers

(Colonial Tariff Policies, 1922). On the other hand, France and most of its colonies adopted tariff

assimilation or a customs union as its predominant trade policy in 1892. Under this regime,

colonies enjoyed free trade with France for most products while non-colonies were charged

tariffs to promote trade within the empire. As shown in Table 3, Algeria, Indo-China, and Tunis,

three of France’s most important colonies, formed a customs union with the metropole. Many of

its remaining colonies, including French West Africa as well as its island dependencies adopted

open door or preferential trading policies.

       The smaller colonial empires tended to have a more uniform colonial trade policy. For

example, colonies of the Belgian, Dutch, and German empires had open-door trading policies

and low to moderate tariffs that were levied strictly for revenue purposes. Spain, Portugal, and

the United States generally adopted preferential tariff systems with its colonies. There were a




                                                19
few exceptions, however. Macao, Portuguese Congo, the Canal Zone, and American Samoa had

open door trade policies, and the United States maintained a customs union with Puerto Rico

after acquiring the colony in the Spanish-American War in 1898.



B. Transactions Costs



A second channel through which membership in an empire may have benefited international

trade is by lowering transactions costs and payments frictions. One way empires reduced

payments frictions was by promoting a common language among merchants. Even in cases

where the dominant language of the population differed from that of the imperial power, a lingua

franca often developed around commercial centers (Ferguson, 2002). Since trade in the 18th

century and early 19th century had been initially organized around principles of mercantilism and

imperial preference, all else equal, merchants had a financial incentive to learn the language of

colonial masters in order to sell more goods. Even as the incentive to learn “colonial” languages

receded as trade relationships changed over time, the process was path dependent: the foreign

language of the imperial power continued to be used by merchants.

           Merchants who had been trading within an empire were already acclimated to local

customs and habits. They had well-established contacts and may have developed social networks

as well as distribution and marketing channels for buying and selling goods; this would tend to

lower the transactions costs associated with trade. Greif (1997), McMillan (1997), and McMillan

and Woodruff (1999) have noted the importance of informal relationships in fostering deals

where laws of contract are weak; social networks can, in turn, support contracting and foster



26
     The average level of import duties on manufactures was approximately zero for the United Kingdom.


                                                         20
trade (Rauch and Trindade 2002). The historical record suggests that colonial officials were often

urged to foster ties between locals and merchants.27

           Finally, empires may have also reduced transaction costs associated with trade via the

widespread propagation and use of colonial currencies. As discussed above, previous scholarship

on currency unions has highlighted the role of the gold standard in reducing payments frictions,

but during this period other “currency unions” also existed. The Latin Monetary Union (LMU)

and Scandinavian Monetary Union (SMU) were included in the gravity models estimated in

Section III, but during our sample period, some colonies also participated in less formal

monetary arrangements that functioned like currency unions (Monetary Systems of the Colonies,

1950). Table 4 displays the considerable cross-sectional and times-series variation in the

establishment and formation of currency unions within colonial empires during the classical gold

standard period. Belgium, Dutch, and French colonies generally linked up to their respective

metropoles’ currencies to form a fixed-exchange-rate area. The United States introduced the

dollar in its dependencies after acquiring many of its colonies in the Spanish-American War of

1898. British and German colonies, on the other hand, either joined the sterling or mark block or

formed currency unions with other colonies in the region. British colonies in East Africa, for

example, formed a silver rupee union with India that also included some areas in East Africa that

were members of the German Empire. Brunei, Johore, Labuan, and the Straits Settlements also

formed a currency union while British colonies in West Africa left the sterling union to form a

West African (Silver) Currency Union in 1913.

            Although many different currency unions were formed within and even across the

colonial empires, the pound sterling remained the largest and most important currency during the

classical gold standard period. As the pound sterling became the preferred means for settling

27
     See Frieden (2006, pp.90-1) for discussion of this point.

                                                            21
accounts, countries and colonies began to hold sterling balances with foreign banks, which set up

offices in London, and the sterling functioned as the reserve currency of the world. Thus, while

previous research points to the gold standard as playing an important role in reducing payments

frictions, and currencies like the pound sterling were “as good as gold,” it may have been the

case that sterling was in many ways better than gold. It was more convenient in that British

exporters and importers preferred to draw and be drawn on in pounds sterling. Investor and

trader preference for carrying out transactions in sterling or sterling-denominated bills of

exchange meant that it was advantageous for dominions and colonies to also carry out their

transactions in sterling.28



C. The Effects of Transactions Costs and Trade Policies on Bilateral Trade



        Before assessing the direct effects of these channels on bilateral trade, we first assess

whether trade policies and transactions costs are correlated with empire in order to provide better

insight into this cross-sectional indicator variable. This exercise should help to “unpack” the

empire variable that may bundle a package of economic policies and political relationships

between a metropole and its colony. We do this by estimating a series of simple OLS regressions

where we model the determinants of empire. Column 1 of Table 5 (Panel A) shows the

regression of empire on a constant and the common language variable. Columns 2 through 5 of

Table 5 (Panel A) show the contribution of including one additional variable to the variable(s)

listed in the previous column. (The correlation coefficients are shown in Panel B of the table.)




28
  For example, Butlin (1986) has noted that the use of the pound sterling was widespread in Australia and New
Zealand.


                                                       22
        Column 1 shows that common language (one measure of transactions costs) is positively

correlated with empire and is statistically significant, although the R-squared in the regression is

only four percent.29 Column 2 augments the simple model with the number of years a colony has

been a member of an Empire since the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars. We include this

variable to capture a reduction in transactions costs that may have arisen from the long-run

relationship between a colony and its metropole, such as familiarity with local customs and

culture, the development of distribution and marketing channels, or the formation of social

networks – all of which may benefit trade or its participants gradually, over many decades. This

measure of transactions costs has a positive and statistically significant effect on empire, and the

fit of the model improves from four percent to more than 23 percent. Columns 3 and 4 augment

the model with measures for customs unions and trade preferences within empires.30 The two

variables take a value of one if country/colony i and j were both members of the same customs

union or had a preferential trade agreement with each other. The results show that two trade

policy variables both significantly predict empire, but do not substantially improve the fit of the

model. Column 5 adds a currency union variable for empire countries.31 The currency union

variable substantially improves the fit of the model. Despite the admittedly parsimonious

specification, the trade policy and transactions costs variables explain more than 50 percent of

the variation in the empire indicator variable.

        Since the transactions costs and trade-policy variables are highly correlated with empire

and also seem to capture a significant amount of the variation in empires across colonies, we


29
   With respect to the colonial empires, settler colonies were coded as having a common language with the
metropole. For example, British settler colonies such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa were
coded as having the same language as England. As a result of the coding scheme, the language variable may also
capture institutional differences.
30
   Customs unions and trade preferences are based on information from Colonial Tariff Policies (1922).
31
   The currency union variable for empire countries was coded using Pick and Sedillot (1971),
www.dollarization.org, and Monetary Systems of the Colonies (1950).


                                                       23
now consider the extent to which these variables mattered for bilateral trade during the period

1870-1913. We replace the empire indicator variable used in our earlier empirical models with

the transactions costs and trade-policy variables described above. Table 6 reports country and

dyad fixed-effects models. Consistent with the results shown in earlier tables, countries that are

more distant trade less. Bilateral trade between two countries and/or colonies is increasing with

miles of railroad track and population, and countries that border each other or are members of the

gold club have greater bilateral trade flows.

        The results in Table 6 also show that many of the channels we have quantified help

account for the observed variation in bilateral trade across countries and colonies. First, the

empirical estimates suggest that membership in a preferential trade agreement raised bilateral

trade flows by 26 to 168 percent (depending on the econometric specification). The coefficient

on the customs union variable is also economically and statistically significant. Membership in a

customs union increased bilateral trade flows by 20 to 131 percent. This result provides a reason

why, as shown in Table 2, the empire effect differed for Germany, France, and Britain.

Metropoles differed in the nature and extent to which they set up explicit trade policies for their

colonies.32

        Table 6 also suggests that empire boosted trade by lowering transactions costs. Being part

of an empire’s currency union significantly increased trade by 17 percent to 371 percent,

depending on which fixed-effects model was used. The currency union effect in colonial empires

may also be capturing the impact of monetizing many African colonies that historically traded

very little with the rest of the world, and largely relied on barter to exchange goods prior to

32
  It is possible that preferential trading agreements may have changed the way in which countries oriented their
economies towards producing goods for the metropoles. If this were the case, then colonial tariff policies may have
lowered the prospects of long-term economic development, as suggested by Lewis (1970). As we have indicated




                                                         24
colonization. Countries and colonies that transacted in a common tongue also exhibited greater

bilateral trade – approximately 20 percent more than those that did not. This result suggests that

a lingua franca was another way in which empires may have lowered transactions costs and

boosted trade.

         The number of years that a colony has been part of an empire is also statistically

significant in two of the four bilateral trade regressions, although the sign varies according to

which specification is used. One interpretation of the positive relationship exhibited in the

country-fixed-effects specifications is that trade in British Dominions, such as Australia, Canada,

and New Zealand benefited most from strong social networks and shared customs, whereas

newer colonies (many of which were in Africa) had a different cultural heritage and therefore

benefited less; these would constitute the remaining colonies included the two dyad fixed-effects

regressions.

         It may be impossible to test empirically all of the ways in which empire impacted trade.

The channels that we have identified nevertheless account for a significant amount of the cross-

sectional variation in empire and help shed additional light on the “empire effect” reported

earlier in the paper.33




throughout, the focus of this paper is to analyze the determinants of bilateral trade flows and the impact of empire on
international exchange rather than to construct a counterfactual of trade in the absence of empire.
33
   We also tested for the possibility that metropoles may have increased bilateral trade by building out or financing
infrastructure development in their colonies. The infrastructure variable, defined as the interaction between empire
and railroads was only statistically significant in the fixed-effects model. However, the coefficient on infrastructure
in the fixed-effects model was not economically significant; empire*railroads increased bilateral trade flows by
approximately 0.2 percent.


                                                          25
V. Conclusion



       What is the impact that empires have on trade flows? Do metropoles use their political

control to tilt the balance of trade through preferential trade policies or customs unions? Do they

lower transactions costs by standardizing language and currency and creating social networks?

We provide some perspective on these questions using a new database of over 21,000 bilateral

trade pairs collected from primary sources for the period 1870-1913. We find strong empirical

evidence that membership in an empire more than doubled bilateral trade during the Age of High

Imperialism. Moreover, it was quantitatively more important in explaining bilateral trade flows

during the first era of globalization than either membership in the gold standard or a non-empire

currency union. This empire effect appears to be robust to a variety of econometric

specifications, including instrumental variables regressions, fixed-effects specifications that

account for multilateral resistance, propensity score estimates, and a number of selection models.

       We suggest two broad channels through which empire may have boosted trade during

this period: transactions costs and trade policies. Our empirical findings suggest that membership

in an empire-currency union, sharing a common language, preferential trading agreements and

customs unions were important in accounting for the observed variation in bilateral trade flows.

Moreover, variation in colonial trade policies and currency-union arrangements helps to explain

why the effect that empires have on trade differ. Empire currency unions were especially

prevalent in the British, French, and German Empires while preferential trading agreements were

widely used by France and some of the British Dominions. Although we have not fully

accounted for all the channels through which empire may have impacted trade, transactions costs

and trade policies account for over 50 percent of the cross-sectional variation in empire, and




                                                26
appear to have played a significant role in boosting trade within empires during the Age of High

Imperialism.

        An interesting avenue for future research would be to analyze how the positive

relationship between empire and trade impacted productivity and economic growth.34 For

example, metropoles may have increased productivity by creating “free trade” zones that

promoted competition and intercolonial trade. The free trade systems established by empires may

have promoted specialization within colonies and increased their productivity. This would be

consistent with a model developed by Alcala and Ciccone (2004) where the greatest impact of

trade on productivity occurs in the traded goods sector rather than the non-traded, service sector

through a Balassa-Samuelson effect.35

        In creating the machinery for trade (that sometimes included a new production

technology and an enhanced market with a quasi-monopsonist buyer of exports), empires may

have also imparted institutions that either fostered or undermined productivity and growth. Some

scholars have argued that trade can transform political institutions and foster the development of

property rights, which in turn can lead to greater investment and growth as it did in the North

Atlantic economies between 1500-1850 (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2005). Some settler

colonies’ institutions, for example, may have benefitted favorably from the trade and openness

that the British empire promoted. On the other hand, empires may have undermined long-run

productivity and growth by leaving extractive institutions, such as those suggested by Acemoglu,

Johnson, and Robinson (2001).


34
   For an analysis of the impact of trade and growth or income levels, see Frankel and Romer (1999) and Irwin and
Tervio (2002).
35
   The Balassa-Samuelson effect can cause changes in the relative price of nontradable goods, which introduces a
bias in the use of nominal openness to measure the productivity gains from trade. Alcala and Ciccone employ a
measure of real openness, measured as imports plus exports in exchange rate US$ divided by GDP in purchasing
power parity US$, to control for cross-country differences in the relative price of non-tradable goods.



                                                        27
       Understanding the relationship between empire and trade and long-run outcomes such as

productivity and growth is complicated by the fact that the institutional footprints of empires

varied, not only across empires and colonies, but even within colonies. For example, some

colonies’ exports were produced in very controlled plantations systems whereby colonists owned

and controlled the land and capital that coffee, sugar, rubber or other crops were grown on and

employed low-wage, local labor in the production of these commodities. Other tradables sectors

of the same colony may have been left untouched. This raises questions about how such parallel

specialization impacted the growth prospects of these economies. To thoroughly assess the long-

run impact of trade and empire on productivity and growth, future research will need to examine

the institutional variation within and across colonies as well as the changes in trade relations that

took place after independence.




                                                 28
References

Accominotti, Olivier and Marc Flandreau. (2005). “Does Bilateralism Promote Trade?
Nineteenth Century Liberalization Revisited.” Sciences Po Working Paper.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. (2005). “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic
Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 95(3): 546-
579.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. (2001). “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review
91(5):1369-1401.

Alcala, Francisco and Antonio Ciccone (2004). “Trade and Productivity.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119(2): 613-46.

Alesina, Alberto. (2002). “The Size of Countries: Does it Matter?” Harvard University Working
Paper.

Anderson, James E, and Eric van Wincoop. (2003). “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to
the Border Puzzle. American Economic Review 93(1): 170-92.

Bae, Kee-Hong and Warren Bailey. (2003). “The Latin Monetary Union: Some Evidence on
Europe’s Failed Common Currency.” Cornell University Working Paper.

Bairoch, Paul. (1989). “European Trade Policy 1815-1914,” in Peter Mathias and Sidney Pollard
(eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vol. VIII: The Industrial Economies: The
Development of Economic and Social Policies. Cambridge University Press.

Baldwin, Richard. (2005). “The Euro’s Trade Effects.” Prepared for What effects is EMU having
on the euro area and its member countries? European Central Bank (June).

Banks, Arthur S. (1976). “Cross-National Time Series: 1815-1973.” [Computer file]. ICPSR ed.
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer and
distributor].

Barbieri, Katherine. (1996). “Economic Interdependence and Militarized Interstate Conflict,
1870-1985.” Ph.D. Dissertation, Binghampton University.

British Board of Trade. Various years. Statistical Abstract for the Principal and other Foreign
Countries. London: Board of Trade.

British Board of Trade. Various years. Statistical Abstract for the Several British, Colonies,
Possessions, and Protectorates. London: Board of Trade.




                                                29
British Board of Trade. Various years. Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom. London:
Board of Trade.

Butlin, S.J. (1986). The Australian Monetary System. Sydney: Ambassador Press Pty Ltd.

Clemens, Michael and Jeffrey G. Williamson. (2004). “Wealth Bias in the First Global Capital
Market Boom.” Economic Journal 114(495): 304-47.

Colonial Tariff Policies. (1922). United States Tariff Commission. Washington: Government
Printing Office.

Deardorff, Alan V. (1998). “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a
Neoclassical World?” in Jeffrey A. Frankel (ed.) The Regionalization of the World Economy
Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Edison, Hali J., and Michael Melvin. (1990) “The Determinants and Implications of a Choice of
Exchange Rate Regime.” In William S. Haraf and Thomas D. Willett (eds.) Monetary Policy for
a Volatile Global Economy AEI Press: Washington, DC.

Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan M. Taylor. (2003). “The Rise and Fall of World
Trade, 1870 - 1939.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (May): 359-407.

Evenett, Simon J. and Wolfgang Keller. (1998). “On Theories Explaining the Success of the
Gravity Equation.” NBER Working Paper 6529.

Feenstra, Robert C., James Markusen and Andrew Rose. (1998). “Understanding the Home
Market Effect and the Gravity Equation: The Role of Differentiating Goods” NBER Working
Paper 6804.

Ferguson, Niall. (2004). Colossus: The Price of American Empire. New York: Penguin Press.

Ferguson, Niall. (2003). “British Imperialism Revised: The Costs and Benefits of
Anglobalization.” Development Research Institute Working Paper No. 2, New York University.

Ferguson, Niall. (2002). Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the
Lessons for Global Power. New York: Basic Books.

Ferguson, Niall and Moritz Schularick. (2004). “The Empire Effect: The Determinants of
Country Risk in the First Age of Globalization, 1880-1913.” Unpublished paper, New York
University.

Flandreau, Marc. (2000). “The Economics and Politics of Monetary Union: A Reassessment of
the Latin Monetary Union, 1865-71.” Financial History Review 7(1): 25-43.




                                               30
Flandreau, Marc and Mathilde Maurel. (2001). “Monetary Union, Trade Integration, and
Business Cycles in 19th Century Europe: Just Do It.” Centre for Economic Policy Research,
Discussion Paper Series No. 3087 (November).

Flandreau, Marc and Frederic Zúmer (2004), The Making of Global Finance. Paris: OECD.

Frankel, Jeffery A. and David Romer (1999). “Does Trade Cause Growth.” American Economic
Review 89(3): 379-99.

Frieden, Jeffry A. (2006). Global Capitalism: Its Fall and Rise in the Twentieth Century. New
York: W.W. Norton & Company.

Glick, Reuven, and Andrew K. Rose. (2002). “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time-
Series Evidence.” European Economic Review 46: 1125–51.

Glick, Reuven and Alan M. Taylor. (2006). “Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the
Economic Impact of War.” NBER Working Paper 11565.

Greif, Avner. (1997). “Contracting, Enforcement, and Efficiency Economics Beyond the Law,”
in Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic (eds.), Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hobson, J.A. (1902). Imperialism: A Study. London: Nisbet.

Irwin, Douglas and Marko Tervio. (2002). “Does Trade Raise Income? Evidence from the
Twentieth Century. “ Journal of International Economics 58:1-18.

Lal, Deepak. (2004). In Praise of Empires: Globalization and Order. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.

Lal, Deepak. (2001). “Globalization, Imperialism, and Regulation.” Cambridge Review of
International Affairs 14(1): 107-121.

Lenin, V.I. (1916). Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism. Moscow: Foreign Languages
Publishing House, 1947.

Lewis, W. Arthur. (1970). Tropical Development, 1880-1913. London: George Allen and Unwin.

Lopez-Cordova, J. Ernesto and Christopher Meissner. (2003). “Exchange-Rate Regimes and
International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era.” American Economic
Review 93(1): 344-53.

Lopez-Cordova, J. Ernesto and Christopher Meissner. (2000). “Exchange-Rate Regimes and
International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era.” CIDER-IBER Working
Paper 118, UC Berkeley.




                                              31
Maddison, Angus. (1995). Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-1992. OECD: Paris.

McMillan, John and Christopher Woodruff. (1999). “Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit
in Vietnam.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 1285-1320.

McMillan, John. (1997). “Markets in Transition,” in David M. Kreps and Kenneth Wallis (eds.)
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Meissner, Chris. (2005). “A New World Order: Explaining the Emergence of the Classical Gold
Standard.” Journal of International Economics 66: 385-406.

Monetary Systems of the Colonies: A Fully Revised Reprint of Eight Authoritative Articles which
Appeared Between July 1948 and February 1949 in The Banker: (1950). London.

Nye, John V. (1991). “The Myth of Free-Trade Britain and Fortress France: Tariffs and Trade in
the Nineteenth Century.” Journal of Economic History 51(1): 23-46.

O’Brien, Patrick K. (ed.). (1991). Oxford Atlas of World History New York: Oxford University
Press.

Officer, Lawrence. (2004). “The Gold Standard.” EH-Net Encyclopedia Entry.
http://www.eh.net/encyclopedia/?article=officer.gold.standard.

Olson, James S. (ed.). (1991). Historical Dictionary of European Imperialism. New York:
Greenwood Press.

O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. (1999). Globalization and History: The
Evolution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Pick, Franz and Sedillot, Rene. (1971). All the Monies of the World, New York: Crown
Advertising Press, Inc.

Porter, Andrew (1999). The Oxford History of the British Empire, Vol. III, The Nineteenth
Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade. (2002). “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 84: 116-30.

Rose, Andrew K. (2004). “A Meta-Analysis of the Effect of Common Currencies on
International Trade.” NBER Working Paper 10373 (March).

Rose, Andrew K. (2002). “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9273 (October).




                                               32
Rose, Andrew K. (2000). “One Money, One Market: The Effect of Common Currencies on
Trade.” Economic Policy 15: 7–33.

Sarkees, Meredith Reid (2000). "The Correlates of War Data on War: An Update to 1997,"
Conflict Management and Peace Science, 18(1): 123-144.

Tableau General du Commerce Exterieur. France: Direction Generale des Douanes, Various
Years.

Townsend, Mary Evelyn. (1966). The Rise and Fall of Germany’s Colonial Empire 1884-1918.
New York: Howard Fertig.




                                             33
Table 1: The Effects of Empire on Trade, 1870-1913


                                   Pooled         Pooled         Pooled
Independent Variables                OLS            OLS            OLS
Empire Membership                 1.306***       1.278***       1.502***
                                    (0.19)         (0.19)         (0.25)
Gold Standard                      0.169*        0.263**        0.379***
                                    (0.10)         (0.10)         (0.14)
Distance                         -0.557***      -0.561***      -0.565***
                                    (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.09)
Border                            0.681***       0.627***       0.699***
                                    (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.21)
Number Landlocked                  -0.307          -0.231         -0.076
                                    (0.23)         (0.23)         (0.25)
Railroad Track                    0.184***       0.197***       0.144***
                                    (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.04)
Population                        0.372***       0.368***       0.454***
                                    (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.04)
Non-Empire Currency Union          0.653*          0.619*          0.383
                                    (0.33)         (0.32)         (0.36)
War                                 0.165          0.217          -0.443
                                    (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.27)
War (-1)                           0.418*         0.481**          0.678
                                    (0.22)         (0.21)         (0.57)
War(-2)                              0.25          0.202           -0.16
                                    (0.16)         (0.17)         (0.38)
War(-3)                              0.18          0.254           0.137
                                    (0.16)         (0.17)         (0.34)
War(-4)                             0.008          0.012          -0.355
                                    (0.19)         (0.20)         (0.37)
War(-5)                            -0.056           0.018        -0.676*
                                    (0.26)         (0.27)         (0.37)
War(-6)                             0.006          0.101           -0.44
                                    (0.23)         (0.24)         (0.44)
Exchange Rate Volatility                                           2.69
                                                                  (2.93)
Year Dummies                          NO           YES             YES
Observations                        21630         21630           11045
R-squared                            0.41          0.42            0.47
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        34
Table 2: The Effects of Empire on Trade, 1870-1913: Sensitivity Tests and IV Estimates
                                                Country      Country          Dyad         Dyad
                                                  Fixed      Yr. Fixed        Fixed     Yr. Fixed Instrumental
Independent Variables           Pooled OLS       Effects      Effects        Effects      Effects        Variables
Empire Membership                              1.764***      1.768***       0.472***     0.429***         1.331***
                                                  (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.12)       (0.12)           (0.04)
British Empire Membership          1.168***
                                     (0.20)
French Empire Membership            1.088*
                                     (0.62)
German Empire Membership           1.017***
                                     (0.30)
US Empire Membership               2.153***
                                     (0.52)
Spanish Empire Membership          2.458***
                                     (0.20)
Distance                          -0.555***    -0.723*** -0.750***                                       -0.565***
                                     (0.07)       (0.01)       (0.02)                                       (0.02)
Gold Standard                      0.302***     0.375***     0.448***       0.343***     0.169***         0.260***
                                     (0.10)       (0.03)       (0.05)         (0.02)       (0.02)           (0.03)
Border                             0.635***     0.595***     0.705***                                     0.623***
                                     (0.20)       (0.04)       (0.04)                                       (0.05)
Number Landlocked                     -0.24     0.69***      0.747***                                    -0.225***
                                     (0.23)       (0.12)       (0.13)                                       (0.06)
Railroad Track                     0.195***     0.096***       0.636        0.187***     0.059***         0.197***
                                     (0.03)       (0.01)       (0.51)         (0.01)       (0.01)           (0.01)
Population                         0.364***     0.226***       0.020        0.336***     0.127***         0.371***
                                     (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.09)         (0.02)       (0.02)           (0.01)
Non-Empire Currency Union           0.591*      0.802**      0.733***       0.568***       0.165          0.629***
                                     (0.32)       (0.08)       (0.10)         (0.12)       (0.12)           (0.11)
Exchange Rate Volatility                                                   -3.379*** -2.198***
                                                                              (0.55)       (0.55)
War                                   0.23         0.03       -0.254         -0.458       -0.512*           0.218
                                     (0.21)       (0.22)       (0.28)         (0.28)       (0.27)           (0.37)
War(-1)                             0.489**       0.372        0.170        0.771***     0.704***           0.481
                                     (0.22)       (0.25)       (0.26)         (0.27)       (0.25)           (0.38)
War(-2)                              0.213        0.218        0.122         -0.058        -0.015           0.202
                                     (0.17)       (0.22)       (0.26)         (0.26)       (0.25)           (0.38)
War(-3)                              0.265        0.173        0.176          0.109        0.098            0.252
                                     (0.17)       (0.22)       (0.28)         (0.26)       (0.25)           (0.38)
War(-4)                              0.021        0.003        0.170         -0.323        -0.187           0.012
                                     (0.21)       (0.25)       (0.33)         (0.25)       (0.24)           (0.38)
War(-5)                              0.027       -0.013        0.024         -0.236        -0.181           0.019
                                     (0.27)       (0.26)       (0.33)         (0.23)       (0.22)           (0.38)
War(-6)                              0.116        0.071        0.108          0.029        0.139            0.101
                                     (0.24)       (0.23)       (0.30)         (0.21)       (0.20)           (0.37)
Year Dummies                          YES          NO           YES            NO           YES              YES
Observations                         21630        21630        21630          11045        11045           21603
R-squared                              0.42        0.69         0.76           0.26         0.33             0.42
Notes: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. * indicates significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5%
level; *** significant at 1% level.


                                                         35
Table 3. Colonial Tariff Systems

Countries      Assimilated         Preferential            Open Door
Belgium                                                    Belgium Congo
France         Algeria
               French Indo-
               China
               Tunis
               Madagascar
               Reunion
               Martinique
               Guadeloupe
               New Caledonia
               French Guiana
               Gabon
Germany                                                    German East Africa
                                                           German Southwest Africa
                                                           Kamerun
                                                           Togo
                                                           German Samoa
                                                           New Guinea
                                                           Kiaochow (leased
                                                           territory)
Great
Britain                            Dominions:              British India
                                   Canada                  Newfoundland
                                   Australia               Papua
                                   New Zealand             Norfolk Island
                                   Cook Islands            Colonies in Asia:
                                   Union of South Africa   Aden
                                   Rhodesia                Ceylon
                                                           Straits Settlements
                                   Colonies:               Federated Malay States
                                   Trinidad                Protected Malay States
                                   British Guiana          Hong Kong
                                                           Weihaiwei(leased
                                   Jamaica and Caymans     territory)
                                   Turks and Caicos        Colonies in Africa:
                                   Barbados                Nigeria
                                   Leeward Islands:        Gold Coast
                                   Dominica                Sierra Leone
                                   Montserrat              Gambia
                                   St. Christopher-Nevis   British Somaliland
                                   Virgin Islands          Kenva and Uganda
                                   Antigua                 Zanzibar and Pemba
                                   Windward Islands        Nyasaland
                                   Grenada                 Egypt
                                   St. Lucia               Anglo-Egyptian Sudan
                                   St. Vincent             Other colonies:
                                   British Honduras        Gibraltar



                                                    36
Table 3 (continued). Colonial Tariff Systems
Countries      Assimilated        Preferential               Open Door
                                  Bahamas                    Malta
                                  Fiji                       British North Borneo
                                                             Brunei
                                                             Sarawak
                                                             Tonga
                                                             Solomons
                                                             Gilbert and Ellice Islands
                                                             Mauritius
                                                             Seychelles
                                                             Falkland Islands
                                                             Bermuda
                                                             St. Helena
                                                             Italian Northern
Italy                               Eritrea                  Somaliland
                                    Somalia                  Rhodes
                                    Libya
Japan           Formosa                                      Kwangtung
                                                             Kiacochow (leased
                Saghalin                                     territory)
                Korea
Netherlands                                                  Dutch East Indies
                                                             Curacao
                                                             Dutch Guiana
Portugal                            Mozambique               Macao
                                    Angola                   Portuguese Congo
                                    Cape Verde Islands
                                    Portuguese India
                                    Timor
                                    Sao Thome and Principe
                                    Portuguese Guinea
Spain                               Fernandi Po              Canary Islands
                                    Spanish Guinea           Spanish Morocco
                                    Rio de Oro
United
States          Puerto Rico          Philippines             American Samoa
                                     Virgin Islands          Canal Zone
                                     Guam
Source: Colonial Tariff Policies (1922).




                                                      37
Table 4. Empire Currency Unions, 1870-1913
                                         Dates
Belgium
Franc Union
Belgium Congo                            1879-1913

England
Gold Rupee Union
India                                   1898-1913

Silver Rupee Union
Aden                                    1870-1913
Ceylon                                  1872-1900
India                                   1870-1897
Maldives                                1870-1913
Mauritius                               1870-1913
Seychelles                              1877-1913
Somaliland                              1889-1913
Uganda                                  1870-1913

Sterling Union
Australia                               1870-1913
Bahamas                                 1870-1913
Barbados                                1870-1913
Bermuda                                 1870-1913
Botswana                                1870-1913
Canada                                  1870-1913
Cape of Good Hope/South Africa          1870-1913
Ceylon                                  1870-1871, 1901-1913
Cyprus                                  1878-1913
Falkland Islands                        1870-1913
Fiji                                    1874-1913
Gambia                                  1870-1912
Gibraltar                               1899-1913
Gold Coast                              1886-1912
Ireland                                 1870-1913
Jamaica                                 1870-1913
Malta                                   1870-1913
Natal                                   1882-1913
New Hebrides                            1878-1913
New Zealand                             1870-1913
Newfoundland                            1870-1913
Nigeria                                 1880-1912
Orange Free State                       1870-1913
Rhodesia                                1891-1913
St. Helena                              1870-1913
Sarawak                                 1906-1913
Seychelles                              1870-1876
Sierra Leone                            1880-1912



                                 38
Table 4 (continued). Empire Currency Unions, 1870-1913
Transvaal                                1870-1913
Trinidad                                 1870-1913

Straits Union
Brunei                                       1903-1913
Johore                                       1870-1913
Labuan                                       1870-1913
Straits                                      1870-1913

West African Currency Union
Gambia                                                1913
Gold Coast                                            1913
Nigeria                                               1913
Sierra Leone                                          1913

France
Franc Union
Algeria                                      1870-1913
Guadeloupe                                   1870-1913
Madagascar                                   1900-1913
Martinique                                   1870-1913
New Caledonia                                1870-1913
New Hebrides                                 1878-1913
Senegal                                      1870-1913
St Pierre and Miquelon                       1870-1913
Tunis                                        1891-1913

Germany
Mark Union
German West Africa                           1886-1913
German SW Africa                             1901-1913
Togoland                                     1884-1913

Silver Rupee Union
Burundi                                      1904-1913
Rwanda                                       1904-1913
Tanzania                                     1888-1913

Netherlands
Guilder Union
Indonesia                                    1870-1913
Surinam (Dutch Guiana)                       1870-1913

United States
Dollar Union
British Honduras                              1894-1913
Hawaii                                        1898-1913
Puerto Rico                                   1898-1913
Sources: Pick and Sedillot, 1971; www.dollarization.org, Monetary
Systems, 1950.


                                   39
Table 5: The Channels of Empire, 1870-1913

Panel A. Regressions

Independent                Pooled        Pooled        Pooled         Pooled       Pooled
Variables                    OLS           OLS           OLS            OLS          OLS
Common Language           0.270***      0.187***      0.195***       0.189***       -0.028
                            (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.05)       (0.02)
Years in Empire                         0.011***      0.010***       0.010***     0.003***
                                           0.00          0.00           0.00        (0.00)
Customs Union                                         0.519***       0.533***       0.182*
                                                        (0.10)         (0.10)       (0.10)
Trade Preferences                                                    0.286***      0.281**
                                                                       (0.10)       (0.13)
Empire Currency
Union                                                                             0.782***
                                                                                    (0.03)

Observations                22580         22580          22580        22580        22580
R-squared                    0.04          0.23           0.25         0.25         0.53
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Panel B. Correlation Matrix

                                                                                   Empire
                          Common        Years in      Customs          Trade      Currency
                          Language      Empire         Union        Preferences    Union
Common Language               1
Years in Empire             0.16            1
Customs Union               -0.02         0.16            1
Trade Preferences           0.11          0.18          -0.02           1
Empire Currency Union       0.32          0.46           0.21          0.25          1




                                                        40
Table 6: The Effects of Empire on Trade, 1870-1913

                                 Country       Country          Dyad       Dyad
                                  Fixed        Yr. Fixed       Fixed      Yr. Fixed
                                 Effects        Effects        Effects     Effects
Independent Variables
Gold Standard                     0.187***        -0.015      0.387***    0.183***
                                    (0.03)         (.05)        (0.02)      (0.02)
Distance                         -0.747***     -0.777***
                                    (0.02)         (.02)
Border                            0.499***     0.601***
                                    (0.04)         (.04)
Number Landlocked                 0.848***     0.919***
                                    (0.11)         (.11)
Railroad Track                    0.099***        0.369       0.143***    0.030***
                                    (0.01)        (0.47)        (0.00)      (0.01)
Population                       0.204***      0.340***       0.217***    0.063***
                                    (0.02)        (0.09)        (0.01)      (0.01)
Common Language                   0.193***      0.253***
                                    (0.04)        (0.04)
Years in Empire                   0.010***     0.008***         0.001     -0.004**
                                    (0.00)       (0.001)        (0.00)      (0.00)
Customs Union                    0.362***      0.838***       0.329***     0.179*
                                    (0.12)        (0.16)        (0.10)      (0.10)
Trade Preferences                0.852***      0.984***       0.317***    0.235***
                                    (0.07)        (0.09)        (0.06)      (0.05)
Empire Currency Union             1.476***     1.549***       0.155**     0.255***
                                    (0.06)        (0.06)        (0.07)      (0.07)
Non-Empire Currency
Union                             0.658***       0.653***       0.219**    0.048
                                    (0.08)         (0.10)        (0.10)    (0.10)
War                                 0.072         -0.070          -0.18    -0.161
                                    (0.21)         (0.29)        (0.16)    (0.15)
War(-1)                             0.404          0.246          0.212     0.23
                                    (0.28)         (0.28)        (0.16)    (0.16)
War(-2)                             0.253          0.255          0.077    0.127
                                    (0.21)         (0.26)        (0.16)    (0.16)
War(-3)                             0.205          0.198         -0.017    0.024
                                    (0.21)         (0.26)        (0.16)    (0.16)
War(-4)                             0.037          0.162         -0.061       0
                                    (0.24)         (0.33)        (0.16)    (0.16)
War(-5)                             0.015          0.060         -0.078    -0.003
                                    (0.26)         (0.33)        (0.16)    (0.16)
War(-6)                              0.11          0.141         -0.038    0.043
                                    (0.23)         (0.31)        (0.16)    (0.15)
Observations                        21630          21630         21630     21630
R-squared                             0.7            .76          0.17      0.22
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        41
Appendix Table 1. The Effects of Empire on Trade including GDP Estimates, 1870-1913


Independent                     Pooled        Dyad Yr. Fixed        Country Fixed   Country and Yr. Fixed   Country-Year Fixed
Variables                         OLS            Effects                Effects            Effects               Effects
Empire Membership              0.947**          0.960***              2.154***            2.174***              2.067***
                                 (0.41)           (0.10)                 (0.09)             (0.09)                (0.10)
Distance                      -0.510***                               -0.437***          -0.445***                 -0.48
                                 (0.10)                                  (0.02)             (0.02)                (0.02)
Gold Standard                    0.193           0.122***                0.059              0.044                 0.089
                                 (0.14)            (0.03)                (0.04)             (0.04)                (0.07)
Border                         0.862***                               0.856***            0.852***              0.804***
                                 (0.20)                                  (0.05)             (0.05)                (0.06)
Number Landlocked              -0.921**                               -1.193***          -2.753***                 1.538
                                 (0.44)                                  (0.44)             (0.48)                (2.23)
Railroad Track                0.203***           0.072***             0.072***             0.034*                  0.617
                                 (0.05)            (0.01)                (0.02)             (0.02)                (0.07)
GDP                            0.448***          0.365***              0.627***           0.287***                -0.196
                                 (0.14)            (0.05)                (0.07)             (0.10)                (0.67)
Population                        -0.01           -0.019                -0.198             -0.187                  2.042
                                 (0.11)            (0.07)                (0.13)             (0.13)                (1.91)
Non-Empire Currency
Union                           1.197**            -0.119             2.003***            2.021***               2.024***
                                 (0.50)             (0.23)              (0.12)              (0.12)                 (0.13)
War                              0.424*             0.019               0.281               0.254                 -0.031
                                 (0.22)             (0.14)              (0.26)              (0.25)                 (0.23)
War(-1)                         0.285**             0.115               0.287               0.252                  0.212
                                 (0.12)             (0.15)              (0.21)              (0.21)                 (0.27)
War(-2)                          0.335*            0.266*               0.363               0.367                  0.353
                                 (0.18)             (0.15)              (0.22)              (0.23)                 (0.31)
War(-3)                           0.24               0.07               0.252               0.248                  0.368
                                 (0.20)             (0.15)              (0.25)              (0.25)                 (0.37)
War(-4)                          0.032             -0.007               0.095               0.084                  0.094
                                 (0.24)             (0.15)              (0.28)              (0.29)                 (0.45)
War(-5)                          -0.057             0.006              -0.005               0.016                 -0.075
                                 (0.30)             (0.15)              (0.29)              (0.30)                 (0.42)
War(-6)                          0.008              0.047               0.108               0.119                  0.075
                                 (0.29)             (0.14)              (0.26)              (0.26)                 (0.36)
Year Dummies                      YES                YES                  NO                 YES                     NO
Observations                      6671               6671                6671                6671                   6671
R-squared                         0.49               0.41                0.68                0.68                   0.75
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                     42
