                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CATERING THROUGH NOMINAL SHARE PRICES

                                          Malcolm Baker
                                         Robin Greenwood
                                          Jeffrey Wurgler

                                        Working Paper 13762
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13762


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




For helpful comments we thank Yakov Amihud, Lauren Cohen, Ken French, Sam Hanson, Harrison
Hong, Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, Eric Kelley, Owen Lamont, Ulrike Malmendier, Andrei Shleifer, Erik
Stafford, Dick Thaler, and seminar participants at Arizona State, Copenhagen Business School, Darmouth,
Helsinki School of Economics, Kellogg, the NBER Behavioral Finance conference, the Norwegian
School of Management, NYU Stern, Penn State, Stockholm School of Economics, and the University
of Arizona. We thank Jay Ritter for providing data. Baker and Greenwood gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Malcolm Baker, Robin Greenwood, and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Catering Through Nominal Share Prices
Malcolm Baker, Robin Greenwood, and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 13762
January 2008
JEL No. G12,G3

                                              ABSTRACT

We propose and test a catering theory of nominal stock prices. The theory predicts that when investors
place higher valuations on low-price firms, managers will maintain share prices at lower levels, and
vice-versa. Using measures of time-varying catering incentives based on valuation ratios, split announcement
effects, and future returns, we find empirical support for the predictions in both time-series and firm-level
data. Given the strong cross-sectional relationship between capitalization and nominal share price,
an interpretation of the results is that managers may be trying to categorize their firms as small firms
when investors favor small firms.


Malcolm Baker                                         Jeffrey Wurgler
Baker Library 261                                     Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
Harvard Business School                               New York University
Soldiers Field                                        44 West 4th Street
Boston, MA 02163                                      New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                              and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu                                        jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

Robin Greenwood
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 479
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
rgreenwood@hbs.edu
       In frictionless and efficient stock markets, there is no optimal nominal (per-share) stock

price. A firm’s board of directors may choose to split to manage the nominal share price and

number of shares outstanding but cannot change its overall market value through these means.

Yet boards typically do manage their firm’s nominal share price. Theories offered to explain

share price management include that trading costs depend on nominal prices (Dolley (1933),

Angel (1997)), that splits signal inside information (Asquith, Healy, and Palepu (1989), Brennan

and Copeland (1988)), or that prices in certain ranges simply constitute a market norm (Benartzi,

Michaely, Thaler, and Weld (2007)).

       In this paper, we propose a different theory of nominal share prices. The catering theory

of nominal share prices sees share price management as an effort to obtain higher valuations that

investors may be temporarily placing on stocks at different price ranges. The theory predicts that

splits will be more frequent, and to lower prices, when the valuations of low-priced firms are

attractive relative to the valuations of high-priced firms.

       To explain managerial behavior, the catering theory requires only that managers believe

that nominal prices matter to investors. While the majority of managers subscribe to this belief

(Baker and Gallagher (1980)), the theory gains further motivation from evidence that, contrary to

efficient markets, return characteristics actually are affected by nominal price. Green and Hwang

(2007) find that stocks that split experience sudden increases in their comovement with lower-

priced stocks. Ohlson and Penman (1985) find that stocks that split experience large increases in

volatility; thus, as splitting stocks comove more with low-price, generally smaller-cap stocks,

they inherit their higher volatility as well. Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992) and Gompers

and Metrick (2001) show that individual investors hold lower-price stocks than institutions,

suggesting a segmented market. Black (1986) also views low-price stocks as subject to greater




                                                  1
noise trading. Investors thus appear to categorize stocks in part based on price, and this affects

returns, much as the addition or deletion of a stock from an index affects returns in Barberis,

Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), Greenwood (2007a), and Greenwood and Sosner (2007).

       A case study introduces our main ideas. Figure 1 plots the share price of Applied

Materials, Inc. from 1980 through 2004. Applied Materials enjoyed success in this period and

split its shares nine times. However, far from maintaining a constant share price, the company

split to nine different prices, ranging from $15 all the way to $88, through both 2-for-1 and 3-for-

2 splits. Catering predicts splits to lower prices when lower-priced shares are in favor. Consistent

with this prediction, the figure illustrates a close connection between the post-split share price

and a relative valuation measure that we refer to as the “low-price premium,” the log difference

between the average market-to-book ratio of low-nominal-price firms and that of high-nominal-

price firms. In the figure, the series is inverted so that higher values suggest an investor

preference for higher-priced stocks. Simply put, the figure shows that when low-priced stocks

enjoyed relatively high valuations, Applied Materials maintained a lower share price, and when

high-priced stocks enjoyed high valuations, the company maintained a higher share price.

       In our empirical work, we use three time series proxies for catering incentives based on

annual data from 1963 through 2006. We just described the low-price premium. There is a strong

cross-sectional relationship between size and share price, as in Dyl and Elliott (2006) and

Benartzi et al. (2007), suggesting the possibility that catering-minded splitters may be trying to

portray themselves not as low-priced firms per se but rather as small-cap firms. We therefore

construct a “small-cap premium” as the average market-to-book ratio on small-cap firms relative

to the average market-to-book ratio on large-cap firms. As a third measure of the time-varying

incentive to reduce prices, we use the average announcement effect of recent splits. Greenwood




                                                 2
(2007b) finds that high announcement effects for Japanese splitters are associated with more

splits and higher split ratios in subsequent quarters. Both results are consistent with catering.

         A simple accounting framework for nominal share prices suggests testing whether four

components of active price management depend on catering incentives: the binary decision to

split in a given period; the net change in price due to active price management in a given period;

the price chosen by splitters; and the price chosen at the IPO.1 We perform these tests using both

time-series and firm-level data. Note that IPOs are a particularly good laboratory in which to

look for catering effects because newly public firms must actively choose a share price and they

retain no legacy of any particular historical share price.

         We find strong empirical support for the catering predictions. In terms of univariate time

series regressions, our proxies for catering incentives explain up to 30% of the annual variation

in the frequency of stock splits, with more firms splitting when low-priced or small-cap firms

have higher valuations. The average net change in price across firms is also lower when investors

favor lower-priced firms. Of course, prices are ultimately what we seek to explain. Catering

incentives explain up to 75% of time variation in (log) IPO offer prices and 78% of time

variation in (log) first-day closing prices, with firms going public at higher prices when catering

incentives point that direction. Perhaps most broadly, catering proxies also explain up to 52% of

the time variation in (log) post-split prices chosen by splitters. It seems unlikely that theories

based on transaction costs or asymmetric information could achieve comparable explanatory

power. The effects are robust to controlling for overall average prices and recent returns, other

determinants of splits.


1
  To be clear, the nominal price stability that Benartzi et al. (2007) emphasize is stability relative to the enormous
growth in other nominal prices in the economy. The average prices selected by stocks that split, the average prices
selected by IPOs, and average nominal stock prices in general have varied by a factor of two to three over the last
few decades. We address this variation.



                                                          3
       We consider several robustness tests for the regressions involving post-split prices, such

as subsample splits, time trends, difference specifications, and so forth, with little change in the

results. One interesting result that emerges is that catering incentives affect post-split prices only

for larger firms. That is, the post-split price results reflect large firms trying to “act small” at

opportune times. However, the results for IPO prices involve smaller, younger firms, so in that

sense firms respond to catering concerns at multiple points in their life cycle. We also conduct

robustness tests using firm-level data. This controls for changes in the composition of firms that

might confound aggregate time-series tests. We find that proxies for catering incentives have

incremental explanatory power for the various components of active price management when

examined at the firm level, after controlling for a suite of firm- and industry-level characteristics.

       Our final tests involve future stock returns. As noted above, it is not required that share

prices be inefficient in order for catering to explain managerial behavior. Managers may cater in

vain to an efficient market, not understanding that the valuations of low- and high-priced stocks

differ for fundamental reasons. Nonetheless, we treat subsequent stock returns as proxies for the

correction of ex ante mispricing and ask whether observed split patterns are consistent with the

successful pursuit of misvaluation. Perhaps surprisingly, given our relatively short time series,

the evidence is consistent with this view. High split frequencies and low post-split prices portend

significantly lower future returns on small stocks versus large stocks and on low-priced stocks

versus high-priced stocks.

       In summary, nominal share prices are influenced by catering incentives. One question

that the results raise, and that we leave to future work, is why nominal share prices matter to

investors. Institutional trading frictions may play a role. The psychology of stock price levels is

unexplored. Bernartzi et al (2007) suggest that stock prices constitute a norm. Perhaps some




                                                  4
investors suffer from a nominal illusion in which they perceive that a stock is cheaper after a

split, has more “room to grow” ($10 is farther from infinity than $25 is), or has “less to lose”

($10 is closer to zero than $25 is). Alternatively, perhaps they naively equate low nominal prices

with small capitalization. Given the strong cross-sectional correlation between price and

capitalization, and the fact that for individual investors it is a bit harder to obtain capitalization

data than a price quote, this is not an entirely unreasonable heuristic. But managers of large caps

may be able to exploit it. More generally, investors may categorize stocks according to price, so

that a change in price can potentially lead to an increase in attention or investor recognition in

the sense of Merton (1987). Whatever the mechanism, our particular results suggest time

variation. Occasionally, investors as a group shift focus to different price categories.2 Or,

equivalently clienteles with a particular focus in terms of stock price shift in importance over

time.3

           The paper adds nominal share prices to a list of managerial decisions that may be shaped

by catering influences.4 Baker and Wurgler (2004a,b) and Li and Lie (2006) consider catering

via dividend policy. Cooper, Dimitrov and Rau (2001) and Cooper, Korana, Osobov, Patel, and

Rau (2004) find evidence that corporate names can be shaped by catering considerations.

Greenwood (2007b) finds that firms in Japan are more likely to announce stock splits following a

period when stock splits have generated high announcement returns. Polk and Sapienza (2006)

suggest that corporate investment decisions are shaped by catering considerations. Aghion and

Stein (2006) view catering as an influence on the strategic decision to cut costs or maximize

2
    For example, see Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992) for a model of fads and customs.
3
  Odean (1999), Hirshleifer and Teoh (2002), and Barber and Odean (2007) emphasize that individual investors as a
group limit their search for stocks to those that catch their attention. Nominal prices and splits may play a role in
attracting individual investor attention, and thus stimulating demand.
4
 Somewhat related, Hong, Wang, and Yu (2007) suggest that firms can directly influence the supply and demand
conditions in their own securities by repurchasing shares.



                                                          5
sales growth. Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler (2004) suggest that time-varying investor preferences

for the conglomerate form may help to explain the rise and subsequent dismantling of

conglomerates. Unlike some of these applications, nominal share prices and stock splits offer a

clean test of catering because they aren’t tied up with any “real” motivation.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section I outlines the methodology and main hypotheses.

Section II shows time-series tests. Section III offers firm-level tests. Section IV examines return

predictability. Section V concludes.



I.     Methodology

       We are interested in explaining the active management of stock prices, in particular in

identifying decisions that may be motivated by catering. The active management of stock prices

has several components. We start by introducing a general accounting framework for share price

management and then describe the main hypotheses.

A.     Accounting for share prices

       Stock prices are initially set at the IPO. Subsequently, active price setting happens

through the choice of how often to split and at what ratio. Ignoring dividends for the moment,

stock prices are determined as follows. Prices P typically grow by the stock return R. The

manager of firm i can lower or raise the end of period price by choosing to split the stock:

        Pi ,t = Pi ,t −1 ⋅ (1 + Ri ,t ) ⋅ (1 + S i ,t ⋅ N i ,t )                                                      (1)

where S is an indicator variable, equal to one if the manager decides to split the stock, and N is

the inverse of the split ratio minus one. For example, in a typical 2-for-1 stock split, N is equal to

-0.5. We can express this in logs as follows:

        pi ,t = pi ,t −1 + ri ,t + log(1 + Si ,t ⋅ N i ,t ) ≡ pi ,t −1 + ri ,t + mi ,t ≈ pi ,t −1 + ri ,t + si ,t n   (2)



                                                                     6
where p is the log price, r is the log total return, and m is the net effect of splitting activity

between time t and t+1. If the split ratio, and therefore N, does not vary over time – this is

approximately the case empirically – then s is simply an indicator variable for splits and n is a

constant, equal to the log of 1+N, and the approximation in equation (2) is exact.

        In addition to the explicit effect of splitting through s and n, the manager is implicitly

controlling p through splitting decisions in prior periods. In that spirit, we can substitute for pi,t-1:

        pi ,t ≈ ∑ki=0 ri ,t − k + s i ,t − k n + pi , IPO
                     T
                                                                                                               (3)

where T is the number of periods since firm i’s initial public offering.

        Dividend policy can be treated in one of two ways. It can be lumped into active price

selection by using total returns in the equations above or it can be taken as exogenous by using

only the capital gains portion of returns in the equations above. We take the latter approach,

focusing on the role of splits.

        Our focus in the empirical tests is on the aggregate determinants x and, to a lesser extent,

the firm level determinants w of active price selection. We take returns as given and examine the

determinants of pIPO, s and m in the following four specifications. In each case, we look at firm

level and market wide data. The initial measure of price selection is the IPO price:

        pi , IPO = f (w i , IPO , x t −1 ) + u i , IPO or, at the market level, pt , IPO = f ( xt −1 ) + u t   (4)

The narrowest measure of price selection following the IPO is simply the indicator variable s:

        si ,t = f (w i ,t −1 , x t −1 ) + u i ,t or st = f (x t −1 ) + u t                                     (5)

We then expand this to include the combined effect of s and n:

        mi ,t = pi ,t − pi ,t −1 − ri ,t = f (w i ,t −1 , x t −1 ) + u i ,t or mt = f (x t −1 ) + u t          (6)

The broadest measure of price selection is the price level itself:




                                                                     7
        pi ,t = f   (∑
                     Ti
                          r
                     k =0 i ,t −k
                                                   )
                                    , w i ,t −1 , x t −1 + ui ,t or p t = f   (∑
                                                                               T
                                                                                                 )
                                                                                       r , x t −1 + u t
                                                                                   k =0 t − k
                                                                                                          (7)

For the IPO price, we of course focus on firms that have just listed. For the price level, we focus

in similar spirit on firms that have split in period t. These firms have made an active decision

within period t and so the price reflects an explicit choice, rather than simply managerial inertia.

We also include past returns and price levels in these specifications. For tests of the frequency of

splits and their combined effect on prices, on the other hand, we include all listed firms.

B.     Main hypotheses

       When testing these four equations we are particularly interested in the effect of elements

of x that proxy for catering incentives. In particular, when the relative valuations of low-priced

or small-cap firms are high, relative to other firms, catering implies that prices in (4) and (7) will

be lower, all else equal. With respect to equations (5) and (6), we hypothesize that when the

relative valuations of low-priced or small-cap firms are high, relative to other firms, splits will be

more common and lead, on average, to greater reductions in share prices.

       The last hypothesis we test is complementary but somewhat distinct. We consider future

returns on low-priced and small-cap firms (relative to other firms) as a dependent variable,

putting split frequency s and post-split prices p on the right-hand side as predictors. The idea is

that if mispricing indeed causes splits toward a particular price range, we may observe return

predictability on stocks in that price range as their mispricing subsequently corrects.



II.    Time-series tests

       We begin with time-series tests involving average or aggregate measures of active

nominal price management such as average post-split stock prices, average prices chosen by




                                                                      8
newly-public firms, and aggregate split frequencies of listed firms. This is a natural level of

analysis because our proxies for catering incentives are purely time-series measures.

A.     Data on splitting activity and post-split prices

       We track stock splits and post-split prices for all shares on CRSP between 1963 through

2006 that have share codes of 10 or 11. Stock splits are events with a CRSP distribution code of

5523. We distinguish three types of splits. Regular splits are defined as events having a split ratio

of greater than 1.25-for-1. Stock dividends have split ratios between 1.01-for-1 and 1.25-for-1.

Reverse splits have split ratios less than 1-for-1.

       The first several columns of Table 1 report the total number of splits, the average pre-

split price, the average post-split price for splitters, and the aggregate effect of active price

management (which we label m). The pre-split price is the closing price on the day prior to the

split. The post-split price is the pre-split price divided by the split ratio. The broader measure of

splitting activity m measures the average active management of price over the course of the year.

It is the average across all listed firms of the log difference between the actual stock price and the

beginning of year stock price grown at the stock return excluding dividends. For example, in

1963, the average is -4.00%, meaning that the average firm reduced its price by 4% through

splitting activity. The last two columns show the average first-day and offering prices for IPOs.

We thank Jay Ritter for providing IPO dates and offer prices; the first-day prices are from CRSP.

       A salient feature of Table 1 is that the fraction of firms that splits varies considerably

over time. In 1970, for example, 40 firms conduct proper splits, or fewer than two percent of

listed firms, while in 1983, 780 firms split, or well over ten percent of listed firms. (A detail here

is that Table 1 counts the number of splits, not the number of firms that split. However, it is rare

for a firm to split more than once in a year, so the number of splits is close to the number of




                                                      9
firms that split.) The broader measure of active price management also varies over time, from a

maximum reduction in price of 8.69% in 1981 to an increase in price of 0.32% in 2001. To some

extent these series are driven by returns. When past returns are high, managers tend to move

prices down toward their historical mean.

        The “target” prices to which splitters split and the prices at which newly public firms

choose to list also vary greatly over time. Shedding light on these target prices is our primary

goal. At the height of the Internet bubble, the average post-split price approached $50 per share,

whereas in earlier years it had been as low as $18. IPO prices follow a very similar pattern to

average post-split prices, at lower levels. The correlation between the average post-split price

and the first-day IPO price is 0.92, while the correlation with the offering IPO price is slightly

lower at 0.70. The average post-split price is tied to variation in the average pre-split price,

although of course firms can decide both when they want to split and, by manipulating the split

ratio, the exact price they split to.

        Finally, Table 1 shows that reverse splits are quite rare for much of the sample, and the

pre- and post-split prices suggest that when they do occur they reflect an effort to satisfy

exchange listing requirements, i.e. to bump prices above $5 per share. For these reasons we give

more attention to proper splits and stock dividends in the analysis.

B.      Data on catering incentives

        Next we form proxies for catering incentives. These are the aggregate determinants of

price management x of most interest to us. Baker and Wurgler (2004a,b) construct a dividend

premium variable based on the difference between the average valuation ratios of dividend

payers and nonpayers. Similarly, we construct variables intended to capture any small-cap

premia and low-nominal-price premia that may emerge in market prices.




                                                10
           For starters, Figure 2A plots share price breakpoints for low- and high-priced shares.

Low-priced stocks are taken to be those with per-share prices below the 30th percentile of NYSE

common stocks. High-priced stocks are those with per-share prices above the 70th percentile.

Average share prices for high-priced stocks have varied over time from a high near $50 per share

in the late 1960s to a low below $20 per share in the early 1970s. Figure 2B plots average share

prices for large-cap and small-cap firms.5 Small caps are defined as those with capitalizations

below the 30th percentile of NYSE common stocks and large caps have capitalizations above the

70th percentile. As noted by prior authors, for example, Benartzi et al. (2007), capitalization and

share prices have a very strong cross-sectional relationship, with smaller stocks typically having

lower share prices.

           These fluctuating share prices are associated with fluctuating valuation ratios. Figure 3A

plots the average market-to-book ratios of low- and high-price stocks. Market equity is end of

year stock price times shares outstanding (Compustat item 24 times item 25). Book equity is

stockholders’ equity (216) [or first available of common equity (60) plus preferred stock par

value (130) or book assets (6) minus liabilities (181)] minus preferred stock liquidating value

(10) [or first available of redemption value (56) or par value (130)] plus balance sheet deferred

taxes and investment tax credit (35) if available and minus post retirement assets (330) if

available. The market-to-book ratio is then book assets minus book equity plus market equity all

divided by book assets. Similarly, Figure 3B plots the average market-to-book ratios of small-

cap and large-cap stocks. We show the value-weighted average market-to-book ratios in these

figures but we also compute equal-weighted averages.6 Both series are shown in Table 2.


5
    Like Bernartzi et al. (2007), we exclude Berkshire Hathaway from computations of mean prices.
6
 In computing the equal-weighted averages, we winsorize the market-to-book ratio of individual firms at a
maximum value of 10.



                                                         11
Because of the strong cross-sectional relationship between size and share price, Figures 3A and

3B look quite similar.

       Finally, we translate these valuations into proxies for catering incentives. Figure 3C

displays the low-price premium PCME (“cheap minus expensive”), which is the log of the average

market-to-book ratio of low-priced stocks minus the log of the average market-to-book of high-

priced stocks. It also shows the small cap premium PSMB (“small minus big”), which is the log of

the average market-to-book ratio of small-caps minus the log of the average market-to-book of

large-caps. Again, we plot only the value-weighted average measure, but Table 2 also reports the

equal-weighted measure.

       Capitalization is positively correlated with the market-to-book ratio, so it is not surprising

that low-priced and small stocks have on average sold at a discount in terms of their value-

weighted average valuation ratios, with 1983 the lone exception in the value-weighted series. In

the equal-weighted average valuation ratios, small stocks displayed a premium valuation ratio

from 1979 through 1985 and in 2003 and 2004. More importantly for this analysis, the equal-

weighted premium for high-priced stocks has very similar variation.

       Historical market commentaries give some color to the peaks and troughs in the low-

price and small-cap premia. For example, according to Malkiel (1999), two peaks in Figure 3C,

the late-1960s and 1983, were both notable eras for new issues, which tended to be low-price and

of small capitalization. There are also two troughs in which large caps and high-priced stocks

were apparently more in favor. One is the early 1970s and reflects what Siegel (1998) calls the

“nifty fifty” bubble. The name refers to fifty large, stable, consistently profitable stocks. Siegel

writes, “All of these stocks had proven growth records … and high market capitalization” and

surely high nominal share prices (p. 106). Another trough occurs in the Internet period. This is




                                                12
driven by extraordinary valuations on high-price, large-cap stocks, consistent with the popular

impression of a long bull market for the S&P 500 that started in the 1980s. It also reflects the

valuations of many growth stocks that had such high returns that they quickly leapfrogged

smaller capitalization firms to become high-price, large-cap stocks. Indeed, data from Jay

Ritter’s website indicate that the average first-day return among the 1999 IPO cohort was 70%.

       Two historical anecdotes seem particularly à propos of the catering hypothesis. Malkiel

describes the proposed offering of Muhammad Ali Arcades International in 1983, at the very

peak of the small-stock and low-price premium in Figure 3C. The firm proposed to offer units of

one share plus two warrants at the price of one penny. “… when it was discovered that the champ

himself had resisted the temptation to buy any stock in his namesake company, investors began

to take a good look at where they were. Most did not like what they saw. The result was a

dramatic decline in small company stocks in general” (1999, p. 77-78). As a second interesting

anecdote, in 1989, at the tail end of a 15-year period of outperformance of low-price stocks,

Fidelity Investments launched the Low-Priced Stock Fund. The fund’s mandate was to select

stocks trading at $10 or less. Over the next several years—as high-price stocks began to

outperform—the definition of “Low-Priced” was reset to $25 and then to $35.

       In addition to relative valuation ratios, we also use the market reaction to splits as a proxy

for catering incentives. When splitting firms are greeted with a positive market reaction (Fama,

Fisher, Jensen, and Roll (1969) and subsequent authors find that the average split announcement

is positive) perhaps the simplest inference is that investors prefer lower prices. More specific

evidence comes from Greenwood (2007b), who shows that Japanese firms split more frequently

following high split announcement effects. He also finds that high split announcement effects are

associated with higher split ratios. Both results are consistent with catering. Of course, at least in




                                                 13
the U.S., positive news about earnings or dividends news is often announced at the same time as

a split. In using the market reaction to splits as a measure of catering incentives, we are

implicitly assuming that this news content is similar across years or, to the extent it varies over

time, that it is not correlated with catering incentives.

        Specifically, we compute the return in the window from the day before the CRSP split

announcement date through 10 days after the effective date, net of the value-weighted market

index.7 To control for differences in volatility across firms and across time (see Campbell,

Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2000)), we scale each firm’s excess return by the square root of the

number of days in the window times the standard deviation of its daily excess returns. We

measure volatility in the period from 100 days prior to the split announcement through five days

before the announcement. We label the standardized announcement effect A and report the

average within each year over time. This series is presented in Table and in Panel D of Figure 3.

The figure shows that A varies considerably over time, from a high of 0.88 in 1977, meaning that

the average event return was 0.88 standard deviations above zero, to a low of 0.13 in 1962. The

figure also shows a fairly high degree of correlation between A and the low price (ρ=45%) and

small cap premia (ρ=52%). Thus, the valuation benefits of splitting vary with our premium

measures in an intuitive way. We view all of these measures as alternative, but noisy proxies for

catering incentives.

C.      Catering incentives and splitting activity

        We start by examining whether aggregate measures of split activity, as in equations (5)

and (6), is related to measures of catering incentives. Specifically, we regress the split percentage

and the broader measure of splitting activity on equal- and value-weighted measures of the low
7
  We have experimented with different windows for measuring the announcement premium, achieving similar
results using both shorter and longer windows. We also find that the announcement premium is not much affected
whether one includes or excludes split dividends in the calculation of A.



                                                     14
price and small stock premia and the split announcement premium, controlling for beginning of

period prices and returns:

        st = a + bPt CME
                     −1  + cPt −SMB
                                 1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                 EW        EW
                                                              + ut , and                        (8)

        mt = a + bPt CME
                     −1  + cPt −SMB
                                 1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                 EW        EW
                                                              + ut .

       We expect the low price and small stock premia, labeled b and c, as well as the split

announcement effect, labeled d, to have a positive relationship to the split percentage. In other

words, when low priced and small stocks are trading at a premium relative to high priced and

large stocks, or when splits are associated with larger announcement returns, we expect to see

more firms splitting their shares down to lower prices, in the hopes of attracting investor

demand. The broader measure of splitting activity is decreasing in the propensity to split and the

split ratio, so we expect opposite signs, i.e., when low priced and small stocks are trading at a

premium. Or, once again, when splits are associated with high announcement returns, we expect

to see firms taking actions m to decrease their stock prices. Note in the measure s we include

both splits and stock dividends; it makes little difference if we exclude stock dividends. The

measure m includes all firms and thus is the net effect of splits of any type.

       The estimates of b, c, and d in Table 4 are broadly consistent with these predictions. The

top panel shows univariate results. All ten coefficients have the correct sign, and all but two are

statistically significant at the five percent level. Standard errors are adjusted for

heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of up to three lags and all of the independent variables are

standardized. Thus, in terms of economic significance, a one standard deviation increase in the

value-weighted low-price premium, for example, is associated with a 0.94 percentage point

increase in split frequency and a 0.85 percentage point net decrease in prices through active price

management. Equal-weighting the low price premium or using the small stock premium as a



                                                        15
measure of catering incentives leads to slightly larger effects. Split announcement effects are

associated with split frequencies as well as being strongly associated with net decreases in prices.

       The bottom panel shows multivariate results that control for the overall equal-weighted

average share price from the beginning of the year and the equal-weighted average return over

the course of the year. Naturally, split activity is more common when share prices and returns are

generally high. More important for us is that the inclusion of these control variables does not

affect the coefficients on catering proxies, which are similarly strong. In fact, the t-statistics on

catering incentives are typically as high as the t-statistics on the average price level (unreported),

and the inclusion of these variables does not greatly increase goodness of fit relative to univariate

regressions that contain only catering incentives. One might have expected the average price

level to be the dominant effect on overall split activity, but these results suggest that catering

incentives may be as important.

D.     Catering incentives and IPO and post-split prices

       Next we examine IPO and post-split prices, as in equations (4) and (7). These are

situations where the firm has explicitly chosen a stock price. Catering predicts that splitters will

split to lower prices and new firms will list with higher prices when low-priced firms (or small

firms) are more highly valued. In some respects, this is a clearer test. We expect to see more

splitting activity simply in response to higher prices and past returns, but we would not

necessarily expect to see differences in post split or IPO prices.

       Figure 4 shows the relationship between catering incentives and IPO first-day closing

prices. Initial public offerings offer a unique setting to test for catering effects on prices, as the

price is highly discretionary, there are strong incentives to adapt cosmetic aspects of the firm to

attract investor demand, and there is no issue of inertia with respect to a particular historical




                                                 16
price range. Average IPO closing prices almost tripled from 1984 to 1999 and have fallen more

recently. This variation appears to be well explained by proxies for catering incentives, which are

inverted and once-lagged in the figure. The figure shows that when the relative valuations of

large or high-priced stocks are high, firms go public at higher prices, and vice-versa. The

correlation between IPO closing prices and the lagged value-weighted low price premium is -

0.88 and the correlation with the small stock premium is -0.84.

       Perhaps the central result of the paper is illustrated in Figure 5, which looks at the larger

and longer sample of post-split prices chosen by seasoned firms. The average post-split price is

plotted against the low price and small stock premia, lagged one period and inverted. The

variation in post-split prices is qualitatively similar to the variation in prices chosen by newly-

public firms. In 2000, for example, the average post-split price was nearly $50, or more than

double the average price that firms had been splitting to just a few years earlier and roughly

double the price that firms would be splitting to a few years later. Measures of catering

incentives again appear to help explain this variation. When the low-price premium is relatively

high, firms that conduct splits split to lower prices. The correlation between the post-split price

and the value-weighted low price premium is -0.72. The correlation with the small stock

premium is -0.64. The 2000 spike in post-split prices matches a spike in the relative valuation of

small-cap and low-price firms, but there seems to be a correlation in other periods as well.

       Somewhat more formally, we regress IPO and post-split prices on equal- and value-

weighted versions of the low price and small stock premium and the split announcement

premium, controlling for beginning of period prices and returns:

        ptIPO = a + bPt CME
                        −1  + cPt −SMB
                                    1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                    EW        EW
                                                                 + ut , and                     (9)

        pt = a + bPt CME
                     −1  + cPt −SMB
                                 1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                 EW        EW
                                                              + ut .



                                                        17
We expect that b, c, and d on actively chosen prices to be negative. In other words, when low

priced and small stocks are trading at a premium relative to low priced and small stocks, or when

splits to lower prices are associated with a larger announcement effect, we expect to see firms

choosing lower prices.8

           The estimates in Table 5 are consistent with predictions. The top panel shows univariate

results, and the bottom panel controls for past prices and contemporaneous returns. Of the twenty

coefficients, all have the right sign and all but one are significant at the five percent level. In

terms of economic significance, a one-standard-deviation increase in the low-price premium is

associated with a 19 percentage-point decrease in IPO prices and a 17 percentage-point decrease

in post-split prices. Results for the small-stock premium are similarly strong. These effects are

only slightly affected by the inclusion of average prices and recent returns as control variables,

and the inclusion of such controls increases the statistical and economic significance of the split

announcement premium.

E.         Robustness checks

           We test several aspects of the robustness of the link between catering incentives and post-

split prices. The first row of Table 6 repeats as a base case the multivariate results for value-

weighted measures of catering incentives from Table 5.

           We start by examining whether the results come predominantly from one part of the

sample. Splitting the sample into halves indicates that this is not the case. A second concern is

that both the premia and the average post split price may share a common time trend, leading to a

spurious correlation. The fourth row shows that controlling for a time trend only strengthens the

results. In the fifth row, we go a step further and run equation (9) in differences, removing the


8
    We use log prices as dependent variables here, but we obtain similar results using dollar prices.



                                                            18
time trend from both series. Thus, the dependent variable is the change in the log post-split price,

and the independent variable is the lagged change in the low-price (or small-cap) premium.

Again, results are similar. Related to the difference specification, we estimate GLS specifications

based on a variant of the Cochrane-Orcutt procedure, which assumes that regression residuals are

AR(1). Again, the results are similar and significant. Finally, in untabulated results we find that

the level of the log post-split price is significantly related to past changes in the low-price (or

small-cap) premium.

       The sixth row uses the past relative returns of cheap and expensive stocks and small and

large stocks. We compound these differences over the three years prior to year t and use the gap

in returns to predict the average post split price in year t. As expected, the basic results are

qualitatively unchanged. In the seventh row we replace IPO first-day closing prices with offering

prices. Although Loughran and Ritter (2002) show that the closing price is predictable, the

offering price may be a better gauge of the intended share price. In any event, the results are not

sensitive to this distinction, though the coefficient increases as a result of the lower variance of

offering prices.

       Another conceivable issue with the results in Table 5 involves a composition effect.

Suppose that small firms always split to low prices and large firms always split to higher prices.

Then, when small-cap or low-price premia are high, we would expect more small firms to be

potential splitters. Since small firms split to lower prices, the average post-split price will be

lower, potentially producing the effect in Table 5. An easy test of this alternative explanation is

to separate small from large firms. We define small firms as those with market capitalization less

than the 30th NYSE percentile and large firms as those with market cap greater than the 70th

percentile. The eighth and ninth rows of the robustness table show that the results are driven by




                                                19
large firms. Thus, the results appear to reflect large firms trying to “act small” (when catering

incentives point in that direction) rather than the composition effect suggested above. Perhaps

smaller listed firms have less scope to alter investor perceptions, especially if their prices are

already low (reverse splits are rare as shown in Figure 1). At the same time, the results for IPO

prices involve smaller and younger firms, and so catering incentives may be important at

different stages of the firm life cycle.

        The final two rows represent a single regression result. We split the low price and small

stock premia into their components. This addresses a class of alternative explanations in which

our catering incentives measures are correlated with overall valuation levels. For example, high

overall valuation levels may proxy for low expected returns, so perhaps firms choose not to split

to low prices because they expect their price to fall on its own. A simple test is to see whether the

effect is coming from both or just one part of our relative valuation measures. The results suggest

that post-split prices are significantly positively related to the valuations of high priced (or large)

stocks as well as significantly negatively related to the valuations of low priced (or small) stocks.

        A class of explanations that is popular in the splits literature involves signaling. It is hard

to rule out signaling as an explanation for any particular split or pattern of a firm’s decisions. For

example, Applied Materials may have split to lower prices because of increased confidence that

its current valuation was not too high. However, signaling is unlikely to explain our large sample

results. We find a pattern between a publicly available data (the relative valuation of low and

high priced firms) and the propensity to split. While this could reflect time series variation in

asymmetric information, it would more naturally predict that the need to signal was greater, not

lesser, when low priced and small stocks (opaque firms) were trading at a discount.




                                                  20
III.   Firm-level tests

       As another robustness test we can use firm-level data. This allows us to more fully

control for composition effects that could affect average post-split prices and split activity but

that do not involve catering, as well as to correct for effects related to variation over time in the

cross-sectional dispersion in prices or other relevant characteristics. The specific approach is to

add time series measures of catering incentives to pooled firm level regressions corresponding to

eqs. (4) through (7).

A.     Data

       We gather firm- and industry-level determinants of splits and post-split share prices at an

annual frequency. We take beginning-of-year nominal share prices and construct annual stock

returns using CRSP data. We measure firm size as the NYSE capitalization decile as of the end

of the previous calendar year. We control for industry average prices using Fama and French

(1997) industry classifications. In some cases we also control for idiosyncratic, firm-specific

preferences for a specific price range by using the price to which the firm split when it split the

last time (whether that was a proper split, a stock dividend, or a reverse split). Inclusion of this

last control limits the sample to firms that have split previously.

B.     Catering incentives and firm-level splitting activity

       In Table 7, we estimate the firm level analogue to our time series regressions in Table 4.

An indicator variable equal to one when firms i splits or pays a stock dividend in quarter t

replaces the aggregate split percentage, and the firm level measure of the net impact of splitting

activity m replaces the equal weighted average across firms. We regress these dependent

variables on the value-weighted low price premium, controlling for beginning of period prices p,

contemporaneous returns r, the NYSE size decile NYSED, the industry average price pIndustry, and




                                                 21
the price at last split pLastSplit. We cluster the residuals u by year to match the variation in the low

price premium.9

         Pr ( si ,t = 1) = a + bPt CME
                                   −1  + epi ,t −1 + fri ,t + gNYSEDi ,t + hpiIndustry
                                                                               ,t −1   + jpiLastSplit
                                                                                            ,t −1     + ui ,t , and                (10)

         mi ,t = pi ,t − pi ,t −1 − ri ,t = a + bPt CME
                                                    −1  + epi ,t −1 + fri ,t + gNYSEDi ,t + jpiIndustry
                                                                                                ,t −1   + hpiLastSplit
                                                                                                             ,t −1     + ui ,t .

        As before, we expect the coefficient on the low price premium b to have a positive sign in

the first equation and a negative sign in the second. We expect the effect of past price and

contemporaneous returns to be positive for splits and negative for the broader measure m. That

is, when prices are high initially or because of recent returns, we expect to see more splits and

more downward management of price. Firms in size deciles and industries with higher prices are

likely to split less and manage prices higher. Finally, firms may have their own idiosyncratic

preference for share price that is manifested in past stock splits. Those with preferences for low

prices will split more often and manage price downward.

        These predictions are supported in Table 7. Splits are more common when prices are

higher, when returns are higher, when the industry average share price is lower (as in

Lakonishok and Lev (1987), and when the firm’s last post-split price is lower. Large firms are

somewhat less likely to split, all else equal, consistent with the cross-sectional pattern in which

large firms maintain higher average share prices. More importantly, the high price premium has

the correct sign in all six regressions, and is significant at the five percent level in five out of six.

In the first specification in the top panel, a one-standard deviation increase in the low price

premium is associated with a 0.50 percentage point increase in the probability that a firm will

split in that year, all else equal. This may appear small but it should be compared to the

9
  We have also estimated t-statistics following Thompson (2006), who describes a technique for obtaining standard
errors when residuals are clustered both by firm and in time. Although this adjustment appears to matter for many of
the control variables, it does not much affect the significance of b, the coefficient on the low price premium.



                                                                22
unconditional probability of a split in a given year, which is roughly four to twelve percentage

points, as can be inferred from Table 1. Note also that we are controlling for beginning of year

price, which itself reflects the impact of our annual proxy for catering incentives. It is also

associated with a 0.79 percentage point reduction in the average firm’s share price that year as

effected through splitting activity.

C.      Catering incentives and firm-level IPO and post-split prices

        In Table 8, we estimate the firm level analogue to the time series regressions in Table 5.

Firm level IPO prices and post-split month-end prices replace the time series averages. We

regress these dependent variables on the value-weighted low price premium, controlling for the

log price following the last split pLastSplit and returns since the last split rLastSplit in the case of post-

split prices, the NYSE size decile NYSED, and the industry average price pIndustry.

         piIPO
            ,t = a + bPt CME
                         −1  + gNYSEDi ,t + hpiIndustry
                                                ,t −1   + ui ,t                                          (11)

         pi ,t = a + bPt CME
                         −1  + cpiLastSplit
                                  ,t −1     + dri ,LastSplit
                                                   t         + eNYSEDi ,t + fpiIndustry
                                                                                ,t −1   + ui ,t

For firms that have not split before, pLastSplit denotes the log month-end price following the IPO,

and rLastSplit is the log ex-dividend return since the IPO.

        Here, we expect the coefficient on the low price premium b to be negative, as before, and

all other coefficients to be positive. These predictions are borne out in Table 8. Notably, the low

price premium is negative in all four regressions and statistically significant at the five percent

level in three of them. The base case result for post-split prices implies that a one-standard

deviation increase in the low-price premium is associated with firm-level prices that are on

average lower by about 5 percentage points, all else equal.

        The results for IPOs are statistically somewhat weaker, although they are economically

larger, with a one-standard deviation increase in the low-price premium associated with a three



                                                              23
to four percentage point decrease in IPO prices. This lower statistical significance is partly a

function of the smaller sample but primarily due to the size control. Without the size control, the

coefficient b is -0.17 with a t-statistic of -8.41. This suggests that firms that are small (relative to

existing NYSE stocks) are much more likely to go public when the low price and small stock

premium are high. This is broadly consistent with the notion that investor demand for small and

low priced stocks varies over time. One way to satiate this demand is to split; the other is to bring

more firms with these characteristics public.

       We have also tried an alternative estimation approach. In analogy to Fama and French

(2001) and Baker and Wurgler (2004b), who estimate the “propensity to pay dividends,” we also

estimate the firm-level “propensity to split” as a function of firm- and industry-specific factors,

in the first stage, and ask whether catering incentives help to explain the remaining time variation

(the constant term in the cross-sectional regressions), in the second stage. Similarly, we estimate

the firm-level “active price manipulation due to splits” as a function of firm- and industry-

specific factors, and ask whether unexplained time fixed effects depend on prevailing catering

incentives. This procedure has the benefit of giving equal weight to each time period, but has

disadvantages. The effect of the time series predictor in the second stage can be contaminated by

the first stage variables. In particular, the time series averages of the firm-level predictors can

make up an important part of the variation in the annual average residuals. Whatever the relative

merits, it is comforting that this procedure produces similar results to the pooled regressions

shown here, so we omit the results.



IV.     Future stock returns




                                                  24
       In the purest catering theory, firms split in an effort to categorize themselves, via their

new share price, into a group of small or low-price firms that is relatively overvalued. If this is

accurate, then split activity may forecast the returns on small or low-priced stocks, relative to the

returns on large or high-priced stocks, as prices eventually revert. On the other hand, it is also

possible that the catering activity is misguided, and no actual misvaluation exists, i.e. small and

low-price firms have high valuations because their fundamentals are strong. Still another

possibility is that misvaluation exists, but because corrections of mispricing are irregular they

may go undetected in predictive regressions with relatively short time series.

       We consider two of the time series we have focused on, the frequency of splits and

average post-split share prices, as potential forecasters of the SMB and CME relative return

factors. Also, since the equal-weighted average nominal price level itself has such a strong effect

on the frequency of splits and average post-split share prices, we control for it. In other words,

we ask whether “excess” splitting activity, or “excess” variation in post-split prices, predicts

returns. The predictive regressions are

        Rt +1 = a + bst + cptEW
                             −1 + ut                                                            (12)

        Rt +1 = a + bpt + cptEW
                             −1 + ut


where R denotes the return on low minus high priced stocks or small minus large cap stocks. We

consider forecasts of one-, two-, and three-year ahead relative returns.

       As it turns out, the results in Table 9 are quite supportive of catering. The left columns

show that when splits are particularly frequent, controlling for overall average share prices,

future returns are lower on low-price stocks relative to high-price stocks, and on small-cap stocks

relative to large-cap stocks. For example, suppose the aggregate frequency of splits increases by

one percentage point, which is about a third of its standard deviation. Then, controlling for



                                                 25
overall average share prices, equal-weighted returns on low-priced stocks are lower, relative to

equal-weighted returns on high-priced stocks, by a total of 8.27 percentage points over the next

three years. This is in the direction consistent with splits as a response to ex ante relative

overvaluation of low-priced stocks and the magnitude seems substantial.

         The right columns show that average post-split share prices are also useful for predicting

size- and price-based relative return factors. Suppose that average post split prices are lower by

one nominal dollar, which is about a sixth of one standard deviation. Then, controlling for

overall average share prices, for example, the equal-weighted returns on low-priced stocks are

low relative to the returns on high-priced stocks by a total of 3.45 percentage points over the next

three years. Again, this magnitude seems nontrivial and the direction is consistent with ex ante

relative overvaluation of low-priced stocks inspiring splitters to target lower prices.10 And we

note that, in addition to being nicely consistent with the catering hypothesis, this evidence of

return predictability further casts doubt on rational expectations versions of signaling.



V.       Conclusion

         Boards of directors are free to choose whatever nominal price they decide is optimal,

subject only to listing requirements. Existing theories of nominal share prices typically invoke

frictions such as trading costs and asymmetric information. In this paper, we suggest a catering

theory of nominal share prices in which firms manage share prices toward the price range that


10
   Stambaugh (1999) describes the potential for bias due to autocorrelated regressors whose innovations are
correlated with returns. Annual innovations in stock splits and post split prices are not statistically correlated with
relative returns of high- and low-priced stocks or small and large stocks. The correlations range from -0.04 to -0.17
for stock splits (the wrong sign for bias) and from -0.02 to -0.16 for post split prices (correct sign but small
magnitudes). Moreever, the reduced-bias estimator of Amihud and Hurvich (2004) indicates virtually no bias for
either predictor in our setting. However, standard errors using the Amihud-Hurvich approach are slightly above
those in Table 9. The difference comes primarily from switching from the homoskedastic to robust standard errors,
not from the bias correction.



                                                         26
investors currently prefer. The “friction” in the catering theory is limits to arbitrage that allow for

mispricing based on nominal share price levels.

       We find several elements of empirical support for a catering view of share prices. Splits

are far more common, and to lower prices, when the valuation ratios of small- and low-priced

firms are high relative to the valuation ratios of large- and high-priced firms. Simple valuation

ratio-based proxies of catering incentives explain a large fraction of variation in post-split share

prices. They explain an especially large fraction of variation in the prices chosen by newly-

public firms. Finally, consistent with active price management as an effort to take advantage of

relative overvaluation of low-priced firms, split activity or splits to lower prices predicts

relatively low returns on low-priced firms and small-cap firms over the next few years.




                                                  27
References

Aghion, Philippe, and Jeremy Stein, 2007, Growth vs. margins: Destabilizing consequences of
      giving the stock market what it wants, forthcoming Journal of Finance.

Amihud, Yakov, and Clifford M. Hurvich, 2004, Predictive regressions: A reduced-bias
     estimation method, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 41, 637-660.

Angel, James J., 1997, Tick size, share prices, and stock splits, Journal of Finance 52, p. 655-
       681.

Asquith, Paul, Paul Healy, and Krishna Palepu, 1989, Earnings and stock splits, The Accounting
       Review 64, 387-403.

Baker, H. Kent, and Patricia L. Gallagher, 1980, Management’s view of stock splits, Financial
       Management 9, 73-77.

Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, Behavioral corporate finance: A
       survey, ed. Espen Eckbo, (Amsterdam: North-Holland).

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004a, A catering theory of dividends, Journal of Finance
       59, 1125-1165.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004b, Appearing and disappearing dividends: The link to
       catering incentives, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 271-288.

Barber, Brad, and Terrence Odean, 2007, All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the
       buying behavior of individual and institutional investors, Review of Financial Studies,
       forthcoming.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2005, Comovement, Journal of
       Financial Economics 75, 283-318.

Benartzi, Shlomo, Roni Michaely, Richard H. Thaler, and William C. Weld, 2007, The nominal
       price puzzle, UCLA working paper.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, 1992, A theory of fads, fashion,
      custom, and cultural change as informational cascades, Journal of Political Economy
      100, 992-1026.

Black, Fischer, 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 41, 529-543.

Brennan, Michael, and Thomas Copeland, 1988, Stock splits, stock prices, and transactions
      costs, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 83-101.

Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, 2001, Have individual
     stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of
     Finance 56, 1-44.


                                               28
Cooper, Michael J., Orlin Dimitrov, and P. Raghavendra Rau, 2001, A rose.com by any other
      name, Journal of Finance 56, 2371-2388.

Cooper, Michael J., Ajay Korana, Igor Osobov, Ajay Patel, and P. Raghavendra Rau, 2004,
      Managerial actions in response to a market downturn: Valuation effects of name changes
      in the dot.com decline, Journal of Corporate Finance, forthcoming.

Dolley, James C., 1933, Common stock split-ups—Motives and effects, Harvard Business
       Review October, 70-81.

Dyl, Edward, and William B. Elliott, 2006, The share price puzzle, Journal of Business 79, 2045-
       2066.

Fama, Eugene F., Lawrence Fisher, Michael C. Jensen, and Richard Roll, 1969, The adjustment
      of stock prices to new information, International Economic Review 10, 1-21.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial
      Economics 43, 153-193.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
      characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-44.

Hirshleifer, David, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2002, Limited attention, information disclosure, and
       financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337-386.

Gompers, Paul, and Andrew Metrick, 2001, Institutional ownership and equity prices, The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 229-259.

Green, T. Clifton, and Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, 2007, Price-based return comovement, Emory
       University working paper.

Greenwood, Robin, 2007a, Excess Comovement: Evidence from cross-sectional variation in
      Nikkei 225 weights, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Greenwood, Robin, 2007b, Trading restrictions and stock prices, forthcoming Review of
      Financial Studies.

Greenwood, Robin, and Nathan Sosner, 2007, Trading patterns and excess comovement of stock
      returns, forthcoming Financial Analysts Journal.

Hong, Harrison, Jialin Yu, and Jiang Wang, 2007, Firms as buyers of last resort, Review of
      Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Lakonishok, Josef, and Baruch Lev, 1987, Stock splits and stock dividends: Why, who, and
      when, Journal of Finance 42, 913-932.




                                               29
Lakonishok, Josef, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer, 1992, The impact of institutional trading
      on stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 23-43.

Li, Wei, and Erik Lie, 2006, Dividend changes and catering incentives, Journal of Financial
      Economics 80, 293-308.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 2002, Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the
      table in IPOs?, Review of Financial Studies 15, 413-443.

Malkiel, Burton G., 1999, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, (Norton, New York, NY).

Merton, Robert C., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
      information, Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

Ohlson, James A., and Stephen H. Penman, 1985, Volatility increases subsequent to stock splits,
      Journal of Financial Economics 14, p. 251-266.

Odean, Terrence, 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review 89, 1279-
      1298.

Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2006, The stock market and investment: A test of
       catering theory, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Siegel, Jeremy, 1998, Stocks for the Long Run, (McGraw-Hill, New York).

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-
      421.

Thompson, Samuel B., 2006, "Simple Formulas for Standard Errors that Cluster by Both Firm
     and Time", working paper Harvard University




                                              30
Figure 1. Stock splits by Applied Materials, Inc. Applied Materials monthly share price (solid) is plotted against the low
price premium (dash – scale adjusted and inverted). Applied Materials went public in the fourth quarter of 1972, split its
stock for the first time in the second quarter of 1980 and eight more times through 2004. Diamonds indicate split dates and
mark the post-split price.

   $250



   $200



   $150



   $100



    $50



      $0
           1980

                   1982

                            1984

                                     1986

                                             1988

                                                      1990

                                                               1992

                                                                        1994

                                                                                1996

                                                                                         1998

                                                                                                  2000

                                                                                                           2002

                                                                                                                   2004




                                                              31
Figure 2. Share price breakpoints. In Panel A., all NYSE stocks with share codes of 10 or 11 are ranked each year by
share price at the end of December. The figure shows the 30th percentile and 70th percentile share price breakpoints. In Panel
B, all NYSE stocks with share codes of 10 or 11 are ranked each year by market capitalization at the end of December. The
figure shows the equal-weighted average share price for stocks with market capitalizations below the 30th percentile and
above the 70th percentile.

Panel A. Share price breakpoints for high-price (solid) and low-price (dash) stocks

   $60


   $50


   $40


   $30


   $20


   $10


    $0
         1962
         1963
         1964
         1965
         1966
         1967
         1968
         1969
         1970
         1971
         1972
         1973
         1974
         1975
         1976
         1977
         1978
         1979
         1980
         1981
         1982
         1983
         1984
         1985
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
Panel B. Average share prices for large (solid) and small-cap (dash) stocks

   $70


   $60


   $50


   $40


   $30


   $20


   $10


    $0
         1962
         1963
         1964
         1965
         1966
         1967
         1968
         1969
         1970
         1971
         1972
         1973
         1974
         1975
         1976
         1977
         1978
         1979
         1980
         1981
         1982
         1983
         1984
         1985
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005




                                                               32
Figure 3. The low price and small stock premia, and the split announcement premium. The low price premium is the
log difference in the value weighted average market-to-book ratios of low and high priced stocks. The small stock premium
is the log difference in the value weighted average market-to-book ratios of small and large stocks. The market-to-book ratio
is the ratio of the market value of the firm to its book value. Market value is equal to market equity at calendar year end
(item 24 times item 25) plus book debt (item 6 minus book equity). Book equity is defined as stockholders’ equity (generally
item 216, with exceptions as noted in the text) minus preferred stock (item 10) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credits
(item 35) and post retirement assets (item 330). All NYSE stocks with share codes of 10 or 11 are ranked each year by share
price and market capitalization at the end of December. Low (high) price stocks are stocks with share prices below the 30th
percentile (above the 70th percentile) by share price. Small (large) stocks are stocks with market capitalizations below the
30th percentile (above the 70th percentile) by capitalization. Panels A and B plot the value weighted average market-to-book
ratios of high and low priced stocks and large and small stocks. Panel C plots the low price and small stock premia. Panel D
plots the split announcement premium, defined as the abnormal return from the day before split announcement through ten
days after the effective date, scaled by the standard deviation of returns.

Panel A. Value weighted average market-to-book ratio for high price stocks (solid) and low price stocks (dash)

  3.50
  3.00
  2.50
  2.00
  1.50
  1.00
  0.50
  0.00
         1962
         1963
         1964
         1965
         1966
         1967
         1968
         1969
         1970
         1971
         1972
         1973
         1974
         1975
         1976
         1977
         1978
         1979
         1980
         1981
         1982
         1983
         1984
         1985
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
Panel B. Value weighted average market-to-book ratio of large stocks (solid) and small stocks (dash)

  3.00

  2.50
  2.00

  1.50
  1.00
  0.50
  0.00
         1962
         1963
         1964
         1965
         1966
         1967
         1968
         1969
         1970
         1971
         1972
         1973
         1974
         1975
         1976
         1977
         1978
         1979
         1980
         1981
         1982
         1983
         1984
         1985
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005
Panel C. The low price premium (solid) and small stock premium (dash)
 0.20

 0.00

 -0.20

 -0.40

 -0.60

 -0.80

 -1.00
         1962
         1963
         1964
         1965
         1966
         1967
         1968
         1969
         1970
         1971
         1972
         1973
         1974
         1975
         1976
         1977
         1978
         1979
         1980
         1981
         1982
         1983
         1984
         1985
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005




Panel D. The split announcement premium
  1.00

  0.80

  0.60

  0.40

  0.20

  0.00

 -0.20
         1962
         1963
         1964
         1965
         1966
         1967
         1968
         1969
         1970
         1971
         1972
         1973
         1974
         1975
         1976
         1977
         1978
         1979
         1980
         1981
         1982
         1983
         1984
         1985
         1986
         1987
         1988
         1989
         1990
         1991
         1992
         1993
         1994
         1995
         1996
         1997
         1998
         1999
         2000
         2001
         2002
         2003
         2004
         2005




                                                               33
Figure 4. The small stock premium and IPO prices.

The average IPO first day closing price (solid), plotted against the low-priced-stock premium (short dash – right axis, inverted)
and the small stock premium (long dash – right axis, inverted) in year t-1. The low-price-stock premium PCME is the difference
between the logs of the value-weighted market-to-book ratios for low and high priced firms. The small-stock premium PSMB is the
difference between the log of the value-weighted market-to-book ratios for small and large firms. Data on IPO prices is from Jay
Ritter.


                              $30                                                                                                                                                                                                1.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                              $25

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t-1
     Mean IPO Closing Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SMB
                              $20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         or -P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CME
                              $15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2

                              $10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0


                              $5                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.2
                                    1980
                                           1981
                                                  1982
                                                         1983
                                                                1984
                                                                       1985
                                                                              1986
                                                                                     1987
                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                   1989
                                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                                 1991
                                                                                                                        1992
                                                                                                                               1993
                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                             1995
                                                                                                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006




                                                                                                                               34
Figure 5. The low price premium and post split stock prices. The average post split price (solid – left axis) in year t is plotted
against the low price premium (dash – right axis, inverted) and small stock premium (long dash – right axis, inverted) in year t-1.
The average post split price is described in Table 1 and the low price premium and small stock premium are described in Table 2.


                         $60                                                                                           1.20


                                                                                                                       1.00
                         $50




                                                                                                                                  t-1
                                                                                                                       0.80




                                                                                                                               SMB
 Mean Post split price




                         $40




                                                                                                                                or -P
                                                                                                                       0.60
                         $30




                                                                                                                                 t-1
                                                                                                                       0.40




                                                                                                                               CME
                                                                                                                                -P
                         $20
                                                                                                                       0.20

                         $10
                                                                                                                       0.00


                         $0                                                                                            -0.20
                               1963
                               1964
                               1965
                               1966
                               1967
                               1968
                               1969
                               1970
                               1971
                               1972
                               1973
                               1974
                               1975
                               1976
                               1977
                               1978
                               1979
                               1980
                               1981
                               1982
                               1983
                               1984
                               1985
                               1986
                               1987
                               1988
                               1989
                               1990
                               1991
                               1992
                               1993
                               1994
                               1995
                               1996
                               1997
                               1998
                               1999
                               2000
                               2001
                               2002
                               2003
                               2004
                               2005
                               2006




                                                                35
Table 1. Stock splits and post split prices. The number of splits, the average pre split price, the average post split price, and the
average split ratio for splits, stock dividends, and reverse splits. Events with a CRSP distribution code of 5523 are divided into
three categories: Splits have a split ratio greater than 1.25-for-1; stock dividends have a split ratio between 1.01-for-1 and 1.25-
for-1; and, reverse splits have a split ratio less than 1-for-1. The pre split price is the closing price on the day prior to the split.
The post-split price is the pre split price times the reciprocal of the split ratio. The left most column lists the size of the full
sample of CRSP firms. The right most two columns show a summary measure of splitting activity m and the average offering
price and first-day close for IPOs. m is equal to the log of the ratio of the actual average stock price to the beginning of year stock
price grown at the stock return excluding dividends, expressed in percentage terms. We report the equal-weighted average m
across all listed stocks.

                             Splits                Stock Dividends              Reverse Splits                        IPO Prices
Year         All        N     Pre       Post       N     Pre     Post         N      Pre       Post     m%       FirstDay    Offering
1963       2,074       57    63.96     32.49       2 34.50 27.60              5     2.59 10.94          -4.00
1964       2,138       99    70.12     32.78      13 82.85 66.28             10     3.10       9.07     -3.62
1965       2,135      132    72.39     32.46      13 28.74 22.99              5     2.21 10.74          -4.56
1966       2,177      163    64.61     32.68       8 32.75 26.20              4     2.47 10.72          -4.77
1967       2,180      108    70.21     35.50      10 38.36 30.88              1 17.00 34.00             -3.48
1968       2,179      218    70.91     36.21      15 32.73 26.19              3     6.17 18.21          -4.99
1969       2,264      210    59.83     30.74       1 16.63 13.30              3     4.35 19.77          -4.60
1970       2,336       46    50.06     25.65       1 18.63 14.90               -        -         -     -0.99
1971       2,431       94    51.46     28.28       9 30.18 24.30              5     7.10 16.85          -2.77
1972       5,300      148    56.69     29.08       9 27.94 22.54              5     4.28 14.45          -1.81
1973       4,993      178    56.33     29.00      23 37.32 30.26             11     2.99       9.36     -3.21
1974       4,699       78    43.48     22.29      20 13.99 11.34              5     7.81 16.74          -2.09
1975       4,737      101    33.50     17.86      19 16.09 13.01              7     1.96       9.35     -2.95
1976       4,802      203    38.48     21.01      53 15.06 12.16             11     1.93       7.02     -4.67
1977       4,730      236    33.23     18.47      58 17.35 14.01              6     1.63       9.08     -4.48
1978       4,659      340    33.27     18.55      66 19.81 15.91              9     1.13       4.17     -5.30
1979       4,612      272    37.44     19.77      83 19.19 15.76              5     1.35 19.15          -5.45
1980       4,780      456    40.94     21.94      78 20.79 16.76              5     3.24       9.56     -7.43        15.47         12.96
1981       5,130      505    38.98     20.53      67 21.42 17.26             14     4.66 11.83          -8.69        12.48         11.74
1982       5,100      226    31.69     18.44      67 18.69 15.12             24     0.83       5.70     -5.88        12.53         11.11
1983       5,720      780    40.56     21.60      73 20.98 16.86             29     2.81       7.03     -8.54        13.08         11.88
1984       5,837      349    34.86     19.15      49 15.85 12.78             28     0.55       4.00     -5.80         9.37          9.16
1985       5,800      480    36.10     19.98      78 18.09 14.65             40     3.34       9.44     -6.03        11.42         10.80
1986       6,061      738    44.39     23.17      75 20.51 16.49             25     1.99       8.09     -7.88        11.87         11.15
1987       6,360      554    41.75     22.15      81 21.31 17.27             62     1.09       8.85     -3.85        11.76         11.11
1988       6,099      205    33.08     18.53      54 19.72 16.02             52     0.92       6.05     -2.43        11.55         10.94
1989       5,902      292    37.76     20.76      64 21.34 17.27             60     1.41       6.86     -1.71        12.38         11.51
1990       5,737      197    43.50     22.26      38 20.77 16.73             93     0.75       3.82     -0.51        12.48         11.23
1991       5,792      248    41.39     22.79      41 15.89 12.87             84     1.45       6.85     -1.50        13.53         12.08
1992       5,930      416    44.60     23.10      45 19.73 15.94            140     1.02       5.87     -0.43        13.08         11.76
1993       6,451      477    40.55     22.62      61 22.73 18.26            104     2.15       9.88     -1.96        13.95         12.26
1994       6,780      345    42.75     22.05      52 23.98 19.35             84     2.60       7.82     -1.07        12.10         11.01
1995       7,021      447    45.83     24.77      47 20.10 16.20             87     1.32       6.78     -2.01        15.28         12.49
1996       7,489      562    47.73     25.69      51 24.47 19.65             87     1.86       6.59     -2.39        14.68         12.39
1997       7,483      630    51.36     27.87      59 26.60 21.43             88     2.81       7.96     -2.81        13.88         12.05
1998       7,020      630    52.28     27.23      60 25.60 20.79            157     1.04       4.61     -2.43        15.63         12.61
1999       6,665      405    81.53     41.44      40 24.51 20.49            103     0.98       4.39     -1.97        27.43         14.80
2000       6,357      442    97.23     48.07      12 23.55 19.47             52     3.43 10.23          -1.35        25.68         14.82
2001       5,653      180    49.08     27.74      27 23.21 19.55            101     0.69       3.95      0.32        16.56         14.46
2002       5,232      186    48.24     26.96      23 21.69 17.65             94     1.04       7.41     -0.01        17.62         15.95
2003       4,917      193    45.40     25.69      32 26.25 21.73             68     1.02       5.16     -1.28        17.13         15.21
2004       4,856      262    52.20     27.57      27 26.20 21.48             42     2.88 12.00          -1.82        15.54         13.61
2005       4,775      260    56.03     30.22      33 24.49 20.00             50     1.85       7.82     -0.88        16.04         14.32
2006       4,714      206    57.22     29.82      32 23.48 19.98             57     2.51       9.22     -1.01        15.89         13.65




                                                                  36
Table 2. The low price and small stock premia. The low price premium PCME is the log difference in the average market-to-
book ratios of low and high priced stocks. The small stock premium PSMB is the log difference in the average market-to-book
ratios of small and large stocks. The market-to-book ratio is the ratio of the market value of the firm to its book value. Market
value is equal to market equity at calendar year end (item 24 times item 25) plus book debt (item 6 minus book equity). Book
equity is defined as stockholders’ equity (generally item 216, with exceptions as noted in the text) minus preferred stock (item
10) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credits (item 35) and post retirement assets (item 330). All NYSE stocks with share
codes of 10 or 11 are ranked each year by share price and market capitalization at the end of December. Low price i.e. cheap
stocks (high price i.e. expensive) are stocks with share prices below the 30th NYSE percentile (above the 70th percentile) by share
price. Small (large) stocks are stocks with market capitalizations below the 30th NYSE percentile (above the 70th percentile) by
capitalization. Each premium is presented with both equal weighted (EW) and value weighted (VW) averages.

                            Low Price Premium                                             Small Stock Premium
            Cheap MB          Expensive MB                PCME           Small Cap MB       Large Cap MB               PSMB
Year        VW      EW         VW        EW           VW        EW        VW       EW         VW        EW          VW         EW
 1962       0.99   1.17        1.72      1.95        -0.55     -0.51      0.98     1.17       1.62      2.01       -0.50      -0.54
 1963       1.06   1.22        1.88      2.13        -0.57     -0.56      1.03     1.23       1.77      2.17       -0.54      -0.57
 1964       1.08   1.29        1.96      2.09        -0.60     -0.48      1.09     1.31       1.87      2.18       -0.54      -0.51
 1965       1.18   1.46        2.02      2.40        -0.54     -0.50      1.22     1.52       1.93      2.39       -0.46      -0.45
 1966       1.04   1.23        1.77      2.31        -0.53     -0.63      1.07     1.33       1.65      2.18       -0.43      -0.49
 1967       1.25   1.79        2.11      3.06        -0.52     -0.54      1.39     1.97       1.83      2.51       -0.28      -0.24
 1968       1.53   2.14        1.98      2.94        -0.26     -0.32      1.62     2.29       1.81      2.45       -0.11      -0.07
 1969       1.10   1.39        1.97      2.87        -0.58     -0.73      1.19     1.55       1.64      2.36       -0.32      -0.42
 1970       1.01   1.18        1.76      2.36        -0.56     -0.69      1.05     1.25       1.53      2.07       -0.38      -0.50
 1971       1.02   1.28        1.97      2.88        -0.66     -0.81      1.13     1.42       1.64      2.49       -0.37      -0.56
 1972       1.04   1.26        2.07      3.05        -0.69     -0.88      1.12     1.42       1.79      2.73       -0.47      -0.65
 1973       0.84   0.91        1.58      2.17        -0.63     -0.87      0.86     0.96       1.48      2.15       -0.54      -0.81
 1974       0.75   0.75        1.14      1.32        -0.42     -0.57      0.75     0.78       1.08      1.38       -0.36      -0.57
 1975       0.82   0.86        1.28      1.49        -0.45     -0.55      0.82     0.88       1.22      1.52       -0.40      -0.55
 1976       0.92   0.98        1.31      1.48        -0.35     -0.41      0.90     1.01       1.26      1.47       -0.34      -0.38
 1977       0.90   1.01        1.15      1.36        -0.25     -0.30      0.92     1.04       1.11      1.26       -0.19      -0.19
 1978       0.89   1.02        1.15      1.37        -0.26     -0.30      0.93     1.06       1.08      1.21       -0.15      -0.13
 1979       0.93   1.31        1.18      1.59        -0.24     -0.19      0.98     1.33       1.11      1.31       -0.12       0.02
 1980       0.95   1.73        1.31      2.04        -0.32     -0.16      1.06     1.78       1.22      1.64       -0.14       0.08
 1981       1.00   1.45        1.11      1.55        -0.10     -0.07      1.01     1.46       1.05      1.33       -0.04       0.09
 1982       1.00   1.54        1.24      1.83        -0.22     -0.17      1.09     1.57       1.11      1.54       -0.02       0.02
 1983       1.21   1.82        1.22      1.63        -0.01      0.11      1.24     1.79       1.18      1.54        0.05       0.15
 1984       1.10   1.53        1.14      1.43        -0.04      0.07      1.12     1.51       1.11      1.42        0.01       0.06
 1985       1.14   1.73        1.26      1.68        -0.10      0.03      1.20     1.73       1.22      1.60       -0.02       0.08
 1986       1.17   1.70        1.30      1.82        -0.11     -0.07      1.18     1.69       1.28      1.75       -0.08      -0.03
 1987       1.13   1.47        1.27      1.68        -0.12     -0.13      1.07     1.46       1.26      1.74       -0.16      -0.18
 1988       1.16   1.58        1.25      1.66        -0.07     -0.05      1.13     1.59       1.25      1.66       -0.10      -0.04
 1989       1.20   1.65        1.41      1.92        -0.16     -0.15      1.16     1.67       1.39      1.90       -0.18      -0.13
 1990       1.00   1.31        1.36      1.94        -0.31     -0.39      1.01     1.38       1.31      1.78       -0.26      -0.25
 1991       1.11   1.63        1.59      2.64        -0.36     -0.48      1.19     1.79       1.47      2.33       -0.21      -0.26
 1992       1.17   1.83        1.63      2.44        -0.33     -0.29      1.31     1.93       1.54      2.23       -0.16      -0.14
 1993       1.29   2.04        1.63      2.55        -0.23     -0.22      1.45     2.11       1.60      2.26       -0.10      -0.07
 1994       1.24   1.77        1.61      2.41        -0.26     -0.31      1.32     1.84       1.56      2.02       -0.17      -0.09
 1995       1.32   1.98        1.86      3.08        -0.34     -0.44      1.41     2.08       1.75      2.52       -0.22      -0.19
 1996       1.37   2.01        1.97      2.94        -0.36     -0.38      1.46     2.09       1.85      2.52       -0.24      -0.19
 1997       1.40   2.01        2.26      3.03        -0.48     -0.41      1.53     2.09       2.09      2.73       -0.31      -0.27
 1998       1.16   1.69        2.62      3.66        -0.81     -0.77      1.23     1.79       2.41      3.17       -0.67      -0.57
 1999       1.12   2.06        3.03      5.08        -1.00     -0.90      1.23     2.23       2.77      4.22       -0.81      -0.64
 2000       1.08   1.57        2.35      3.87        -0.78     -0.90      1.03     1.62       2.16      3.31       -0.74      -0.71
 2001       1.24   1.77        2.18      2.85        -0.56     -0.48      1.19     1.82       1.88      2.59       -0.46      -0.35
 2002       1.15   1.52        1.94      2.28        -0.52     -0.41      1.09     1.55       1.63      2.08       -0.40      -0.29
 2003       1.44   2.37        1.97      2.54        -0.31     -0.07      1.42     2.39       1.78      2.36       -0.23       0.01
 2004       1.56   2.45        1.98      2.57        -0.24     -0.05      1.57     2.50       1.74      2.40       -0.10       0.04
 2005       1.48   2.30        1.95      2.50        -0.28     -0.08      1.55     2.35       1.77      2.47       -0.13      -0.05




                                                               37
Table 3. The split announcement premium. The split announcement premium A is the scaled abnormal return from the day
before split announcement through ten days after the effective date. The cumulative abnormal return CAR is equal to difference
between the stock return and the value weighted market return over this interval. The split announcement premium is equal to the
CAR scaled by the square root of the number of days in the window times the standard deviation of daily returns in the 100
trading days ending five days prior to the split announcement date. The t-statistic is from Campbell et al. (2001) and tests the
hypothesis that the average split announcement return is equal to zero.

                                                      Split Announcement Premium
                                        Year           CAR              A       [t-stat]
                                        1962           0.24         -0.09       [-0.66]
                                        1963           1.92          0.13        [0.99]
                                        1964           3.45          0.37        [4.01]
                                        1965           9.10          0.59        [6.99]
                                        1966           6.70          0.44        [4.98]
                                        1967           9.84          0.69        [8.28]
                                        1968           9.67          0.65        [9.22]
                                        1969           4.43          0.29        [3.68]
                                        1970           2.47          0.18        [1.23]
                                        1971           8.38          0.55        [5.77]
                                        1972           4.29          0.30        [3.39]
                                        1973           6.75          0.44        [5.46]
                                        1974           7.80          0.39        [3.27]
                                        1975          11.50          0.71        [7.50]
                                        1976           8.07          0.65      [10.14]
                                        1977           9.93          0.88      [14.48]
                                        1978           9.83          0.72      [14.11]
                                        1979          10.79          0.80      [13.90]
                                        1980          11.30          0.69      [16.05]
                                        1981           7.87          0.61      [13.60]
                                        1982          11.94          0.82      [14.76]
                                        1983           9.47          0.64      [17.90]
                                        1984           5.43          0.54      [10.06]
                                        1985           9.90          0.83      [19.03]
                                        1986           8.91          0.64      [17.52]
                                        1987           6.48          0.47      [11.20]
                                        1988           8.84          0.37        [5.87]
                                        1989           7.42          0.57      [10.75]
                                        1990           7.23          0.57        [8.11]
                                        1991          11.23          0.67      [11.38]
                                        1992          11.80          0.72      [15.25]
                                        1993           9.50          0.56      [12.74]
                                        1994           7.31          0.35        [6.51]
                                        1995          10.78          0.65      [13.99]
                                        1996          10.71          0.55      [12.66]
                                        1997           9.03          0.64      [14.28]
                                        1998           5.06          0.23        [4.86]
                                        1999          17.70          0.45        [9.20]
                                        2000          12.08          0.46        [8.73]
                                        2001           8.54          0.51        [6.85]
                                        2002           9.59          0.86      [12.16]
                                        2003           7.26          0.45        [6.89]
                                        2004           8.31          0.65      [10.67]
                                        2005           6.06          0.54        [9.06]


                                                              38
Table 4. The low price and small stock premia and splitting activity. Regressions of measures of splitting activity on the low price and small stock premia.
                       st = a + bPt CME
                                    −1  + cPt −SMB
                                                1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                                EW        EW
                                                                             + ut          and     mt = a + bPt CME
                                                                                                                −1  + cPt −SMB
                                                                                                                            1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                                                                                                            EW        EW
                                                                                                                                                         + ut
where s is the number of splits in year t, expressed as a percentage of the number of firms, shown in Table 1, m is a summary measure of splitting activity in year t equal to the log
of the ratio of the actual average stock price to the t-1 stock price grown at the stock return excluding dividends, PCME and PSMB are the low price and small stock premia shown in
Table 2, A is the split announcement premium shown in Table 3. Panel A shows univariate regressions for each of the three premia. Panel B controls for the log equal weighted
average stock price pEW in year t-1 and the equal weighted return r excluding distributions at time t. We perform separate univariate regressions in Panel A for value and equal
weighted versions of the high price and large stock premia. Each regression has 44 observations. All right-hand-side variables have been standardized to unit variance. T-statistics
use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of up to three lags.


                                    Low Price Premium PCME                                 Small Stock Premium PSMB                              Split Announcement Premium A
                               Split % s             Splitting Activity m              Split % s              Splitting Activity m              Split % s           Splitting Activity m
                                                2                           2                           2                            2                         2
Weighting                  b        [t]     R          b       [t]      R         c        [t]         R        c       [t]      R         d         [t]     R        d       [t]      R2
Panel A. Univariate Regressions
Value Weighted          0.94     [2.3]     0.11     -0.85   [-2.1]    0.14      1.33     [3.0]       0.21   -0.93    [-2.1]    0.16
Equal Weighted          1.15     [3.1]     0.16     -0.86   [-2.0]    0.14      1.56     [4.7]       0.29   -0.88    [-1.8]    0.15      1.62     [3.4]     0.31   -0.79   [-1.6]    0.12
Panel B. Multivariate Regressions
Value Weighted          1.33     [2.8]     0.24     -1.00   [-2.4]    0.19      1.53     [3.0]       0.32   -0.99    [-2.2]    0.20
Equal Weighted          1.32     [3.0]     0.25     -0.90   [-1.8]    0.17      1.63     [4.3]       0.37   -0.89    [-1.7]    0.17      1.82     [4.2]     0.43   -0.82   [-1.7]    0.14




                                                                                            39
Table 5. The low price and small stock premia and IPO and post-split stock prices. Regressions of price levels on the low price and small stock premia.
                      ptIPO = a + bPt CME
                                      −1  + cPt −SMB
                                                  1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                                  EW        EW
                                                                               + ut        and   pt = a + bPt CME
                                                                                                              −1  + cPt −SMB
                                                                                                                          1 + dAt −1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                                                                                                          EW        EW
                                                                                                                                                       + ut
where pIPO is the log of the average IPO price in year t, p is the log of the average post-split stock price in year t, PCME and PSMB are the low price and small stock premia shown in
Table 2, A is the split announcement premium shown in Table 3. Panel A shows univariate regressions for each of the three premia. Panel B controls for the log equal weighted
average stock price pEW in year t-1 and the equal weighted return r excluding distributions at time t. We perform separate univariate regressions in Panel A for value and equal
weighted versions of the high price and large stock premia. Each pIPO regression has 27 observations, and each p regression has 44 observations. All right-hand-side variables have
been standardized to unit variance. T-statistics use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of up to three lags.


                                    Low Price Premium PCME                                Small Stock Premium PSMB                            Split Announcement Premium A
                           IPO Price pIPO              Post Split Price p          IPO Price pIPO            Post Split Price p          IPO Price pIPO            Post Split Price p
                                                 2                          2                          2                          2                          2
Weighting                  b         [t]     R          b       [t]         R      c       [t]       R        c       [t]         R      d       [t]       R        d       [t]         R2
Panel A. Univariate Regressions
Value Weighted         -0.19    [-10.2]     0.78     -0.17   [-6.5]    0.52     -0.18   [-7.0]      0.71   -0.15   [-5.0]    0.41
Equal Weighted         -0.18      [-4.9]    0.59     -0.12   [-2.8]    0.28     -0.20   [-4.6]      0.54   -0.11   [-2.1]    0.21     -0.12   [-1.4]      0.15   -0.10   [-3.5]    0.18
Panel B. Multivariate Regressions
Value Weighted         -0.17      [-8.6]    0.83     -0.12   [-4.0]    0.80     -0.16   [-8.0]      0.84   -0.12   [-4.5]    0.81
Equal Weighted         -0.16      [-6.8]    0.76     -0.09   [-2.8]    0.72     -0.18   [-6.6]      0.78   -0.09   [-3.1]    0.72     -0.14   [-2.2]      0.51   -0.07   [-2.6]    0.64




                                                                                          40
Table 6. The low price and small stock premia and post-split stock prices: Robustness checks. Regressions of price levels
on the low price and small stock premia.
                                       pt = a + bPt CME
                                                    −1  + cPt −SMB
                                                                1 + ept −1 + frt
                                                                       EW        EW
                                                                                    + ut
where p is the log of the average post-split stock price in year t, PCME and PSMB are the low price and small stock premia shown in
Table 2. All regressions control for the log equal weighted average stock price pEW in year t-1 and the equal weighted return r
excluding distributions at time t. All right-hand-side variables are standardized to have unit variance. T-statistics use standard
errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of up to three lags.


                                                   Low Price Premium PCME                      Small Stock Premium PSMB
Specification                           N             b             [t]           R2               c            [t]           R2
Base Case                         44              -0.12        [-4.00]           0.80         -0.12        [-4.52]           0.81
First Half                        22              -0.13        [-6.26]           0.87         -0.13        [-5.95]           0.87
Second Half                       22              -0.12        [-6.46]           0.92         -0.11        [-7.45]           0.93
Time Trend Control                44              -0.12        [-6.36]           0.86         -0.12        [-7.55]           0.88
Differences                       43              -0.12        [-2.08]           0.30         -0.10        [-1.96]           0.20
Return-Based CME or SMB           44              -0.10        [-3.82]           0.69         -0.12        [-3.90]           0.74
IPO Offer Price                   27              -0.08        [-5.01]           0.72         -0.08        [-5.55]           0.75
Large Firms                       44              -0.10        [-4.11]           0.59         -0.09        [-4.25]           0.58
Small Firms                       44               0.01         [0.34]           0.70          0.01         [0.23]           0.70
M/BHigh                           44               0.15         [6.81]           0.88          0.21         [8.44]           0.90
M/BLow                                            -0.04        [-1.92]                        -0.06        [-2.96]




                                                               41
Table 7. The low price and small stock premia and splitting activity: Firm level panel regressions. Regressions of measures of splitting activity on the high price and large
stock premia.

                                          Pr ( si ,t = 1) = a + bPt CME
                                                                    −1  + epi ,t −1 + fri ,t + gNYSEDi ,t + hpiIndustry
                                                                                                                ,t −1   + jpiLastSplit
                                                                                                                             ,t −1     + ui ,t    and

                                    mi ,t = pi ,t − pi ,t −1 − ri ,t = a + bPt CME
                                                                               −1  + epi ,t −1 + fri ,t + gNYSEDi ,t + jpiIndustry
                                                                                                                           ,t −1   + hpiLastSplit
                                                                                                                                        ,t −1     + ui ,t
where s is an indicator variable equal to one if firm i splits in year t, m is a summary measure of splitting activity in year t equal to the log of the ratio of the stock price p for firm i
at year end t to the stock price p for firm i at year end t-1 grown at the stock return r for firm i in year t excluding dividends, and PCME is the low price premium shown in Table 2.
Panel A shows results for s, and Panel B shows results for m. Additional control variables include the NYSE market capitalization decile NYSED for firm i, the log average price
pIndustry in the matched Fama and French (1997) industry, and the log of the post split price pLastSplit from the most recent split for firm i. T- and z-statistics use standard errors that
are clustered by year. The coefficients and associated z-statistics shown for the probit regressions denote the marginal effects.


                                PCME                      p                      r                   NYSED                pIndustry               pLastSplit
Specification                   b         [t]         e            [t]       f            [t]        g        [t]         h              [t]       j           [t]      R2                N
Panel A. (Split = 1) = s
Base Case                  0.50        [3.03]     3.62          [9.57]   3.99        [13.63]     -0.38   [-8.72]                                                      0.24         211,977
Industry Control           0.45        [2.99]     3.59        [10.08]    3.81        [13.43]     -0.34   [-9.39]      -0.93      [-6.08]                              0.24         211,977
Last Split Control         0.77        [3.12]     0.76        [10.75]    7.48        [16.25]     -0.59   [-9.24]                               -2.92      [-8.44]     0.24           89,989
Panel B. Splitting Activity m
Base Case                  -0.79    [-1.89]       -6.92       [-17.75]   -7.34       [-11.25]    0.95    [13.80]                                                      0.12         211,977
Industry Control           -0.73    [-1.81]       -6.99       [-17.77]   -7.35       [-11.29]    0.89    [12.16]       1.27           [4.80]                          0.12         211,977
Last Split Control         -0.48    [-1.06]       -8.80       [-19.10]   -9.36       [-11.16]    0.89    [11.08]                               2.89        [9.37]     0.13           89,989




                                                                                                42
Table 8. The low price and small stock premia and IPO and post-split prices: Firm level event regressions. Regressions of the IPO and post-split prices on firm-level
determinants and the low price and small stock premia.
                                                                piIPO
                                                                   ,t = a + bPt CME
                                                                                −1  + eNYSEDi ,t + fpiIndustry
                                                                                                       ,t −1   + ui ,t       and

                                                     pi ,t = a + bPt CME
                                                                     −1  + cpiLastSplit
                                                                              ,t −1     + dri ,LastSplit
                                                                                               t         + eNYSEDi ,t + fpiIndustry
                                                                                                                            ,t −1   + ui ,t
where pIPO is the log first day closing price for newly listed firms, p is the log month-end price for stocks that split in month t, and PCME is the low price premium shown in Table 2.
Panel A shows results for pIPO and Panel B shows results for p. Additional control variables include the NYSE market capitalization decile NYSED for firm i, the average price
pIndustry in the matched Fama and French (1997) industry, the log of the split price pLastSplit from the most recent split for firm i, and the log of the ex-dividend return rLastSplit since
the last split. For firms that have not split before, pLastSplit is the log month-end price following the IPO, and rLastSplit is the log return since the IPO. T-statistics use standard errors
that are clustered by year.
                                   PCME                        pLastSplit                 rLastSplit                 NYSED                       pIndustry
Specification                     b            [t]              c               [t]        d               [t]        e            [t]             f            [t]         R2             N
                      IPO
Panel A. IPO Price p
Base Case                     -0.04       [-1.92]                                                                  0.19      [27.71]                                      0.50         6,719
Industry Control              -0.03       [-1.46]                                                                  0.19      [26.62]          0.11           [5.93]       0.51         6,719
Panel B. Post Split Price p
Base Case                     -0.05       [-7.61]           0.54            [17.56]    0.51            [21.56]     0.05      [13.88]                                      0.75        13,308
Industry Control              -0.04       [-8.33]           0.52            [17.18]    0.49            [21.36]     0.05      [14.32]          0.09           [5.73]       0.75        13,308




                                                                                               43
Table 9. Splitting activity, post-split prices and the future returns on high price and large stocks. Regressions of future excess returns of low price stocks over high price
stocks, or of small stocks over large stocks, on splitting activity and post-split price levels, controlling for overall price levels.
                                                         Rt +1 = a + bst + cptEW
                                                                              −1 + ut     and     Rt +1 = a + bpt + cptEW
                                                                                                                       −1 + ut
where s is the number of splits in year t, expressed as a percentage of the number of firms, shown in Table 1, , p is the log of the average post-split stock price in year t, and pEW is
the log equal weighted average stock price in year t-1. T-statistics in the second stage regression use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation up to
three years of lags.

                                                                  Split % s                                                               Post Split Price p
                                               Rt+1 EW                                Rt+1 VW                              Rt+1 EW                                 Rt+1 VW
                                                                    2                                      2                                    2
                              N            b          [t]          R             b          [t]           R           b           [t]         R                b        [t]         R2
Panel A: Relative returns of low-price stocks over high-price stocks
RCheapt+1 - RExpt+1          43        -2.62      [-3.53]        0.11         -1.96    [-2.43]          0.09       0.40       [2.62]         0.08        0.28        [2.84]       0.06
RCheapt+2 - RExpt+2          42        -4.70      [-2.92]        0.11         -3.52    [-1.98]          0.10       0.60       [2.27]         0.06        0.43        [2.22]       0.05
RCheapt+3 - RExpt+3          41        -8.27      [-3.24]        0.20         -6.49    [-2.35]          0.17       1.02       [2.58]         0.10        0.80        [2.70]       0.09
Panel B: Relative returns of small stocks over large stocks
RSmallt+1 - RLarget+1        43        -2.39      [-3.79]        0.09         -2.18    [-3.35]          0.10       0.30       [1.75]         0.05        0.26        [1.84]       0.05
RSmallt+2 - RLarget+2        42        -4.42      [-2.96]        0.10         -3.98    [-2.46]          0.10       0.47       [1.87]         0.04        0.40        [1.80]       0.03
RSmallt+3 - RLarget+3        41        -7.94      [-3.00]        0.18         -7.21    [-2.62]          0.18       0.86       [2.37]         0.07        0.76        [2.31]       0.07




                                                                                          44
