                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE CYCLICAL BEHAVIOR OF INDUSTRIAL
               LABOR MARKETS: A COMPARISON OF THE
                    PRE-WAR AND POST-WAR ERAS



                         Ben S. Bernanke

                        James L. Powell



                      Working Paper No. 1376




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June l98




Ben S. Bernanke is Associate Professor of Economics at the Stanford
Graduate School of Business and a Research Associate of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. James L. Powell is Assistant
Professor of Economics at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. We thank Frank Brechling, Ken Rogoff, Larry Summers,
and our discussants for useful comments. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Buru of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1376
                                               June 1984



             The Cyclical Behavior of Industrial Labor Markets:

                 A Comparison of the Pre—War and Post-War Eras




                                    ABSTRACT



      This paper studies the cyclical behavior of a number of industrial

labor markets of the pre—war (1923—1939) and post—war (1954—1982) eras. rn

the spirit of Burns and Mitchell we do not test a specific structural model

of the labor market but instead concentrate on describing the qualitative

features of the (monthly, industry—level) data.

     The two principal questions we ask are: First, how is labor input (as

measured by the number of workers, the hours of work, and the intensity of

utilization) varied over the cycle? Second, what is the cyclical behavior

of labor compensation (as measured by real wages, product wages, and real

weekly earnings)? we study these questions in both the frequency domain and

the time domain.

     Many of our findings simply reinforce, or perhaps refine, existing

perceptions of cyclical labor market behavior. However, we do find some

interesting differences between the pre—war and the post—war periods in the

relative use of layoffs and short hours in downturns, and in the cyclical

behavior of the real wage.



Ben S. Bernanke                                 James L. powell
Stanford Graduate School of Business            Department of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305                               M.I.T.
                                                 Cambridge, MA 02139

(415) 497—2763                                    (617) 253—1526
              The Cyclical Behavior of Industrial Labor Markets:

                A Comparison of the Pre—War and Post—War Eras



                     Ben S. Bernanke and James   L.   Powell




I. Introduction

     The purpose of this paper is to provide a comparison of the cyclical

behavior of a number of industrial labor markets of the pre—war (1923—1939)

and post—war (1954—1982) eras. The methodology of this study follows that

of the traditional Burns and Mitchell (1946) business cycle analysis, in at

least two ways: First, the data employed are relatively disaggregated (we

use monthly data at the two- or three-digit industry level). Second, we

have not formulated or tested a specific structural model of labor markets

during the cycle but instead concentrate on measuring qualitative features

of the data. As did Burns and Mitchell, we see descriptive analysis of the

data as a useful prelude to theorizing about business cycles. Thus,

although the research reported in this paper permits no direct structural

inferences, it should be useful in restricting the class of structural

models or hypotheses which may subsequently be considered.

     The principal questions of interest studied in this paper are also two

in number:

     First, what are the means by which labor input is varied over the

business cycle? We consider the intensity of utilization (as measured by

gross labor productivity) ,   hours of work per week, and the number of
                                          2


workers employed. Both the    timing and relative magnitudes of the changes in

these quantities over the cycle are examined.

        Second, what are the relationships over the cycle of output and labor

input    to measures of labor compensation? We look at the cyclical behavior
of product wages and real weekly earnings, as well as of real wages.
        As might be expected, many of our findings are not novel; rather, they

tend to support and perhaps refine existing perceptions of cyclical labor

market behavior. However, we do reveal some interesting differences between

the pre—war and the post-war periods in the relative use of layoffs and

short hours in downturns, and in cyclical movements of the real wage.

Another finding is that labor productivity may behave in an anomalous manner

in more severe recessions. Finally, a number of the familiar regularities

are documented in a previously little—used data set, over an unusually long

sample period, and by means of some alternative methodologies.

        The paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews previous

empirical work on the cyclical behavior of labor market variables. Sections

III and IV introduce and describe the data set used in the present paper.

The behavior of key variables over the business cycle is analyzed by

frequency domain methods in Section V and by a time domain approach in

Section VI. Section VII focuses on labor market phenomena in four

particularly severe recessions. Results are summarized and conclusions

drawn in Section VIII.



II. previous Work: Some Regularities and Some Puzzles

        There has been a great deal of empirical work that relates, sometimes

directly and sometimes tangentially, to the cyclical behavior of labor

markets. Without attempting to make an exhaustive survey, this section of
                                         3



the paper will try to summarize the major empirical findings of the

literature. We will also include some brief discussion of how various

authors have interpreted these findings. The reader is warned, however,

that because the focus of the present paper is description rather than

structural analysis, the results we will present later will do little to

resolve existing disputes about interpretation.

     The discussion of this section will be organized around the two

questions of interest raised in the Introduction, i.e., the means by which

labor input is varied over the cycle and the cyclical relationship of labor

input and labor compensation. It might be said that by concentrating on

these two questions, rather than on such phenomena as the frequency and

duration of unemployment spells, cyclical variations in participation rates,

etc., we are emphasizing the "demand side" of the labor market at the

expense of the "supply side." This imbalance is unfortunate but is dictated

by the nature of the available pre—war data.

     1 .   The cyclical pattern of labor utilization. The earliest empirical

work on the variation of labor input over the cycle was done in the context

of NBER business cycle research. Among the hundreds of data series whose

business cycle patterns were painstakingly analyzed by Wesley Mitchell, and

later by Mitchell and Arthur Burns, were a number of labor market variables.

For example, Mitchell (1951) documented the high conformity of employment

and weekly hours with output. (However, Mitchell was perhaps more

interested in labor cost measures; see below.)

     An early NEER finding was the strong tendency of weekly hours (that is,

the length of the average work—week) to lead output and employment over the

cycle (Moore (1955), Bry (1959)). Weekly hours subsequently became a
                                         4



component of the Bureau's well—known index of leading indicators. (For a

relatively recent discussion and updating of this index, see Zarnowitz and

Boschan (1975).) Other labor market variables identified as leading the

cycle by the NBER included accession and layoff rates and initial claims for

unemployment insurance (Shiskin (1961)). Employment and unemployment were

found to be coincident with the cycle.

     Arguably the most important contribution of the NEER research program

in this area was the classic paper by Hultgren (1960). With the purpose of

investigating an hypothesis of Mitchell about labor cost, Hultgren collected

monthly data on output, aggregate hours worked, and payrolls for 23

industries. (The sample period was 1932-58.) With these and other data,

Hultgren discovered that output per worker—hour is procyclical (or,

equivalently, that employment and hours worked vary relatively less over the

cycle than does output.)

     The finding of procyclical labor productivity, or "short—run increasing

returns to labor" (SRIRL), spawned a voluminous literature. Important early

contributions were made by Kuh (1960, 1965), Okun (1962), Eckstein and

Wilson (1964), and Brechling (1965). (Okun's famous "law" is, of course,

SRIRL applied to the aggregate economy.) These and numerous other studies

(including, notably, Ball and St. Cyr (1966), Masters (1967), Brechling and

O'Brien (1967), and Ireland and Smyth (1967)) found the SRIRL phenomenon to

be ubiquitous: It occurs at both high and low levels of output aggregation,

for both production and non-production workers, and in virtually all

industrial countries.

     Because of the neoclassical presumption of diminishing marginal returns

to factors of production, SRIRL was perceived originally (and, to some

extent, still is) as a deep puzzle. One favored explanation was that,
                                         5



 because of the existence of specific human capital, firms 'hoard" labor

 during downturns (Oi (1962), Solow (1968), Fair (1969)); the hoarded labor

 is utilized more fully as demand recovers, giving the illusion of increasing

 returns. For empirical purposes, the labor hoarding model has become

closely identified with a model in which increasing marginal costs of

adjusting the labor stock induce the firm to move toward the desired level

of employment only gradually (Brechling (1965), Coen and Hickman (1970));

conceptually, however, the two models are not quite the same. Another

popular explanation of SRIRL is that it is a reflection of unobserved (by

the econometrician) variations in capital utilization rates that are

associated with changes in labor input (Ireland and Smyth (1967), Lucas

(1970), Solow (1973), Nadiri and Rosen (1973), and Tatom (1980)).

     What is probably the most general current view is that SRIPL is the

outcome of a complex dynamic optimization problem solved by the firm, in

which labor is only one of a number of inputs, each with a possibly

different degree of quasi—fixity. For example, Nadiri and Rosen (1973)

emphasized that the rate at which employment will be varied depends not only

on the costs of adjusting labor stocks but also the costs of adjusting all

other inputs (including inventories and rates of utilization); F'torrison and

Berndt (1981) showed that these interactions could result in the SRIRL

phenomenon even if labor itself were a perfectly variable factor.

     Overall, the research which followed Hultgren's original paper has made

two valuable contributions to knowledge: First, from Brechling (1965) to

Nadiri and Rosen (1973) to Sims (1974), there has been generated a wealth of

empirical material on the sluggish short-run response of employment to

output change, and on the relationship over the cycle of employment to hours

worked, inventories, and other factors of production. Second, the general
                                           6


dynamic optimization model of firm input utilization developed in this
literature has proved to be a most useful and flexible research tool. (For

example, it has permitted the incorporation of rational expectations; see

Sargent (1978) or Pindyck and Rotemberg (1982).)

        We may summarize the received findings on the cyclical behavior of

labor inputs, as follows: Employment and weekly hours are procyclical.

Productivity is also procyclical, i.e., employment and worker—hours vary

less than output over the cycle. Finally, weekly hours lead output, while

employment coincides with or possibly lags output over the cycle.

        2. Labor compensation over the cycle. While the qualitative behavior

of labor inputs over the business cycle seems relatively well established,

there    is very little agreement about how to characterize the cyclical
movements of labor compensation, especially of   real   wages. The debate about
real   wages began when Keynes (1936) conjectured that, again because of

diminishing marginal returns, labor's marginal productivity and hence the


real wage should be countercyclical.2 Empirical studies by Dunlop (1938)

and Tarshis (1939) purported to show that this conjecture was false; but

these studies were in turn disputed (see Bodkin (1969) for references.) The

debate prompted Keynes (1939) to aver that countercyclical real wages were

in fact not an essential implication of his theory.

       Postwar research has done little to resolve the question of the

cyclical behavior of real wages. One can find papers supporting

procyclicality (Bodkin (1969), Stocknan (1983)), countercyclicality (Neftci

(1978), Sarqent (1978), Otani (1978), Chirinko (1981)), and acyclicality

(Geary and Kennan (1982)). Altonji and Ashenfelter (1980) have argued that

the best statistical model of the real wage is the random walk. It would
                                         7



 not be of much help for us to present a detailed comparison of these papers

 here. Instead, we simply list some of the major methodological issues that

have arisen in this literature:

      First, researchers have typically found that their results are

sensitive to whether the nominal wage is deflated by an index of output

prices, such as the Wpi or ppi, or by a cost-of-living index, such as the

CPI. (See Ruggles (1940), Bodkin (1969), or Geary and Kennan (1982).) This

does not seem unreasonable, since the wage divided by the output price

(henceforth, the "product wage") corresponds conceptually to the "demand

price" of labor, while the wage deflated by the cost of living (henceforth,

the "real wage") corresponds to the "supply price"; it is not difficult to

think of conditions under which the short-run behaviors of these two

variables might differ. Unfortunately, however, the difference in behavior

does not seem to vary systematically across studies.

     Second, there is some dispute over whether the contemporaneous

correlation of the real wage and output (or employment) is an interesting

measure of the real wage's cyclical pattern. Neftci (1978) and Sagent

(1978) have argued that, because of the complex dynamics of the wage—

employment relationship, it is necessary to look at correlations at many

leads and lags.   (See also Clark and Freeman (1980).)

     Finally, it has been found that empirical results concerning the short—

run behavior of wages may be particularly sensitive to aggregation biases,

both when the aggregation is over individuals (Stockmnan (1983)) and when it

is over industries (Chirinko (1981)).

    The apparently very weak relationship of real wages and the business

cycle has posed a problem for some prominent theories of cyclical

fluctuations (or at least for simple versions of those theories; see, for
                                              8


example,      Altonji and Ashenfelter (1980) and Ashenfelter and Card (1982)).

However, attempts to reconcile the low correlation of wages and the cycle

with theories of short-run employment fluctuations have also led to a number

of interesting lines of research: These include disequilibrium modelling of

the cycle (Solow and stiglitz (1968), Barro and Grossman (1971));

contracting     approaches that divorce wage payments and short-run labor
allocations (see Hall (1980)       for a discussion); Lucas's (1970)    theory of
capacity and overtime; and       others.

       Real   and product wages are not the   only measures of labor   compensation
whose cyclical behavior have been studied, although they have absorbed a

large part of the research effort. Mitchell theorized in very early work

that unit labor costs might play an important role in the business cycle;

Hultgren's (1960, 1965) studies found that, in reasonably close

correspondence to Mitchell's prediction, labor costs lag the cycle. Various

other compensation measures were studied by the NBER analysts: nominal

labor    income,    for example, was reported by Shiskin (1961) to be coincident

with   the cycle.
       Another     variable that has commanded some attention is the nominal wage.

In an NBER occasional paper, Creamer (1950) studied monthly wage rates in a

number of industries for the 1919-31 period. (His aggregate wage rate

series extended to 1935.) Creamer's most important conclusion was that

nominal wage rates lagged business activity by nine months or more, a

finding    that    was viewed by some subsequent authors as supporting the

"stickiness" of wages. (Creamer also showed that the cyclical behaviors of

an   index of   wage rates and of average hourly earnings were similar, a very

useful   result     given the paucity of direct information on wage rates.)

"Stickiness" was also a major issue for       later students of the nominal wage:
                                         9



 For example, Sachs (1980) has argued that wages became relatively more rigid

 after World War II, while Gordon (1982) has found u.s. postwar wages to be

 stickier than those of the U.K. and Japan. Gordon's result is the opposite

 of earlier characterizations by Sachs (1979) and others.

      Overall, the question of how to characterize the cyclical behavior of

 labor compensation remains rather unsettled. This is unfortunate, given the

 central role of wages in much of macroeconomic theory.



 III. The Data

      The present paper reassesses the qualitative empirical findings

described in the last section, with particular attention paid to possible

differences between the pre—war and post-war eras. This section introduces

our data set and compares it briefly with what has been employed by others.

     The data we use are monthly, roughly at the level of the "industry",

and cover the time periods 1923—1939 and 1954—1982. We felt that the high—

frequency data were necessary if short—run relationships were to be

distinguished; the industry—level data were used both to reduce aggregation

bias and to avoid reliance on the aggregate production indices, which are

poorly constructed for our purpose (see below). In contrast to our

approach, few studies since Hultgren have used monthly, industry—level data

(Fair (1969) is an important exception). Also, little recent-work has used

pre—war data; the exceptions have typically looked at only annual, highly

aqgrega ted numbers.

     There were many variables that we could have chosen to study.

Considerations of data availability and economic relevance led to the

following short list (with mnemonic abbreviations):
                                          10


          1 •   IP     Industry output or production
          2.    EMP    Employment (number of production workers)
          3.    HRS    Hours of work per week (per    production worker)
          4.    PROD   Gross labor productivity = IP/(EMPxHRS)

          5. WR        Average hourly earnings (nominal) divided by a cost-

                       of—living index; the "real wage."

          6. WP        Average hourly earnings divided by the industry

                       wholesale output price; the "product wage"

          7.    EARN   Real weekly earnings per   production   worker = HRSxWR.

In the analysis below, we concentrate not on the levels of the above

variables but on the log—differences (roughly, the monthly growth rates).

From now on, therefore, the mnemonic names just defined should be understood

to denote log—differences.

     The above variables were collected for eight pre-war manufacturing,

eight post—war manufacturing, and three post—war non—manufacturing

industries. These industries are listed in Table 1 •      Note that the eight

                             --Table 1 about here-—



pre—war and post—war manufacturing industries are approximately a "matched

set." This was done to facilitate comparison of the two eras. We did not

have comparable pre—war data for the three non—manufacturing industries.

However, we included these industries because they represent major sectors

of the economy (mining, utilities, and construction), and because it seemed

to us that non—manufacturing industries have been slighted somewhat

(relative to manufacturinq industries) by students of the business cycle.

     Some explanation should be given for the rather miscellaneous character

of the manufacturing industries chosen. For the pre—war period, the eight
                                       11



industries included represent the largest class for which complete and

reasonably consistent data were available. In particular, our desire to

have series on hours of work restricted us to industries regularly surveyed,

beginning in the early 1920's, by the National Industrial Conference Board.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics, which surveyed many more industries, did not

collect hours data before 1932. Also, we included only industries whose

output indices were based on direct measures of physical output (e.g.,

number of automobiles) rather than on scaled—up input measures (e.g.,

manhours). A wider selection of industries is available for the post—war,

of course, but because of the burden of collecting and entering the data,

only those manufacturing industries "matching" the available pre—war

industries were used. In terms of employment or value added, the industries

here studied made up about one—fifth of total manufacturing in the pre—war

era and about one—sixth of total manufacturing after the war.

     A nice fringe benefit of using the Conference Board data rather than

that from the BLS is that it gives us a pre—war data set that has not been

previously analyzed, except in a partial and desultory way by some earlier

NBER studies. In particular, it is quite different from the data set used

by Hultgren (1960).

     A potential problem with studying only manufacturing industries which

have more—or—less continuous identities since the 1920's is that it biases

the sample toward older, often declining industries, at the expense of new

and growing fields. However, for the purpose of studying cyclical (as

opposed to trend) behavior of labor market variables, this sample bias is

probably not important. In particular, our informal comparisons of the
                                           12


declining manufacturing industries with the expanding manufacturing and non—

manufacturing industries did not reveal obvious differences in cyclical

behavior.

       For the purposes of comparison with the industry-level findings, we

also analyzed pre—war and post—war monthly data for aggregate manufacturing.

Although these data obviously have broader coverage than the industry data,

we have less confidence in the results using aggregates, for three reasons:

(1) Aggregation across industries introduces well—known cyclical biases.

(2) The aggregate production indices are heavily contaminated with input-

based measures of output. (3) The pre—war output, price, and labor input

series are not perfectly mutually consistent. (See the data appendix for an

explanation, and for a more detailed discussion of all the data and their

sources.)



IV.   Some Basic Statistics

      Most of the analysis discussed below follows the application of a

deseasonalization process and the removal of means from the log—differenced

series. As a preliminary step, this section looks at some features of the

raw log—differences.

      Tables 2 and 3 present the means of the variables for each industry and

for the pre—war and post—war periods separately. The means are multiplied

by 100 and thus can be interpreted approximately as percentage rates of

growth per month.



                              --Table 2 about here—-




      Considering   first the productivity column in Table 2, we note that
average pre—war rates of productivity growth compared well to those of the
                                       13



post—war. Rates of productivity growth were higher during 1923-1939 than

during 1954—1982 in five of the eight manufacturing industries, as well as

in aggregate manufacturing. The pre—war rate of productivity growth reached

rather exceptional levels in automobiles, paper and pulp, and iron and

steel. The rapid expansion of pre—war productivity observed in these data

supports the view that the period between the world wars (particularly the

1920's) was a time of transformation of industrial technologies, leading to

sharp reductions in costs; see Jerome (1934) and Bernstein (1960). In the

post-war, the best productivity performance among our manufacturing

industries was by paper and allied products; best overall in the post—war

sample was by electric services.

     productivity growth is, of course, definitionally equal to output

growth minus the sum of employment and hours growth. Examining these

constituents of productivity, we note first that the fastest pre-war growth

in output was experienced by automobiles and by paper and pulp; in the post-

war period, paper took the output growth honors for manufacturing, with

electric services again doing best overall. It appears that the high output

industries were also the high productivity industries; the rank correlation

between output growth and productivity growth is .945 for the eight pre-war

industries, .913 for the eleven post—war industries.

     Despite the Depression of the 1930's, employment growth in the pre-war

manufacturing industries studied tended to exceed that in their post—war

 counterparts (seven of eight cases); this was also true for the aggregates.

 This difference largely reflects serious long—term declines by a number of

 the post—war industries: In wool textiles, leather tanning and finishing,

 and footwear, pre—war tendencies toward decline accelerated after the war;

 in iron and steel, pre—war growth in employment changed to post—war
                                        14


shrinkage. The strongest employment growth in the sample took place in two

post—war non—manufacturing industries (electric services and construction).

As a whole, the employment column of Table 2 is consistent with the of ten—

noted secular fall in the fraction of total employment absorbed by

manufacturing.

     The behavior of the last component of productivity, hours of work, was

quite different in the two sample periods, Weekly hours declined steadily

during the pre—war in all industries, most precipitously in iron and steel

(a notorious "long—hours" industry during the early 1920's, in which 84—hour

work—weeks were not uncommon). This fall reflected changes in work

organization during the 1920's (in a few cases as a response to the pressure

of public opinion against long hours), and the "work—sharing" of the

depressed 1930's (sometimes initiated by employers, sometimes the result of

New Deal legislation or union demands); see Zeisel (1958) for further

discussion. In contrast, the post—war work week was almost perfectly

stable.

     Finally, we may consider the mean rates of growth of the alternative

measures of production worker compensation (Table 3). It is interesting

                           -—Table 3 about here--



that, although productivity gains during the pre-war period were larger than

during the post-war in only five of the eight manufacturing industries

studied, real wage growth was significantly larger during the pre—war in all

eight industries, as well as in the aggregate. pre—war product wages also

rose sharply, except in boots and shoes. Within the major sample periods,

the rank correlation of real wage growth with productivity growth was .815

for the eight pre—war industries, .864 for the eleven post—war industries.
                                         15


(Although these correlations are high, note that they are somewhat lower

than the correlations of productivity and output growth reported above.)

The large pre—war growth in real wages was not fully reflected in increases

in worker buying power, as the last column of Table 3 shows; because of the

sharp declines in hours of work, real weekly earnings rose much more slowly

than real wages.

     Turning from the first to the second moments: Tables 4 and 5 contain

                            —-Table 4 about here——



                            ——Table 5 about here——

the standard deviations of the raw log—differences, multiplied by 100 so as

to be interpretable as percentages. we will not comment on these figures

except to note, first, how surprisingly large the variability of the

industry data often is, and, second, that aggregation seems to reduce

measured   variability somewhat. To see how much of total variability was
attributable to business cycles, we used   a frequency domain technique to

wipe out the variance associated with the high-frequency (i.e., seasonal)

and the low—frequency (i.e. trending or long—wave) bands. The resulting

standard deviations for five key variables are in Table 6. Three facts are

                            —-Table 6 about here-—



obvious from the table: First, the share of total variability of the data

to be associated with business cycles is relatively small, both in the pre-

war and post—war periods. Second, the business cycle has dampened

considerably during the post-war. Third, in most industries the cyclical

variance of hours of work per week has, between the pre—war and post—war

periods, been reduced relatively more than that of employment.
                                          16


       This last observation, which is also confirmed in the raw data (Table

4) and in Section VII below, is worth remarking on a bit further. Why have

post-war employers relied relatively more heavily on layoffs, rather than on

short work-weeks, to reduce labor input in downturns? Two possible sources

of   the change are the greater post-war importance of unions and the advent
of unemployment insurance programs. Union objective functions might be such
that   layoffs of a relatively small number of junior workers are preferred to

a general reduction of hours. (Cross—sectional evidence that unions prefer

layoffs was presented in Medoff (1979). Medoff also cited a study by

Slichter et al. (1960) which claimed that unions, which initially approved

of some work—sharing, moved towards a preference for layoffs in the early

post—war period.) perhaps more important than unionism is the fact that in

the United States, fully unemployed workers can receive government

compensation but the partially unemployed can not. See Baily (1977) for a

formal analysis.



V. Analysis in the Frequency Domain

       We turn now to the study of these variables over the business cycle.

In order to obtain characterizations of "typical" cyclical patterns, we

subjected the data to both frequency domain and time domain analysis. In

the frequency domain work we followed the approach suggested by Granger and

Hatanaka (1964); in the time domain our analysis is in the spirit of Sims

(1980). (There are, of course, close formal connections between these two

approaches; this is evidenced by the similarity of the results obtained.)

The results from the frequency domain will be discussed here. Those from

the time domain are presented in Section VI.
                                            17


     The data used in the frequency domain work (as well as in the time

domain) were the deseasonalized log—differences of the basic series.

(Deseasonalization was done by the use of seasonal dummies; see the data

appendix.) Each variable was analyzed separately by industry and for the

pre—war and post—war sample periods.

     Spectra of these data showed power in the business—cycle—frequency

range, but rarely were clear peaks apparent in that range. (Sargent (1979,

p. 254) warns that this is to be expected.) We decided to investigate the

properties of cycles with periods exceeding one year (so as to exclude

remaining seasonal and other high—frequency influences) but less than eight

years. (According to the NBER chronology, the longest business cycle in our

sample -   the   one extending from 1929 to 1937 — was eight years in length.)

For each industry/sample period, we calculated the coherences and phase

relationships of the variables over the one— to eight—year band.

     The coherences of six variables (the rates of growth of employment,

weekly hours, productivity, real wages, product wages, and real weekly

earnings) with the rate of growth of industry output over the business cycle

range are reported in Table 7. (Standard errors of the coherence estimates



                              ——Table 7 about here——



are also included. See the appendix for a description of how these were

calculated.) Coherence is a measure of the degree of association of a pair

of variables over a prescribed set of frequencies; a coherence of zero

indicates the minimum association, a coherence of one the maximum. The

table suggests that employment and hours bear the strongest relationship to

output over the business cycle. productivity and earnings also are strongly
                                            18



related to output, for most industries. The connection between the two wage

measures and output is erratic across industries and, on the whole, is

weaker; this is especially true in the post-war period. Note, however, that

the coherences of wages and output appear to be statistically significant in

both periods.

       A particularly informative exercise in the frequency domain is the

calculation of phase relationships. For a given frequency, think of

variables as tracing out sine curves over time. Then the "phase lead" of

variable A with respect to variable B is the number of months after A

reaches a given point on its sinusoidal path that B reaches the

corresponding point, we shall say that a variable that has a phase lead

with respect to output of near zero is "procyclical"; a variable whose phase

lead with respect to output is approximately half the period of the full

cycle is "countercyclical." (There are, however, some caveats to this

interpretation of phase leads; see Hause (1971).)

       The phase leads of six variables with respect to output growth, plus

standard errors, are given in Table 8. The phase leads are evaluated

                            ---Table   8 about here-—


at   the frequency with period of fifty—four months, the period at the center
of the range considered. (See the appendix for more discussion.) We find
that   employment, hours, and earnings are roughly procyclical. Productivity

is procyclical but slightly leading in the post—war; its lead over output is

greater in the pre-war period. Hours typically leads, though by less than

productivity, while employment consistently lags a few months behind output.

Earnings is approximately coincident.
                                           19



     The interrelationship of productivity, hours, output, and employment,

is essentially stable between the pre—war and post-war and, except for the

introduction of some subtleties in timing, is consistent with earlier

findings. In conjunction with the dynamic model of the firm discussed in

Section II, this interrelationship suggests a simple economic

interpretation: Cycles are dominated by demand changes. Firms anticipating

an increase in demand respond first by increasing nonlabor inputs and asking

for more work effort; this increases productivity. As demand strengthens,

hours of work expand.   Finally, as the increase in demand assumes greater

permanence, firms make the hiring and training investments needed to add to

the workforce. This story is hardly original (see, for example, Baily

(1977)), and we emphasize again that we have done no explicitly structural

test. Still, it is interesting that this interpretation seems at least to

be consistent with the facts for so many disparate industries, and for both

the pre—war and post—war eras.

     This stability across industries and sample periods is not shared by

the relationship of wages and output. There seems to be a definite

difference between the pre—war and post—war behavior of wages. Let us

concentrate on real, rather than product, wages: During the pre—war period,

real wages lagged output significantly —   not   quite enough to be called


countercyclical, but still "half out-of—phase."3 (A well—known example of

this is the positive growth of real wages in 1931-32, even as output and

employment plunged.) In contrast, during the post—war period real wages

were nearly in phase (procyclical), even leading the cycle in some

industries.
                                                    20


       Why did the cyclical behavior of real wages change between the pre-war

and post—war periods? A satisfactory answer to this question would require

an explicit structural model, which we do not attempt in this paper.

However, we do present a simple heuristic example which suggests that this

change may be related to one of our earlier findings, that layoffs have

become relatively more important than work-sharing in the post-war period.

        Suppose that, because of fixed costs, workers can hold only one job at

a time. (This example will generalize as long as an individual's work

effort is not infinitely divisible among employers.) Then the labor market

is cleared not by the hourly wage, but by the total utility available to the

worker in a job. Assume that workers get utility from total real

compensation Y and disutility from hours of work per week H. If,

for simplicity, the marginal utilities of income and leisure are taken to be

constant, then instantaneous utility at time t, U, can be written as

                          Ut =Y t —       c.H
                                                t



where    OI.   is a parameter.

       To retain their labor forces, firms must provide workers with (y, H)


combinations such that workers' utility equals or exceeds U, the

(exogenous) utility level obtainable elsewhere in the economy. Assuming for

purposes of this example that business cycles are regular sine waves, and

that      is procyclical, we can write



(2)                                   =             + a sin t)
                                              21


where       is average obtainable utility, and a is a positive parameter
measuring the cyclical sensitivity of U.
        Firms'   choices about which      Ht) combinations to offer (from among

those combinatins that satisfy the external utility constraint) will arise

from a maximization calculation that takes into account the nature of the

production function, the existence of      specific human capital or adjustment
costs,    etc. For this heuristic example we do not explicitly specify the

firm's maximization problem but simply assume (realistically) that its

outcome will imply a procyclical workweek:



(3)                                Ht = H0 (1 + b sin t)




where H0 is the average workweek over the cycle and b measures the


workweek's cyclical sensitivity. (3) is to be interpreted as a reduced

form; the parameter b may well depend on the other parameters in the

problem.

      The three equations just given, plus the assumption that real earnings

are just high enough to meet the external utility constraint, imply that the

cyclical behavior of real earnings per      worker   is:




                               =   ( + cH0) + (a + cb) sin t

Average earnings Y0 equal          +


      In this example, the measured "real wage" W is just Yt/Ht. Under what

circumstances will the measured wage be procyclical (i.e., have a positive
                                         22


sensitivity to the exogenous cycle)? It is easy to show that the necessary

and sufficient condition for real wage procyclicality is



(5)                             a>b

That is, wages are procyclical if reservation utility has a greater

sensitivity to the cycle than do hours of work.

      It is difficult to say what has happened over time to the cyclical

sensitivity of reservation utility; perhaps reservation utility has become

less cyclical in the past-war, which would work against the present

argument. However, in Section IV we introduced evidence that b, the

cyclical sensitivity of hours, has fallen in the post—war. The example

shows that, everything else being equal, reduced cyclical sensitivity of

hours tends to be associated with greater observed procyclicality in real

wages. Thus, two of the novel findings of this paper —   that   hours have

become less procyclical and real wages more procyclical in the past—war — may

be related.



      P.n important question is whether the cyclical relationships described

in Tables 7 and 8 are the same in long and short business cycles. Closely

related is the issue of whether it is useful to study "reference cycles."

Burns and Mitchell frequently measured timing relationships in terms of

"stages" of a standard "reference cycle" instead of in calendar time. For

this to be worthwhile, it must be the case that cyclical lead/lag

relationships are roughly constant fractions of the cycle length, rather

than constant when measured in calendar time; that is to say, phase angles

must be constant across business cycle frequencies.
                                        23


     Some insight on this question is provided by Table 9. That table gives

                           ——Table 9 about here-—



the estimates of the phase leads of the six variables for the

deseasonalized—high—frequency band (2—12 months); for short cycles (1—2

years); and for long cycles (2-8 years). (The business cycle band was

broken up in that particular way because there are approximately as many

frequencies with periods between 12 and 24 months as there are with periods

between 24 and 96 months.) Also reported for each variable are the results

of a statistical test for constancy of phase angles between short and long

business cycles. Inspection of Table 9 suggests two observations:

     First, while not much systematic emerges in the high—frequency band,

the qualitative pattern of leads and lags is the same in the short and long

business cycles ranges (the (b) and (c) rows in the table). For example,

productivity still leads the cycle, employment still lags.

     Second, there appears to be a bit of support for the "reference cycle"

construction (and, by implication, for the "time deformation" approach to

cycles recently suggested by Stock (1983)). The hypothesis of constant

phase angles between short and long business cycles, which is implied by the

reference cycle approach, is not usually rejected by the data. (Exceptions

are the pre—war meat—packing industry, and, to some extent, aggregate

manufacturing in both the pre—war and post-war.) Thus, assuming that leads

and lags are proportional to cycle length does not seem unreasonable. On the

other hand, it should be noted that this evidence in favor of reference

cycles may possibly be spurious: As an example in Hause (1971) shows, two

variables with a fixed distributed lag relationship in the time domain may
                                        24


also exhibit a phase relationship which is roughly proportional to the

period of the cycle.

    The observations we have made so far apply to more or less all of the

industries in the sample, with a few distinctions having been drawn between

the patterns visible in the pre—war period and those in the post—war. We

had hoped to be able to make more cross—sectional distinctions (e.g., like

the finding of Nadiri and Rosen (1973) that input responses are much more

rapid in durable goods industries.) unfortunately, much less cross—

sectional variation than we expected was evident when we grouped the

industries in the obvious ways.

     To see if the industries might be grouped by the nature of their

cyclical behavior, we estimated the coherences and phases between industry

outputs and the aggregate index of output, for the pre-war and post—war

periods separately. These are presented in Table 10. An odd result is that

                           ——Table 10 about here——



almost all of the phase leads are positive; this may be due to the inclusion

of input—based measures of output in the aggregate index. The coherence

estimates suggest that cyclical influences became relatively less important

for the industries in the post-war period. There is also a tendency in the

post—war sample for durable goods industries to exhibit a relatively higher

coherence with the cycle than non—durable industries. However, except for

meat—packing, there is surprisingly little evidence of this pattern in the

pre—war. overall, cross—sectional differences still seem less significant

than cross—sectional simi lan ties.
                                           25


 VI. Analysis in the Time Domain

        To complement the frequency domain analysis of the data, we employed

 time—domain methods, primarily vector autoregression (VAR5).        Separate VAR5,

 using twelve monthly lags of four variables (output, hours, employment, and

 real wages), were estimated for each of the pre—war and post—war industries,

 and for the aggregates. The data were the same centered and seasonalized

 log—differences described in Section V. As in Sims(1980)     ,   the estimated
VARs were used to do three things: First, we looked at the statistical

significance of blocks of coefficients in order to search for patterns of

causality (in the Granger sense). Second, we calculated the percentages of

the forecast errors attributable to (triangularized) innovations in the

right—hand—side variables, for four forecast horizons. Finally, the implied

impulse—response diagrams were examined for systematic timing relationships

among the variables. We briefly discuss each of these exercises.

        Table 11 summarizes the results of the Granger—causality F—tests.

                             -—Table 11 about here



There is one matrix for each dependent variable. In    each   matrix, the rows

designate    the industry to which the VAR applies, the columns give the block
of independent variables being tested. One, two, or three asterisks in        a
given   cell of a matrix implies that the twelve monthly lags of the

independent variable jointly "explain" the dependent variable (for the given

industry and period) at the .10, .05, or .01 level of significance. No

asterisks in a cell implies that the joint contribution of all lags of the

given regressor is not significant at the ten per cent level.

     Table   11 suggests that, for all industries taken together:
                                           26


     (1) Output growth tends to be relatively exogenous (in the Granger

sense), at least in comparison with the growth rates of employment and

hours. (Thus hours may be a "leading indicator" without having incremental

predictive value for output. See Neftci (1979).) Output seemed to be much

more "persistent" in the post—war period, in the sense that lagged growth

rates of output became much stronger predictors of the current growth rate.

     (2) Hours and employment are rarely found to be Granger—exogenoUs;

they respond both to each other and to output. The two variables are also

found to be persistent ,   in   the sense just defined, in both the pre—war and

post—war samples. The persistence of employment will be an appealing

finding to supporters of the view that there are "adjustment costs" to

changing employment. Are there also adjustment costs to changing hours of

work? The data seem consistent with this.

     (3) The real wage seems to vary nearly independently of the three

other variables, neither consistently predicting nor being predictable by

them. A remarkably strong finding about the real wage is that, like output,

its persistence significantly increased between the pre—war and post—war

periods.



     The results of the forecast error decomposition exercise are given in

                            ——Table 12 about here——



Table 12. To save space, we report results for three industries only: iron

and steel (a durables goods industry), paper and pulp (non—durables), and

leather tanning and finishing (semi—durables). Results for the

manufacturing aggregates are also reported. The pre—war and post—war

forecast error decompositions are placed side—by—side in the table, for
                                          27


easier comparison. Also, note that, since the growth in productivity is

just a linear combination of the growth in output, hours, and employment

(all of which were included in the VARs), it is possible to report

decomposition for this variable as well.

      As the reader familiar with these methods is aware, the attribution of

forecast error at different horizons to the (triangularized) innovations in

the regressors is not invariant to the ordering of the variables. The

ordering used here (and for the construction of the impulse—response

diagrams, below) is as follows: (log—differences of) output, hours,

employment, real wages. Given that the data are monthly, and that forecast

horizons up to 48 months are studied, the choice of ordering is not likely

to be crucial to the results.

      The pattern of relationships suggested by Table 12 is, perhaps not

surprisingly, very similar to that revealed by the F—tests reported in Table

11.   Note,   for example, that the relatively exogenous output variable (IP)

is shown in Table 12 to be largely "self—caused," even at the four—year

forecast horizon. (This tendency seems to be even greater in the post—war

period than in the pre—war.) Hours and employment are fairly sensitive to

output innovations except, for some reason, in the post—war leather

industry. The "persistence" of both hours and employment is apparent; this

persistence increases markedly for hours in the post—war. The productivity

variable is largely driven by innovations in output, especially in the post-

war, although productivity's other components (employment and hours) also

play a role.

      Again, a most striking finding is the relationship (or lack of a

relationship) between real wages and the other variables: Innovations in

the real wage appear to have virtually no predictive power for output,
                                        28


employment, and weekly hours; and, in the other direction, no variable

except the real wage itself is of much use in forecasting the real wage.

This essential independence of the real wage and the other variables is more

pronounced in the post—war period.



     The final exercise in the time domain was the use of the estimated VAR5

to generate impulse—response (IR) diagrams. These diagrams show the

movement over time of each variable in the VAR in response to a

(triangularized) innovation to one of the regressors. (The response of

productivity to innovations in the other variables was also analyzed.) The

ordering of the variables was the same as in the forecast error

decompositions, above. Since the data are in log—differences, we printed

out cumulative—response diagrams; this allowed us to interpret the patterns

in terms of log—levels. These diagrams were useful for gaining a

qualitative appreciation of "typical" short—run patterns in the data.

     The number of industries, variables, and sample periods meaflt that

there were potentially hundreds of IR diagrams to study. we chose to look

carefully only at the three representative industries (iron and steel,

paper, leather); we also looked closely at construction. The reader will be

burdened with only a few sample IR diagrams (see Figures 1—2). These show

                        ——Figures 1 — 2 about here——



the 48—month response pattern of (the log—levels of) output, hours,

employment, real wages, and productivity to a one—standard—deviation

innovation in output growth in the iron and steel industry. Figures 1(a)

through 1(d) are for the pre—war period; Figures 2(a) through 2(d) are for
                                       29



the post—war. The path of output is included in each diagram, for

reference.

     From our examination of all the IR diagrams, we drew the following

conclusions:

     (1) Generally, the IRS reinforce the characterization of the cycle

obtained in the frequency domain. For example, the conclusion of Section V

that productivity is highly coherent with output and that it tends to lead

the cycle by a few months emerges distinctly from the IR diagrams; this is

true no matter which disturbance term provides the initial shock.

Similarly, the high coherence and the lead/lag patterns for hours and

employment found by frequency domain techniques recur almost exactly in the

IRs. Figures 1(a), 1(b), 1(d), 2(a), 2(b), and 2(d) are here perfectly

representative.

     (2) As the frequency domain analysis was less clear about the cyclical

characteristics of the real wage, so it is the case in the time domain. The

pictures show a real wage behavior which is not very stable across

industries and which is also sensitive to the source of the initial shock,

especially in the pre—war sample. However, as in Section IV, there still

appear to be noticeable differences between pre—war and post—war wage

movements. (See Figures 1(c) and 2(c)). During the post—war, in the cases

when there is a visible relationship between output and wages, the IRs show

the real wage to be a roughly coincident, procyclical variable. In the pre-

war data, the real wage is usually "half out—of—phase," either lagging (the

typical response to output shocks; see Figure 1(c)) or leading (when there

is an employment shock). There is also an interesting contrast between the

pre—war and post—war periods with regard to the effect of a wage shock on

the rest of the system: A pre—war wage shock tends to result in declining
                                          30


output and employment, while a wage shock in the post—war sample   typically
has   just the opposite effect.

       (3) Finally, the diagrams show a post—war decline in cyclical

variability (given a "typical" shock), which is consistent with several

findings already discussed. Output and real wages in particular (reflecting

their increased "persistence"?) are much less prone to gyrations in the

post—war sample.



VII. Four Major Recessions

       The analysis so far has been "democratic" in its use of the data,

allowing every sample observation an equal weight in the calculations. This

is consistent with the view that business cycles are realizations of

stationary stochastic processes. An alternative view is that serious

recessions or depressions are "special" occurrences, governed by different

laws of probability than the "normal" parts of the sample. (This idea is

investigated more formally by the Blanchard—Watson paper in this volume.)

In the spirit of this alternative view, this section looks briefly at the

behavior of labor market variables during four major downturns — two pre—war

and two post—war.

      The four downturns studied are 1929 111—1933 I; 1937 11—1938 II; 1973

IV — 1975 I; and 1981 111—1982 IV, where Roman numerals denote quarters.

Note that, except for the first, the recessions are of comparable length.

(The peak and trough quarters are from the official NBER chronology.)



                           -—Table 13 about here——
                                         31



For each of the four downturns, Table 13 gives (for each of the seven labor

market variables studied) the ratio of the average value of the level of the

variable in the trough quarter to its average value in the preceding peak

quarter. (The data are detrended and deseasonalized.) The purpose of this

is to get a rough measure of the behavior of these variables in individual

major recessions. (Alternatives would have been to construct multi—stage

Burns—Mitchell "reference cycles" or to look at all quarters of the

downturns, we experimented with both of these but did not find them much

more informative.)

     A preliminary point that should be made is that the designated peaks

and troughs are based on aggregate economic variation, which may not

coincide exactly with the industry—level cycles. Nevertheless, there is

obviously a strong correlation between aggregate and industry output: In

Table 13 the trough—to—peak ratio for (detrended) production exceeds one

only four times in thirty—eight cases.

     The trough—to—peak ratios for most of the variables displayed in Table

13 do not seem too far out of line with our findings of previous sections.

Enp1oyment and hours display their strong procyclicality throughout. As in

Section Iv, we see again here that post—war employers seemed to rely more on

layoffs than on short weeks as the means of reducing labor input in the

trough, while pre—war employers relied relatively more heavily on part—time

work. Real wages show little systematic peak—to—trough change, which is

indicative of the low coherence of real wages and output. product wages are

more variable than real wages; they also show some tendency to

countercyclicality. Weekly real earnings, as would be predicted ,   are

clearly procyclical.
                                        32



     A variable which is somewhat puzzling is productivity. The standard

finding that productivity is procyclical implies that its trough—to—peak

ratio should be less than one. This ratio is actually below one only about

half of the thirty—four cases in which output declines between peak and

trough, productivity is most procyclical in the heavy durable—goods

industries (iron and steel, automobiles); in the other industries

productivity is more likely to rise than fall, peak-to—trough.

     A partial explanation of these results may follow from our earlier

finding that productivity, although essentially procyclical, may lead the

cycle by a number of months. Thus productivity at the output peak has

already fallen from its highest level, while at the output trough it has

already begun to recover. (A similar observation is made by Gordon (1980).)

The recovery of productivity in the trough may also be particularly strong

in very deep recession, in which financial pressure on firms increases the

costs of hoarding labor or permitting inefficient production. These

considerations serve at least to reduce this new productivity puzzle,

although they probably do not eliminate it.

     putting the productivity question aside, Table 13 does suggest that

there are qualitative similarities between major recessions and less

dramatic economic fluctuations. This should be encouraging to forecasters

and policy—makers, whose tasks would be impossible if every severe

fluctuation were essentially a unique event.



VIII. Conclusion

     This exercise in "measurement without theory" has supported some

existing perceptions about the cyclical behavior of labor markets and has

uncovered a few additional facts. To summarize the most important findings:
                                       33


     1. procyclical labor productivity (SRIRL) appears to be present in

every industry, in both the pre—war and post-war periods. (This paper is

the first to document SRIRL for the pre—1932 period, as far as we know.)

However, in confirming this standard empirical result, we have found two

qualifications: First, productivity is a leading, rather than coincident,

variable. Second, SRIRL may be less pronounced in major recessions.

     2. weekly hours and employment are strongly procyclical. Hours lead

output, while employment lags. Our evidence that employment is lagging

rather than coincident is somewhat novel; otherwise, these observations

replicate previous results.

     3. A new finding is that there has been an increased reliance in the

post—war period on layoffs, rather than short work—weeks, as a means of

reducing labor input.

     4. The relationship of the real wage to other variables over the

business cycle is weak, and has been weaker in the post—war period. On the

question of whether any cyclical sensitivity of the real wage exists at all,

the results from the frequency domain analysis are much more affirmative

than those for the time domain. The difference between the two approaches

probably arises from the fact that the frequency domain analysis blocks out

some high—frequency interference which the time domain analysis does not;

this permits the frequency domain approach to recover a relationship at

business cycle frequencies which is less apparent in the time domain. The

noisiness of the wage—employment relationship in the time domain may explain

the inability of Geary and Kennan (1982) to reject the hypothesis that these

two series are independent.

     5. To the extent that the real wage is related to the cycle, there

seems to be a definite difference between its pre—war and post—war
                                        34



behaviors. The real wage was procyclical (essentially coincident) in the

post—war period, but "half out—of—phase" (usually lagging) in the pre—war.

This difference has not been noticed before for real wages, although Creamer

(1950) found that nominal wages lagged the cycle in the early pre—war

period.

     6. The relationship of product wages to the cycle is, if anything,

weaker and more erratic than that of real wages. Real weekly earnings are

strongly procyclical in both major samples.

     7. Cyclical variation is a relatively small part of the total

variation of the labor market variables. (A similar finding is in Bernanke

(1983).) The postwar data exhibit more stability (i.e., less total variance

and and less business cycle variance). They also are more serially

persistent than the data from the earlier period, which may be interpreted

either as being consistent with Sachs' (1980) finding of greater rigidity,

or as being simply a reflection of a more stable economy.

     We hope that this and similar analyses will lead to a better

understanding of the cyclical behavior of labor markets. However, we

emphasize once again that this research is intended to be a complement to,

not a substitute for, structural modelling of these phenomena.
                            Notes


1. This is not to say that no empirical work on cyclical
    aspects of labor supply exists for the pre—war period;
    for a fascinating example, see Woytinsky (1942).

2. Bodkin (1969) notes that the French economist Rueff
    made the same prediction in 1925.

3. This is reminiscent of Creamer's (1950) result for
    nominal wage rates. See Section II.
                                Data Appendix




I. Sources

     The sources of the pre—war industry data used in this study are as

follows:

     1) Earnings, hours, and employment data are from Beney (1936) and

Sayre (1940). These data are the result of an extensive monthly survey

conducted by the National Industrial Conference Board from 1920 until 1947.

     All of the industries in the sample paid at least part of their

workforce by piece rates (see the Monthly Labor Review, vol. 41, no. 3,

September 1935, pp. 697—700). No correction was made for this.

     2) Industrial production data are from the Federal Reserve Board. See

"New Federal Reserve Index of Industrial production," Federal Reserve

Bulletin, August 1940, pages 753—69 and 825—74.

     3) Wholesale price indexes are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

See the following publications of the U.S. Departluent ot Labor: Handbook of

Labor Statistics (1931 ed., Bulletin 541; 1936 ed., Bulletin 616; 1941 ed.,

Bulletin 694), and Wholesale prices 1913 to 1927 (washington: U.S.G.P.O.,

1929, Bulletin 473). For the automobile industry we merged two BLS series

of motor vehicles prices. Neither series covered 1935; the price series on

all metal products was used to interpolate the automobiles price series for

that year.

     4) The consumer price series is from Sayre (948).

     All basic data were seasonally unadjusted. The span of the pre—war

sample   is January 1923 to Decetiher 1939. Although some of the data exist
before   1923, there are two major problems with extending the sample furtner
back:        1) Some of the industrial production data are missing. 2) There is a

six month qap in the NICB survey in 1923. The December 1939 stop date was

chosen so as to avoid consideration of the many special features of the

wartime economy.



        The sources of the post—war industry data are as follows:

        1) Earnings, hours, and eraployrtent data are from Employment and

Earnings, United States, (Bureau of Labor Statistics).

        2)   Industrial   production indexes for industries 1—10 are from the

Federal Reserve Board. (See Board of Governors, Federal Reserve Board,

Industrial Production (1976). Updates are from the Federal Reserve

Bulletin, and some unpublished series were obtained directly from the

Board.) The output index for construction was obtained by dividing the

value of new construction (as reported by the Survey of Current Business) by

the Department of Commerce construction cost index (also available in the

SCB).

        3) Wholesale prices are again from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

See Wholesale prices and Price Indexes, 1963 (BLS Bulletin 1513), Producer

Price Indexes, and the T1onthly Labor Review.

        4) The consumer price series used to calculate real wages is the

Department of Labor's consumer price index (all items, wage earners and

clerical workers, revised.)

        Again, the basic data are seasonally unadjusted. Tne     span   ot the post-

war sample is 1954—82, except for the wool textile industry, where the data

begin in January 195k. dequate data on output prices (and, tnerefore, on

product wages) are nissing for wool textiles after 1975 and for electric

services before 1958.
      The total manufacturing series were as follows:

      1) For the pre-war period, output was measured by the industrial

production index for manufacturing. Employment, hours, and earnings data

come from the National Industrial Conference Board, as reported in Beney

(1936) and Sayre (1940). The NICB series are based on 25 major

manufacturinq industries; the coveraqe is similar but not identical to that

of the industrial production index. The manufacturing output price, used

only in the construction of the product wage variable, is the BLS wholesale

price index for non—aqricultural, non—fuel goods. Again, the coverage is

similar but not identical to that of the I? index.

      2)   For the post-war period, again the Ip index for manufacturing is

used to measure output. Employment, hours, and earnings data are for

manufacturinq production workers; the output price is the wholesale price

index for total manufactuerers. Those data are from Business Statistics and

the Survey_of Current Business and, as far as ie can tell, are mutually

cons isent.
      A




II.   Stationarity

      The loq—differenced data series appeared in general to be stationary.

We arrived at this conclusion by studying the autocorrelations and partial

autocorrelations of the log—differenced data and by testing for the presence

of trend shifts and higher—order trend terms in the log—levels. Rejections

of stationarity were sufficiently infrequent and weak that, for the sake of

uniform treatment of the data, we decided to ignore then.
III. Reduction of High-Frequency Noise


     The spectra of   most   of the series exhibited considerable power   in   the

higher   frequencies; high—frequency noise (primarily seasonality) nay
interfere with the analysis of the data at business—cycle frequencies. To
reduce this noise,    we regressed each log—differenced series against a

constant,   seasonal dummies, and (where applicable) dummy variables for
strike   periods. (There was no pooling of regressions across industries or

between the two najor sample periods. There also appeared to be no need to

allow for shifts of the regression coefficients within subsamples.) The

residuals from these regressions, "cleaned" of much    of the very high— and
low—frequency noise of the original series, were treated as the basic data
in the frequency and time domain analyses.




                 (ivO
                          r                                   'JX7 i'-c )
IV. Details of Frequency Domain Calculations

    The entries of Tables 7 through 10 were constructed by simple averaging of

the finite Fourier transforms (evaluated at evenly-spaced intervals on (O,it)) for

each data series. Since the pre— and post—war sample sizes differed, the

frequencies corresponding to the "business cycle" varied as well; thus, each

calculation involved averages of about 7 (that is, 1/12—1/96) of the number of

periodogram ordinates calculated for each variable.

    Table 6 gives square roots of the cumulated periodograni ordinates (between 12

and 96 months) for each variable. These calculations (and those in the remaining

tables) will not be affected by the seasonal or strike adjustments made for the

log—differenced data.

    Standard errors for the sample coherence    and phase   between each pair of

variables were computed using the following formulae, adapted from Hannan (1970,

Chapter 7):
    r         =    —1/2, A2\      and
    LSEP)J        v    "i—p ),

              =    -1/2            )1/2
                             ,2

where v is twice the number of periodogram ordinates in the 12 to96 month

range. Since these expressions are derived from the asymptotic behavior of

finite Fourier transforms, the resulting confidence intervals are only

approximate, and will be poorly behaved for    near zero or one; still, the

standard errors are useful guides to the precision of the estimates.
   The estimated phase leads of Tables 8 through 10 were expressed in months by

dividing the estimated phase angle 0 (and its standard error) by the frequency

corresponding to the period in the center of the bandwidth considered. That is,

the phase leads calculated for the 12 to 96, 2 to 12, 12 to 24, and 24 to 96

month bandwidths correspond to cycles with period lengths 54, 7, 18, and 60

months, respectively. These period lengths are uniformly higher than the period

lengths corresponding to the average frequency in the bandwidth (which is, for

example, about 2/(1/12 +   1/96) = 21.33 months for the 12 to 96 bandwidth). Since
the coherences and phase angles are implicitly assumed to be constant within each

frequency band, the phase lead for any frequency in the interval can be obtained

by rescaling; that is, to obtain a phase lead for a "typical" 20 month cycle,

the reported phase lead (and its standard error) for the 12 to 24 month bandwidth

can simply be multiplied by 20/18. The tests of equality of phase angles in

Table 9 do not use the "scaled" phase leads above; rather, t—statistics for the

difference in phase angles are constructed directly from the standard error

formulae reported above (and use the large-sample independence of the phase

estimates for the pre- and postwar periods).

    All calculations were carried out using the RATS statistical package (see

Doan and Litterrnan (1981)). Other, more theoretical references to frequency

domain methods are the texts by Hannan (1970) and Anderson (1971).
                    TABLE 1:    Industries included in data set



              I. Manufacturing Industries (pre—war and post—war data)


Pre-War Industry Title                  Post—War Industry Title (sIc Code)

1.     Iron and steel (STEEL)           Blast furnaces and steel mills (331)

2. Automobiles (AUTOS)                  Motor vehicles and equipment (371)

3. Meat packing (MEAT)                  Meat packing plants (201)

4. Paper and pulp (PAPER)               Paper and allied products (26)

5. Boots and shoes (SHOES)              Footwear, except rubber (314)

6. Wool textiles (WOOL)                 Weaving and finishing mills, wool (223)

7. Leather tanning (LEATH)              Leather tanning and finishing (311)
     and finishing

8. Lumber and millwork (LUMBR)          Lumber and wood products (24)
     (excluding furniture)

9. All manufacturing (ALL MIFO)         All manufacturing industries
     industries



              II. Non-Manufacturing Industries (post-war data only)


1 0.   NA (coAL)                        Bituminous coal and lignite mining (12)

11.    NA (ELECT)                       Electric services (491

12.    NA (coNsT)                       Construction (no code)
            TABLE 2:       Monthly rates of growth (per cent) of output,
                           employment, weekly hours, and productivity



 Industry         Period              IF         EMP        HRS        PROD

STEEL          1923 — 39             0.18       0.07       -0.25       0.35
               1954 — 82            —0.12      —0.26       —0.01       0.14

AUTOS          1923 - 39             0.34       0.07       -0.14       0.42
               1954 - 82             0.16      -0.09        0.00       0.25

MEAT           1923 - 39             0.04       0.05       -0.08       0.07
               1954 - 82             0.18       0.02       -0.01       0.17

PAPER          1923 - 39             0.33       0.06       -0.12       0.39
               1954 - 82             0.33       0.03        0.00       0.29

SHOES          1923 - 39             0.01      -0.07       -0.14       0.22
               1954 — 82            —0.13      -0.22       —0.01       0.10

WOOL           1923 - 39             0.04      -0.08       -0.12       0.24
               1958    -   82       -0.14      -0.43        0.01       0.28

LEATH          1923 — 39            -0.09      -0.14       -0.10       0.15
               1954 - 82            -0.17      -0.29        0.00       0.12
LUT1BR         1923 -      39       -0.07      —0.14       -0.10       0.17
               1954 -      82        0.18      -0.06        0.01       0.23


ALL MFG        1923 - 39             0.22      -0.01       -0.12       0.34
               1954 - 82             0.27      —0.02        0.00       0.29


COAL           1954 — 82             0.18      —0.13        0.06       0.26

ELECT          1954 — 82             0.48       0.11        0.00       0.36

CONET          1954 — 82             0.13       0.11        0.02       0.00
          TABLE 3:    Monthly rates of growth (per cent) of real wages,
                      product wages, and real weekly earnings




Industry              Period           WE        WP         EARN

STEEL                1923 - 39        0.31       0.29       0.06
                     1954 - 82       0.16        0.10       0.15

AUTOS                1923 - 39        0.31       0.30       0.17
                     1954 — 82        0.11       0.16       0.11


MEAT                 1923 - 39        0.29       0.29       0.21
                     1954 - 82        0.06       0.15       0.04

PAPER                1923 — 39        0.24       0.24        0.12
                     1954 — 82        0.13       0.15       0.13

SHOES                1923 — 39        0.11      —0.01       —0.03
                     1954   - 82      0.03       0.05        0.02

WOOL                 1923 — 39        0.21       0.20 1      0.08
                     1958 - 82        0.05       0.31 )      0.06

LEATH                1923 — 39        0.27       0.25        0.17
                     1954 — 82        0.05       0.03        0.05

LUMBE                1923 -   39      0.28       0.27        0.17
                     1954 -   82      0.09       0.13        0.10




ALL MPG              1923 - 39        0.26       0.27        0.14
                     1954 - 82        0.09       0.10        0.09




COAL                 1954 — 82        0.12      -0.04        0.18

ELECT                1958 - 82        0.13       0.05 (2)    0.13


CONST                1954 — 82        0.09       0.03        0.11


Notes:

 (1) Sample period is 1958 — 75.
 (2) Sample period is 1958 — 82.
        TABLE 4:      Standard deviations (per cent) of monthly growth rates
                      of output, employment, weekly hours and productivity



Industry             Period            IP       EMP         HRS       PROD

STEEL              1923 - 39        13.40      4.70        6.85       8.00
                   1954 — 82        16.09     11.53        2.25       7.06

AUTOS              1923 — 39        30.12     10.37        8.13      22.47
                   1954 - 82         7.80      9.69        4.14       8.69

MEAT               1923 — 39         9.91      4.03        3.16       7.95
                   1954 - 82         2.82      1.80        1.84       3.87

PAPER              1923 - 39         5.71      1.83        2.47       5.15
                   1954 - 82         1.83      1.06        0.98       2.06

SHOES              1923 — 39        11.87      3.18        5.39      10.08
                   1954 - 82         4.05      2.86        2.58       5.63

WOOL               1923 — 39        12.04      6.09        4.93       8.64
                   1958 - 82         9.30      2.71        2.01      10.17

LEATH              1923 — 39         5.52      2.93        3.52       5.46
                   1954 — 82         3.39      2.32        1.71       4.82

LUNBR              1923 - 39         6.80      5.63        4.88       6.79
                   1954 — 82         2.85      2.47        1.87       3.62



ALL MFG            1923   —   39     4.70      2.36        2.59       2.92
                   1954 — 82         3.28      1.36        1.17       2.58



COAL               1954 — 82        14.00     16.05        8.18      11.74


ELECT              1954 — 82         1.45      0.91        0.91       1.94


CONST              1954 - 82         7.88      6.17        2.87       5.25
TABLE 5:      Standard deviations (per cent) of monthly growth rates
              of real wages, product wages, and real weekly earnings



   Industry          Period               WR         WP      EARN

   STEEL            1923 — 39         2.14       2.24        7.02
                    1954 — 82          1.32      1.50        2.96

   AUTOS            1923 — 39          1.90      2.24        8.32
                    1954 — 82          1.69      1.87        5.21

   MEAT             1923 — 39         2.24       4.81        3.25
                     IjL —

   PAPER            1923 — 39          1.30      2.14        2.43
                    1954 — 82         0.83       3.61        1.36

   SHOES            1923 — 39         2.70       2.47        5.41
                    1954 - 82         0.95       1.80        2.60

   WOOL             1923 - 39         2.14       2.97        4.79
                    1958 - 82          1.06      1.48(1)     2.37

   LEATH            1923 - 39          1.47      3.03        3.37
                    1954 — 82         0.92       2.96        2.12

   LUNBR            1923 — 39         4.14       4.74        5.25
                    1954 — 82         1.32       1.99        2.37



   ALL MFG          1923 — 39         1   .24    1   .48     2.55
                    1954 — 82         2.30       2.34        2.69



   COAL             1954 — 82         1.95       2.19        9.04


   ELECT            1954 - 82         0.90       i.ii(2)     1.44


   CONST            1954 — 82          1.05      1.02        2.80


Notes:

    (1) Sample period in 1958 — 75.
    (2) Sample period in 1958 — 82.
        TABLE 6:   Standard deviations (per cent) of monthly growth rates
                   of five variables; business cycle frequencies
                   (12 to 96 months) only



Industry      Period      IP        EP        HES       PROD       WR

STEEL         1923—39     3.96      1.59       1.73      1.53     0.59
              1954-82     2.28      1.05      0.48       1.15     0.27

AUTOS         1923—39     4.54      2.72       1.46      2.93     0.36
              1954—82     1.85      1.43      0.47      0.77      0.31

MEAT          1923—39     1.66      1.05       0.49      1.01      0.49
              1954—82     0.46      0.27       0.19     0.36      0.21

PAPER         1923—39     1.33      0.60       0.65      0.76     0.36
              1954—82     0.56      0.30       0.16      0.27     0.14

SHOES         1923—39     1.26      0.47       0.94      0.78      0.68
              1954-82     0.71      0.39       0.38      0.60      0.17

WOOL          1923—39     3.16      1.69       1.06      0.99      0.67
              1954—82     1.56      1.01       0.61      1.74      0.22

LEATH         1923—39     1.19      0.97       0.77      0.82      0.47
              1954—82     0.59      0.49       0.22      0.52      0.14

LUNBR         1923-39     1.75      1.48       0.85      1.19      0.70
              1954-82     0.87      0.61       0.21      0.44      0.23



ALL MFG       1923-39     1   .53   0.97       0.67      0.48
              1954—82     0 .60     0.39       0.15      0.21      0.20




COAL          1954—82     0.92      0.71       0.61      0.84      0.25


ELECT         1954-82     0.22      0.16       0.10      0.28      0.13


CONST         1954—82     0.69      0.75       0.21      0.77      0.15
              TABLE 7:    Coherences of growth rates of six
                          variables with growth rate of output


                          Bandwidth: 12 months to 96 months


                                  1.     Pre—War   Data


Industry        ENP        HRS          PROD                   WJ     EARN

STEEL          .828       .883          .915         .272     .230     .854
              (.060)     (.042)        (.031)       (.ri5)   (.179)   (.osi)

AUTOS          .854       .583          .692         .252     .271     .568
              (.051)     (.125)        (.099)       (J77)    (.175)   (.128)

MEAT           .773       .657          .836         ,5ti     .330     .292
              (.076)     (.107)        (.057)       (.134)   (.168)   (.173)

PAPER          .661       .870          .721         .610     .507     .836
              (.106)     (.046)        (.091)       (,iio)   (.140)   (.057)

SHOES          .717       .836          .651         .098     .142     .794
              (.092)     (.057)        (.109)       (.io)    (.iss)   (.070)
WOOL           .934       .878          .783         .449     .429     .797
              (.024)     (.043)        (.073)       (,i51)   (.154)   (.069)

LEATH          .754       .742          .341         .473     .634     823
              (.082)     (.085)        (.167)       (.147)   (.113)   (.061)

LUMBR          .749       .784          .276         .354     .659     .638
              (.083)     (.073)        (.175)       (.165)   (.107)   (.112)


ALL MPG        .935       .916          .567         .567     .6 07    .902
              (.024)     (.031)        (.128)       (.12)    (i 19)   (.035)




Note:

       Standard errors are in parentheses
                    TABLE 7:    (Continued)


                        2. Post-War Data


Industry     EMP      HRS      PROD             WIR     WP       EARN

STEEL       .898     .895       .863        .527        .180      .829
           (.027)   (.028)     (.036)      (.102)      (.137)    (.044)

AUTOS       .912     .724       .479        .733        .578      .809
           (.024)   (.067)     (.109)      (.065)      (.094)    (.049)

MEAT        .592     .585       .618          .430      .706      .648
           (.092)   (.093)     (.087)      (.115)      (.071)    (.082)

PAPER       .911     .771       .856        .360        .735      .672
           (.024)   (.057)     (.038)      (.123)      (.0.65)   (.078)

SHOES       .714     .594       .503        .159        .094      .590
           (.069)   (.092)     (.106)      (.138)      (.140)    (.092)

WOOL        .418     .295       .586        .252        .573      .294
           (.127)   (.141)     (.101)      (.144)      (.123)    (.141)

LEATH       .620     .412       .416        .164        .368      .385
           (.087)   (.117)     (.117)      (.138)      (.122)    (.120)

LUMBR       .881     .845       .658          .378      .489      .779
           (.032)   (.040)     (.080)      (.121)      (.108)    (.056)




ALL MFG     .941     .839       .684          .378     .314       .693
           (.016)   (.042)     (.075)      (.121)     (.128)     (.073)




COAL        .603     .710       .331          .371      .063      .676
           (.090)   (.070)     (.126)      (.122)      (.141)    (.077)

ELECT       .290     .359       .734        .287        .203      .413
           (.129)   (.123)     (.065)      (.130)      (.148)    (.117)

COMST       .568     .344       .384        .274        .507      .397
           (.096)   (.125)     (.121)      (.131)      (.105)    (.119)
                  TABLE 8:          Phase leads of growth rates of six
                                    variables with respect to growth rate
                                    of output, in months


                                    Bandwidth: 12 months to 96 months


                                       1. Pre—War Data


                ELP           HRS          PROD       WR        WP          EARN
 Industry

 STEEL         -4.7           1.8           2.3       —5.3     —0.3          1.2
               (1.11)        (0.9)         (0.7)      (5.7)     (6.g)       (1.0)
 AUTOS                       10.4          2.9       -10.6     -6.0          9.8
                             (2.3)         (1.7)      (6.2)     (5.8)       (2.4)
 MEAT          —6.0           2.2           4.6      —22.2      —7.6        —5.1
               (1.3)         (1.9)         (1.1)      (2.5)     (4.7)       (5.3)
 PAPER         -7.3           2.4           2.3      -19.3      26.5        —0.5
               (1.8)         (0.9)         (1.6)      (2.1)     (2.8)       (i .1)
 SHOES         -6.3          -2.4           9.0      —11.5       9.0        -3.0
               (1.6)         (1.1)         (1.9)     (16.6)    (11.3)       (1.2)
 WOOL          —2.6           2.1           2.7      —15.8      24.7        —0.6
                (0.6)        (0.9)         (1.3)      (3.2)     (3.4)       (1.2)
  LEATH        -5.7           2.8          11.1      -14.6      26.5        -0.7
               (1.4)         (1.5)         (4.5)      (3.0)     (1.9)       (1.1)
  LUMBR        -3.8           2.0          11.2      -19.1      27.0        -0.7
               (1.4)         (1.3)         (5.7)      (4.3)     (1.9)       (2.0)


  ALL MFG       —3.9          2.3           9.3      —11 .6    —19.5        —0.3
                (0.6)        (0.7)         (2.4)      (2 .4)    (2.1)       (0.8)



Note:
    Standard   errors are in parentheses.
                    TABLE 8:     (Continued)


                            2. Post—War Data


             ENP     HRS          PROD                WP      EARN
Industry

STEEL      —2.8      1.1          2.2       3.1      9.3       1.6
           (0.6)    (0.6)        (0.7)     (2.0)    (6.6)    (0.8)

AUTOS      —2.5      4.5          5.0       3.6      3.9       4.1
           (0.5)    (1.2)        (2.2)     (1.1)    (1.7)    (0.9)

MEAT       —4.1      2.3          1.8       0.1     —1.6       1.3
           (1.7)    (1.7)        (1.6)     (2.6)    (1.2)     (1.4)

PAPER      —4.4      2.1          3.9       7.2     10.0       3.5
           (0.6)    (1.0)        (0.7)     (3.2)    (1.1)     (1.3)

SHOES      —5.9      1.6          3.8      —7.6     11.9       0.8
           (1.2)    (1.7)        (2.1)      (7.6)   (12.9)    (1.7)

WOOL       —3.4     -1.0           1.5       4.9    24.3       0.5
           (2.8)    (4.1)        (1.8)      (4.9)    (2.0)    (4.1)

LEATH      —2.3      3.5          1.7      —5.4      12.4      1.8
            (1.5)   (2.7)        (2.7)      (7.3)    (3.1)    (2.9)

LUMBR      —3.9      2.0           6.4     —1.2     25.7       1.0
            (0.7)   (0.8)         (1.4)     (3.0)    (2.2)    (1.0)




ALL MPG    —2.4      2.1           4.4
            (0.5)   (0.8)         (.1.3)    (3.0)    (3.7)   (i .3)




COAL       —5.1     —0.1           9.1     —10.4    —21.3     —1.7
           (1.6)    (1.2)         (3.5)     (3.0)   (19.2)    (1.3)

ELECT      —16.0    —0.3           1.9       2.8     —5.4      1.3
            (4.0)   (3.2)         (1.1)     (4.1)    (4.9)    (2.7)

CONST       —4.2     4.2           5.0      11.6     12.3      6.7
            (1.8)   (3.3)         (2.9)     (4.3)    (2.0)    (2.8)
                 TABLE 9:    Phase leads of growth rates of six
                             variables with respect to growth rate
                             of output, in months

                             (a) Bandwidth:   2 months to 12 months
                             (b) Bandwidth: 12 months to 24 months
                             Cc) Bandwidth: 24 months to 96 months


                                   1. Pre—War Data

                  EMP       HRS          PROD         WR        WP       EARN
Industry
                                         0.2          -1.9      2.5      —0.1
        (a)      —0.4       0.0
                                         0.8           2.2      2.4       0.8
STEEL            —1.6       0.6
           (b)
           (c)   —5.0       2.1          2.5         _13.8* _13.5*       —0.4

           (a)    0.3       0.5         —0.2          —1.4     —1.2       O4
AUTOS      (b)   -0.3       4.1         -0.9          -2.2     —1.2        4.0
           (c)    0.1        6.6        —3.6         —15.3     —9.4        5.0*
                                         0.2          —2.0     —1.2       —0.2
           (a)   —1.0       —0.1
                                                      —8.2     —5.5        0.2
MEAT             —2.2        0.6         1.1
           (b)
                            23.9*       1O.4***      -.16.1*    O.3***   _18.9***
           (c)   -5.8

           (a)   -1.4       —0.6         0.3          -3.0     -2.4       —0.9
                                                                           0.1
PAPER      (b)   -3.1        0.7         0.8          -7.1     —8.9
                             3.4         2.7         —18.1     27.8       —2.7
           (c)   —4.5

                            —0.1         0.1           2.8      2.6        0.1
           (a)   —0.3
                                          3.0         —7.4      4.4       —1.1
SHOES      (b)   —1.9       —0.9
                 —8.6       —1.1          9.8         —5.0      0.6       —2.3
           (c)

                                          0.4         —2.6     —3.4       —0.3
           (a)   —0.6       —0.1
                                          0.6                              0.2
WOOL       (b)   —0.6        0.6                      —5.3     —8.9
           (c)   —4.4        2.9          5.3        —17.5     25.6       —3.5

                  0.0       —0.1          0.0          1.9     —3.3        0.2
LEATH
           (a)
           (b)   -2.4        0.8          3.5         -4.9      8.8        0.1
                                         18.7        —15.9     29.5       —4.0
           (c)   —3.2        4.0

           (a)   —0.4        0.6         —0.1         —2.6     -3.0        0.4
                 -1.8        0.4          4.6         —7.4     —8.8       —0.5
LUMBR      (b)                                                 28.8        0.8
           (c)   _1.3*       5.7         -.0.9*       -5.7

      (a)        —0.5       —0.1          0.6           3.4     —3.2      —0.1
                 -1.7        0.6          2.3         —3.9      —7.2       0.0
ALL G (b)                                            —12.8     —20.0      -0.7
           (c)               3.4         19.9***

Note: Asterisks denote significance of t—tests of difference of phase angles
       between frequency bands (b) and (c), at marginal significance levels
       of 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***).
                         TABLE 9:     (Continued)

                                2. Post—War Data

Industry           EMP    HRS         PROD          WR       WP        EARN

           (a)    -0.4    0.0         0.1           0.7       0.9      0.1
STEEL      (b)    -0.9    0.1         0.5           0.8      0.8       0.3
           (c)    —3.3    2.9***      44*           4.7      17.6      3.4
           (a)    -0.2   -0.1         1.7       -0.2         -0.1     -0.1
AUTOS      (b)    —0.8    1.5         1.6           1.2       2.0      1.4
           (c)    —2.7    4.6         6.1           3.9      _O.7*     43
           (a)    -1.3    0.1         0.0       -0.6         -0.4     -0.1
MEAT       (b)    -1.3    0.9         0.5        1.0         -0.2      0.9
           (c)    4.9     1.9         2.4       _5.6*        —2.4     —1.5

           (a)     0.4   -0.6         0.0           2.7      -2.0     -0.4
PAPER      (b)    -1.2    0.3         1.0       —2.8          3.1      0.1
           (c)    —5.5    3.6         5.8*          8.7      12.0      5.8*
           (a)     0.3    0.5         0.1           1.0       1.2      0.5
SHOES      (b)    —1.9    0.9         0.6       -3.5          5.3      0.5
        (c)       —6.7    0.8         8.3       —5.6         10.9      0.1

        (a)        0.0    0.1         0.0           0.5       2.5      0.1
WOOL       (b)    —1.9   —1.9         0.5           1.0      —5.2      0.5
        (c)       —2.2    3.7         0.8           7.1      25.2**    4.6
        (a)       0.7     0.7        -0.1           0.7       1.8      0.7
LEATH      (b)    -0.4    1.5        -0.1       -3.3         -8.5      0.7
        (c)       —3.2    3.0         4.2       —2.6         13.3      1.7
        (a)       -0.2    0.1         0.0           0.4       1.2      0.3
LUNBR      (b)    -1.4    0.7         1.3       -2.6         -7.7      0.2
        (c)       —6.2    0.8        18.7*      —8.5         29.1      0.2

           (a)    -0.0    0.2         0.1           0.6      0.7       0.1
ALL MFG (b)       -0.7    0.0         1.0       -1.8          2.8     -0.7
        (c)       —2.9    4•7*        9.5           5.7       9.3      9.5
        (a)      —0.2    —0.2         0.1       —2.7         —1.6     —0.2
COAL    (b)       —1.1   —0.3         0.7       —3.7         —3.2     —1.1
        (c)       -6.2    0.8        18.7***    -8.5         29.0      0.2

        (a)        2.1    0.7        -0.1       -2.2          0.6      0.3
ELECT      (b)    —.7     1.1         0.3          —3.3      —4.4     —0.8
           (c)   —16.5   —°.0         3.1                    —0.1      5.2
           (a)     0.0    0.2         0.0          —3.4      —3.1      0.2
CONST      (h)    —0.8    1.6         0.6           7.0       5.6      3.2
           (c)    —6.7    1.5         8.5           4.9***   10.3**    4.0
           Table 10: Coherences and phase leads of growth rates
                     of output in each industry with respect to
                     growth rate of "all manufacturing" output


                    Bandwidth:   12 months to 96 months


Industry         Period          Coherence (SE)      Phase lead (SE)

STEEL            1923—39           94.7   (2.0)           1.3 (0.6)
                 1954—82           64.6   (8.2)           0.2 (1.4)

AUTOS            1923—39           78.0   (7.4)       —4.1    (1.3)
                 1954—82           78.6   (5.4)           0.2 (1.0)

MEAT             1923—39           19.5 (18.2)             1.2 (8.2)
                 1954—82           26.2 (13.2)            4.8 (4.)

PAPER            1923—39           86.7   (4.7)            2.3 (0.9)
                 1954—82           79.7   (5.2)            1.2 (0.9)

SHOES            1923—39           73.9 (8.6)              6.7 (1.5)
                 1954—82           46.4 (11.1)            4.9 (2.3)

WOOL             1923—39           80.1   (6.8)           3.5 (1.2)
                 1954—82           31.9 (13.9)            1.4 (3.9)

LEATH             1923—39          75.0 (8.3)             0.6 (1.4)
                  1954—82          38.8 (12.0)            3.7 (2.9)

LUMBR            1923—39           88.0   (4.3)            1.0 (0.9)
                 1954—82           73.9   (6.4)            5.3 (1.1)


COAL             1954—82           28.4 (13.0)            —5.4 (4.1)


ELECT            1954-82           44.7 (11.3)            -2.1   (2.4)



COST             1954—82           57.4 (9.5)              6.3   (1.7)
                               TABLE 11: VAR F—tests

                 (*)      denotes F—test significant at .10 level
                 (**)     denotes F—test significant at .05 level
                 (*11*)   denotes F—test significant at .01 level


                                  1. Pre-War Data


Dependent Variables           Industry               Independent Variables



                                               IP         KRS      EMP       WR

  'P
                                 STEEL          **           *               *11*

                                 AUTOS         ***                 ***
                                MEAT                        *11               **
                                PAPER                                **
                                 SHOES         ***          **                    *
                                 WOOL            *                 ***
                                 LEATH                      *
                                 LWBR          *41*       ***                ***
                                 ALL MPG       ***

  HRS
                                 STEEL         *41*       *11*     ***       41*41


                                 AUTOS                    ***
                                 MEAT                      **         *           41



                                 PAPER         *41*         *                     41



                                 SHOES          *41*       *41*    ***
                                 WOOL           *41*        *41    *11*

                                 LEATH          ***        ***      ***
                                 LUMBR              *41    ***
                                 ALL MPG        ***         *       *41*
                      TABLE 11: VAR F—tests (continued)


                         1. Pre—War Data



Dependent Variables   Industry             Independent Variables


                                      IP        HRS       EMP      WR

  EMP
                        STEEL           *
                        AUTOS         ***       ***        *11       *
                        MEAT           41*       41*

                        PAPER          41*                 *41

                        SHOES          41*       *41      *41*

                        WOOL          *11*                41*41


                        LEATH         ***                  *41

                        LIThIBR        **                  *41

                        ALL MPG        **         41




                        STEEL
                        AUTOS                    41*

                        MEAT

                        PAPER                              41*

                        SHOES          **        41*

                        WOOL
                        LEATH          *41

                        LUMBR         *41*        *          *     *41*

                        ALL MPG                              *
                       TABLE 11: VAR F—tests (continued)


                        2. Post-War Data

Dependent Variables   Industry              Inde'pendent Variables


                                       'P         HRS      EMP       WR


  'P                    STEEL              *
                        AUTOS              *               ***
                        NEAT           ***         **                   *
                        PAPER          ***                  *11      ***
                        SHOES          41*91     *11*       *91

                        WOOL           41*41     *91*

                        LEATH          ***        **
                        LUNBR          91*91               91*41     *91*
                        ALL MPG        ***        91*      *91*
                        COAL           91*91                  *
                        ELECT          ***                           ***
                        CONST          ***                            *11




 HRS                    STEEL           *91      ***        **
                        AUTOS                    *91*

                        MEAT            *91      *91*                 **
                        PAPER         ***        *91*         *
                        SHOES         ***        *91*      ***
                        WOOL               41    *91*     *91*       *41*
                        LEATH                    ***        *91        *
                        LUNBR                    ***
                        ALL MPG       ***        *41*       *91

                        COAL          *91*       *41*        *        *91

                        ELECT                    *31*

                        CONST                    ***
                              TABLE 11: VAR F—tests (continued)


                               2. Post-War Data


Dependent Variables         Industry               Independent Variables


                                               IF       HRS      EMP        WR




  EMP                          STEEL                     **
                               AUTOS                     **
                               MEAT                               **
                               PA PEP

                               SHOES           **
                               WOOL           ***
                               LEATH                    ***
                               LUMBR          ***                          **
                               ALL MPG        ***                 *11

                               COAL                *             ***
                               ELECT                     **
                               CONST                              **


  WE                           STEEL                                       ***
                               AUTOS          ***                *11*      ***
                               MEAT               *                         **
                               PAPER                                       ***
                               SHOES                     **                ***
                               WOOL                       *                ***
                               LEATH                                       ***
                               LUMBR                              **
                               ALL MFG                                     ***
                               COAL                                        ***
                               ELECT          **                 ***       ***
                               CONST                                       ***
Note:
  The F—tests whose outcomes are reported are tests of the joint significance of
  all 12 lags of the independent variable in the explanation of the dependent
  variable. (All variables are in growth rates.)
TABLE 12:      Percentaqes of forecast error k months ahead procuced by each
               innovation (pre—war/post—war)

                              1•     Iron and Steel
Forecast
error in:                  Triariqularized innovation in:

                    k           'P

       'P           6        di/91           2/3        3/5         6/1
                   12        79/87           5/4        4/6        13/2
                   24        66/85           8/5        5/8        21/2
                   48        63/85           8/5        6/8        23/2
       EMP          6        31/55           1/1       63/41        5/3
                   12        29/52           4/6       59/39        8/4
                   24        29/51           5/7       53/38       12/4
                   48        29/51           6/7       51/38       15/4

       HRS          6        40/43          40/52      19/4         2/1
                   12        41/41          34/50      19/7         7/2
                   24        40/41          31/49      17/8        12/2
                   48        39/41          31/49      17/8        13/2
      i 1R          6         3/4            3/H        6/1        88/86
                   12         6/6            5/9        7/4        82/82
                   24         8/6            6/9        8/4        78/81
                   48          /6            7/9        8/4        77/81

      pp.ofl        6        57/76          29/10       3/12       11/2
                   12        49/74          30/10       5/13       16/2
                   24        40/73          30/11       7/14       24/3
                   4.        39/73          30/11       7/14       24/3
                          TABLE 12: (Continued)

                            4•   Paper arid Pulp
                      Trianqularized innovation in:
Forecast
error in:     k            IP             HRS         EMP     WR


       I?      6           83/92           3/2        10/5     4/0
              12           75/83           6/3        11/7     8/7
              24           71/80           8/3        12/7    10/9
              48           71/80           8/3        12/7    10/9
       EMP     6           21/31           1/5        72/62    6/2
              12           19/30           5/6        68/57    8/7
              24           19/30           5/6        65/55   11/10
              48           19/30           5/6        65/54   11/10
       HRS        6        30/11          61/86        3/2     6/2
              12           32/14          56/80        4/3     8/3
              24           32/14          54/79        4/4    10/4
              48           32/14          54/79        4/4    10/4
       WR      6            9/1           10/2         2/2    80/96
              12           13/2           10/3         8/3    69/93
              24           13/3           10/4        10/3    67/91
                           13/3.          10/4        10/3    66/91
       PROD       6        50/64          26/18       19/17    5/1
              12           45/60          27/16       20/18    8/6
              24           43/58          26/17       19/18   12/8
              48           43/58           26/17      19/18   12/8
                        TAELE 12:   (Continued)

                   7. Leather tanning and finishing

                    Triangularized innovation in:

Forecast
error in:     k          I?           HRS           E!1P


       IP      6         84/90         5/3           8/5     3/2
              12         80/87         8/5           7/5     4/3
              24         78/85        10/7           8/5     5/4
              48         78/85         10/7          8/5     5/4

       EP1P    6         21/8          8/9          69/82    2/2
              12         23/8          9/10         65/78    4/4
              24         29/8          9/10         58/78    4/4
              48         29/8         10/10         56/78    5/4

       MRS     6         19/3         69/89          7/3     6/5
              12         21/5         65/84          8/6     6/6
              24         23/5         61/82          9/6     7/7
              48         24/5         60/81          9/6     7/7

               6          8/3         12/1           7/3    72/92
              12         14/4         14/3           8/5    64/88
              24         16/5         16/3           9/5    59/87
              98         16/5         16/3          9/5     58/87

       PROD    6         24/58        36/14         37/26    3/1
              12         33/55        34/17         30/25    4/3
              24         34/54        34/17         28/25    4/4
              48         35/53        34/17         28/25    4/4
                      TABLE 12:   (Continued)

                   9. All mariufacturinq firms

                  Triangularized innovations in:


Forecast
error in:     k          IP         HRS         EMP      WR

     1P       6          94/93        1/2        3/4     2/1
             12          77/86        8/4        8/7     7/3
             24          71/82       12/6       10/9     7/3
             48          70/80       12/6       11/10    7/4

     EMP      6          64/59        1/2       33/39    2/0
             12          57/57        9/3       31/39    3/2
             24          54/57       11/4       30/38    5/2
             48          53/56       11/4       31/38    5/2

     HRS      6          51/22      38/74       9/4      1/1
             12          47/21       38/71      12/5     2/3
             24          46/22      37/68       14/6     4/4
             48          46/22      37/68       14/6     4/4

     WR       6           7/2        5/3        11/1    77/94
             12           7/3        9/3        14/2    70/92
             24          13/4        9/3        15/2    62/91
             48          14/4        9/3        16/2    61/91

     PRO!)    6          22/18      41/47       36/34    2/1
             12          22/18      39/44       34/35    5,13
             24          20/19      39/42       35/36    5/3
             48          21/19      39/42       35/36    5/3
                 TABLE 13:         Trough—to—peak ratios of seven variables
                                   for four selected recessions

                                    I:     1933 I /1929   III
                                It:        1938 11/1937   II
                               III:        1975 I /1973   IV
                                   IV:     1982 IV/1981   III



                              IP         EMP                    PROD                  EARN
Industry   Cycle


 STEEL       I               .17         .50      .56           .62     .91     .84    .50
            II               .36         .72      .65           .77     .95     .92    .62
           III               .87         .96      ..            .95    1.00     .81    .95
            [V               .57         .68      .96           .87     .99    1.05    .94



  AUTOS      I               .18         .40      .76           .58     .99     .88    .75
            II               .36         .49      .85           .86    1.02     .90    .87
           [II               .60         .74      .93        .88        .95     .92    .88
            IV               .96         .87     1.01       1.10        .97     .97    .97



  MEAT       I               .91         .77      .95       1.25        .95    1.50    .90
            II           1.07            .93     1.03       1.12        .9')   1.12   1.02
           III            .97            .98      .99       1.00       1.01    1.17   1.00
            IV               .90         .96     1.00           .94     .94     .94    .94



  PAPER      I               .59         .74      .79       1.01        .99     .87    .79
            II               .71         .87      .86           .95    1.06    1.13    .91
           III               .74         .88      .95        .89        .96     .82    .91
            IV               .98         .95      .99       1.05       1.02    1.02   1.01



  SHOES      I               .79         .89      .92           .96     .99     .95    .91
            II               .82         .93      .73       1.20       1.00    1.02    .73
           [II               .81         .87      .91       1 .03       .95     .98    .86
            [V               .87         .91      .98           .97    1.00    1.01    .qR
                            TABLE 13: (continued)



                       IP      EP       HRS         PROD     WR    WP       EARN
Indus       Cycle


 WOOL        I        .62      .73      .88      .95        .94   1.23       .83
                               .68      .80      .80       1.01   1.21       .81
            II        .44
                               .57      .71     1.16        .91   1.23       .65
           III        .47
            IV        .77      .77      .82     1.22        .99    NA        .82


             I        .76      .80      .91     1.04        .98   1.43       .89
 LEATH
            II        .71      .79      .85     1.06       1.03   1.23       .87
           III       1.03      .99      .99     1.06        .95   1.24       .94
            IV        .88      .90     1.01      .97       1.02   1.07      1.03

                                        .74     1.04        .92   1.13       .68
 LUMBR       I        .32      .42
                               .86      .87      .89       1.02   1.22       .88
            II        .67
                                                            .96   1.21       .91
           LII        .75      .78      .94     1.01
                     1.10      .99     1.02     1.09       1.01   1.06      1.02
            IV




 ALL MPG     I        .50
                                                                             .78
            II        .62      .73      .81     1           .97   1   .04
                      .81      .88      .96                 .97       .88    .93
           III
                               .90      .99     1   .01     .99   1   .02    .98
            IV        .90




           III       1.05     1.20     1.01         .87     .96       .68    .97
 COAL
            IV        .83      .84      .91     1.09       1.02   1.02       .93


                               .98      .97     1.00        .96    .80       .94
ELECT      III        .96
                              1.00     1.01      .93       1.02   1.00      1.02
            IV        .93

           III        .78      .87       .98     .92        .94    .89       .92
CONST
            IV        .99      .93       .98    1.09       1.00   1.04       .98



Note:
 The variables from which the ratios are formed are detrended, deseasonalized,
 quarterly averages of levels (not growth rates). Peak and trough quarters are
 from the official NBER chronology.
                     Figure 1
Response of log—levels to innovation in output growth
              Prewar, iron and steel




   Figure la here                Figure lb here




   Figure ic here                Figure ld here
                       Figure 2

Response of log—levels to innovation in output growth
               Postwar, iron and steel




     Figure 2a here                Figure 2b here




     Figure 2c here                 Figure 2d here
                  FIGURE LA
                     EMPLOYMENT
    OUTPUT
1            12     2             36
     00




     LO




(9   c'J
U-
            FIGURE ic
                    OUTPUT
    WAGES
1    12       2'4            36   14
         FIGURE




                OUTPUT




1   12     24            36
                  FIGURE 2A
                         EMPLOYMENT
    OUTPUT
1            12     2i                36
                 FIGURE   2



                      OUTPUT




    HOURS




1           12      214        31
                 FIGURE   2..c
                     OUTPUT
    WAGES
1           12     214           36
         FIGURE 2i




             OUTPUT




1   12     2'4        36
                                   References
ALTONJI, JOSEPH AND ORLEY ASHENFELTER [19801, "Wage Movements and the Labour
        Market Equilibrium Hypothesis," Economica, Vol. 47, Pp. 217-45.
ANDERSON, T. W. [19711, The Statistical Analysis of Time Series, New York: Wiley.
ASHENFELTER, ORLEY AND DAVID CARD [1982], "Time Series fl:prescntations of Eco-
        nomic Variables and Alternative Models of the Labour Market," Review of Eco-
        nomic Studies, Vol. 40, pp. 261-82.
BAILY, MAETIN NEIL [1977], "On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment," Econo-
       metrica, Vol. 45, pp. 1043-6..
BALL, R. J. AND E. B. A. ST. CYR [1966], "Short-term Employment Functiojs
        in British Manufacturing Industry," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 33, pp.
        170- 207.

BARRO, ROBERT J. AND HERSCHEL I. GROSSMAN [19711, "A General Disequilibrium
        Model of Income and Employment," American Economic Review, Vol. 61, pp.
        82-03.
BENEY, M. ADA [1036], Wages, Hours, and Employment in the United States, 1914-1936,
       New York: National Industrial Conference Board.
BERNANKE, BEN S. [1983], "On the Sources of Labor Productivity Variation in U.s.
        Manufacturing, 1947-1080," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 65, pp. 214-
        24.

BERNSTEIN, IRVING 110601, The Lean Years: A History of the American Worker, 1920-
      1933, Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
BODKIN. RONALD C. [1069], "Real Wages and Cyclical Variations in Employment: A
      Re-examination of the Evidence," Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 2, pp.
        353-74.
BRECHLINC. F. P. R. [1065], "The Relationship Between Output and Employment
     in British Manufacturing Industries," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 32, ip.
        187-2 16.

B RECHLING, F. P. R. AND P. 0. O'BRIEN [10671, "Short-run Employment Functions
      in Manufacturing hubistries: Ai.i International Comparison," Review of Economic
      Studies. Vol. 90, pp. 277-87.
BI?Y, CERHAED [1050]. "The Average Workweek as an Economic Indicator, occasional
        PaI,rr no. GO, NBER.
BURNS, ARTHUR F. AND WESLEY C. MITCHELL [1047], Measuring Busi'iess Gycles,
       New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
CHIRINKO, ROBERT [1080], "The Real Wage Over the Business Cycle," Review of Eco-
      nvmics and Statistics, Vol. 62, pp. 459-61.
CLARK, KIM B. AND RICHARD B. FREEMAN [1980], "Flow Elastic Is he Demand for
      Labor?." Rcvww of Economies anl Statistic.s, Vol. 62, pp. 500-20.

                                          1
(iOEN, ROBERT M. AND BERT G. HICKMAN [1970], "Constrained Joint Estimation of
        Factor Demand and Production Functions," Review of Economics and Statistics,
        Vol. 52, pp. 287-300.
CREAMER, DANIEL [1950], "Behavior of Wage Rates During Business Cycles," occasional
        paper no. 34, NBER.
DOAN, T. A. AND R. B. LITTERMAN [1981], RATS User's Manual, Version 4.1, Min-
      neapolis: VAR Econometrics.
DUNLOP, JOHN T. [1938], "T1e Movement of Real and Money Wage Rates," Economic
     Journal, Vol. 48, pp. 413-34.
ECKSTEIN, OTTO AND THOMAS A. WILSON [1064], "Short-run Productivity Behavior
      in tJ.S. Manufacturing," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 46, pp. 41-54.
FAIR, RAY C. [1969], The Short-run Demand for Workers and Hours, Amsterdam: North-
        Holland.
CEARY, PATRICK T. AND JOHN KENNAN [1982], "The Employment - Real Wage Re-
        lationship: An International Study," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 90, pp.
        854-71.
CORDON, ROBERT J. [1980], "The 'End-of-Expansion' Phenomenon in Short-run Pro-
     ductivty Behavior," Working Paper 427, NBER.
       [1082], "Why U.S. Wage and Employment Behavior Differs From That In Britain
     and Japan," Economic Journal, Vol. 92, pp. 13-44.
GRANCER, C. \V. J. AND M. HATANAKA [1064], Spectral Analysis of Economic Time
        Series,
HALL, ROBERT E. [1980], "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, pp. 91-124.
HANNAN, E. J. [1970], Multiple Time Series, New York: Wiley.
HAUSE, JOHN C. [1071], "Spectral Analysis and the Detection of Lead-Lag Relations,"
      American Economic Review, Vol. 61, No. 1, pp. 213-17..
HULTGREN, THOR [1060], "Changes in Labor Cost During Cycles in Production and
     Business." occasional paper no. 74, New York: NEER.
      [1065], Costs, Prices, and Profits: Their Cyclical Relations, New York: NBER.
IRELAND, J. J.. AND D. .J. SMYTH [1067]. "Short-term Employment Functions in
        Australian Manufacturiug, Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 49, pp. 537-
        44.
JEROME, HARRY [1034], Mechanization in Industry. New York: National Bureau of Eco-
      nomic Research.
KEYNES, JOHN MAYNARD [1036], The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
       Money. London: MacMillan.
--——--——-—-—-[1039], Relative Movements of Real Wages and Output," Economic Journal,
       Vol. 49, pp. 34-51.

                                          2
KUH, EDWIN [1960], "Profits, Profit Markups, and Productivity," Joint Economic Activity
       paper no. 15.
         [1965], "Cyclical and Secular Labor Productivity in United States Manufactur-
       ing," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 97, pp. 1-12.
LUCAS, ROBERT E., JR. [1970], "Capacity, Overtime, and Empirical Production Func.
      tions," American Economic Review, Vol. 60, pp. 23-27.
MASTERS, STANLEY H. [1967], "The Behavior of Output per Man During Recessions:
     Au Empirical Study of Underemployment," Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 33,
     pp. 388-04.
MEDOFF, JAMES L. [1979], "Layoffs and Alternatives under Trade Unions in U.S. Man-
     ufactiiring," American Economic Review, Vol. 69, pp. 380-95.
MITCHELL, WESLEY C. [1051], What Happens During Business Gycles, Cambridge, Ma.:
      Riverside Press for NBER.
MOORE, GEOFFREY H. [1955], "Business Cycles and the Labor Market," Monthly Labor
     Review, Vol. 78, pp. 288-02.
MORRISON, CATHERINE J. AND ERNST R. BERNDT [1981], "Short-run Labor Produc-
      tivity in a Dynamic Model," Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 16, pp. 339-65.
NADIR!, M. ISHAQ AND SHERWIN ROSEN [1973], A Disequilibrium Model of Demand
       for Factors of Production, New York: Columbia U. Press for NBER.
NEFTCI, SALIH N. [1078], "A Time-Series Analysis of the Real Wages - Employment
      Relationship," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, pp. 281-91.
——-———[1079J, "Lead-Lag Relations, Exogeneity, and Prediction of Economic Time Se-
    ries," Econometrica, Vol. 47, pp. 101-13.
01, WALTER Y. [1062], "Labor as a Quasi-Fixed Factor," Journal of Political Economy,
        Vol. 70, pp. 538-55.
OKUN, ARTHUR M. [1062], "Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance," Amer.
      ican Statistical Association, Proceedings of the Business and Economics Section,
        pp. 08-104.
OTANI, ICHIRO [1078], "Real Wages and Business Cycles Revisited," Review of Economics
        and Statistics, Vol. 60, pp. 301-04.
PINDYCK, ROBERT S. AND JULIO J. ROTEMBERG [1982], "Dynamic Factor Demands
      and the Effects of Energy Price Shocks," Research Paper , M.I.T..
RUGGLES, RICHARD [1040], "The Relative Movements of Real and Money Wage Rates,"
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 130-40.
SACHS, JEFFREY [1070], Wages, Profits, and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A Compara-
      tive Study," l3rookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, pp. 269-319.
        [1080], "The Changing Cyclical Behavior of Wages and Prices: 1800-1976,"
      American Economic Review, Vol. 70, pp. 78-00.
SARGENT, THOMAS J. [1978], "Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules Under
      Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, pp. 1009-44.

                                          3
SARGENT, THOMAS [1079], Macroeconomic Theory, New York: Academic Press.
SAYRE, R. A. [1040], "Wages, Hours, and Employment in the United States, 1034-1030,"
       Conference Board Economic Record 2, Vol. 10, pp. 115-37.
                Consumers' i7rices, i914-193, New York: National Industrial Conference
       Board.
SHISKIN, JULIUS [1061], "Sigiials of Recession and Recoverj," occasional paper no. 77,
        NB ER.
SIMS, CHRISTOPHER A. [1074], "Output and Labor Input in Manufacturing," Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 3, pp. 605-728.
-
         [1080], Macroeconomics and Reality," Econornetrica, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 1-48.
SLICTER, SUMNER H., JAMES J. HEALY, AND E. ROBERT LIVERNASH [lOGoj, The
       Impact of Collective Bargaining on Management, Washington.
SOLOW, ROBERT M. [1068], "Distribution in the Long and Short Run." in Jean Mar-
     chal aIl(l Bernard Ducrois, Proceedings of a conference held by the International
     Economics Association at Palermo, New York: St. Martin's Press.
         [1073], "Some Evidence on the Short-rnn Productivity Puzzle." In Jagdish Bhag-
        wati and Richard Eckaus, Development and Planning: Essays in lloiiour of Paul
        Rosenstein—Ro dan, Lomlon: Allen and Unwin.
SOLOW, ROBERT M. AND JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ [1068], "Output, Employment, and
     Wages in the Short Run," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 82, pp. 537-60.
STOCK, JAMES H. [1983], Economic Models Subject to Time Deformation, PhD Thesis,
      University of California at Berkeley.
STOKMAN, ALAN C. [1983], "Aggregation Bias and the Cyclical Behavior of Real
     Vages," Research Paper , U. of Rochester.
TARSuS, L0EIE [1930], "Changes in Real and Money Wages," Economic Journal, Vol.
      49, pp. 150-54.
'rATOM, JOHN A. [1080], "The 'Problem' of Procyclical Real Wages and Productivity,"
      Jmrnal of Political Economy, Vol. 88, pp. 385-04.
WOYTINSKY, 'N . S . [10421, Three Aspects (If Labor Dynamics, Washington: Committee
        on Social Security - Social Science Research Council.
ZARNOWITZ, VICTOR AND CHAPLOTTE BOSCHAN [1975]. "Cyclical Indicators: An Eval-
        nation and New Leading indexes," Business Conditions Digest, Vol., i. v—xix.
ZEISEL, .JOSEPH S. [1058], "The Workweek in American Industry, 1850-1056," Monthly
        LaI,or Review, Vol. 81, pp. 23—20.




                                             4
