                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EFFECTS OF WEIGHT ON CHILDREN'S EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT

                                          Robert Kaestner
                                         Michael Grossman

                                        Working Paper 13764
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13764


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2008




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the International Health Economic Association’s
6th World Congress on Health Economics held in Copenhagen, Denmark, from Sunday, 8 July to
Wednesday, 11 July 2007. The authors thank Bo MacInnis, Tony LoSasso, Lorens Helmchen, David
Merriman, Christopher Ruhm and seminar participants at the University of Illinois at Chicago and
University of North Carolina-Greensboro for comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Robert Kaestner and Michael Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Weight on Children's Educational Achievement
Robert Kaestner and Michael Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 13764
January 2008
JEL No. I12,I20

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we investigate the association between weight and children's educational achievement,
as measured by scores on Peabody Individual Achievement Tests in math and reading, and grade attainment.
Data for the study came from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY),
which contains a large, national sample of children between the ages of 5 and 12. We obtained estimates
of the association between weight and achievement using several regression model specifications that
controlled for a variety of observed characteristics of the child and his or her mother, and time-invariant
characteristics of the child. Our results suggest that, in general, children who are overweight or obese
have achievement test scores that are about the same as children with average weight.


Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois at Chicago
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Michael Grossman
Ph.D. Program in Economics
City University of New York Graduate Center
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
Introduction

        Growing rates of childhood obesity and the potential long term health consequences of obesity

have focused public attention on identifying the causes of and solutions to obesity. While the health

consequences of obesity are potentially serious, obesity may also adversely affect other dimensions of

child well-being that have long-term and equally important consequences. Specifically, obesity may

reduce educational achievement. There is a large literature on the stigma and discrimination that

overweight and obese students face and these societal influences may adversely affect student

performance. The National Education Association (NEA) commissioned a study of the issue that

concluded as follows:

        “For fat students, the school experience is one of ongoing prejudice, unnoticed
        discrimination, and almost constant harassment. From nursery school through
        college, fat students experience ostracism, discouragement, and sometimes
        violence. Often ridiculed by their peers and discouraged by even well-meaning
        education employees, fat students develop low self-esteem and have limited
        horizons. They are deprived of places on honor rolls, sports teams, and
        cheerleading squads and are denied letters of recommendation.” (National
        Education Association, 1994)

Discriminatory behavior towards overweight and obese children may also bring on depression and cause

children to adopt coping mechanisms (e.g., substance use) that could further harm educational

achievement. Moreover, obesity may directly reduce cognitive achievement because of physiological

consequences of obesity such as sleep apnea and asthma.

        Despite plausible mechanisms linking obesity (weight) to educational achievement there has been

relatively little research that has investigated the effect of obesity on children’s educational achievement.

From a public policy point of view this is unfortunate because there are several potential justifications for

government action. First, if size (weight) discrimination is the cause of reduced educational achievement,

then the government should arguably take action to eliminate or offset the effects of such discrimination

so that children and parents undertake the appropriate amount of investments in education. Second,

several government policies related to food prices (e.g., farm subsidies), the built environment (e.g.,

transportation and zoning), and physical activity (e.g., school programs) may be partly responsible for the



                                                                                                                2
growth in obesity. If obesity deters human capital investment, current and future government polices that

potentially affect obesity need to consider this consequence. Finally, given the firmly documented

positive relationship between education and health, enhancing the educational achievement of overweight

and obese children may decrease the future social costs of obesity-related health problems.

         The purpose of this paper is to provide evidence of the association between overweight and

obesity, and children’s educational achievement, as measured by scores on achievement tests and grade

attainment. We focus on children between the ages of 5 and 12, and data come from the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979 children cohort), which covers the period from 1986 to 2004. We

conduct a number of cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses that compare the achievement test scores of

overweight and obese children to the achievement scores of normal weight children. We find little

evidence that overweight and obese children’s educational achievement has been adversely affected by

their weight.



Previous Literature

         There are relatively few studies of the effects of obesity on educational achievement.1 Tara and

Potts-Datema (2005) reviewed nine recent studies and reported that all nine showed at least one negative

association between obesity and school performance, but that this was not a uniform finding of this

research. Moreover, these studies varied significantly in size and quality ranging from a study of 65

obese children ages 8 to 13 in Brazil, to 60,000 Finnish adolescents, to 12,537 persons aged 23 who were

born in England and Scotland the week of March 3-9, 1958. As Sigfusdotir et al. (2006) note in their

recent paper, well-designed empirical studies of the relationship between obesity and academic

achievement are scarce.



1
 There is a somewhat larger, although still relatively small, literature on the effects of child health on educational
achievement and some of these papers use weight as an indicator of child health (e.g., Edwards and Grossman 1979;
Shakotko et al. 1981; Blau and Grossberg 1992; and Korenman, Miller and Sjaastad 1994; Rosenzweig and Wolpin
1994; Kaestner and Corman 1995). However, all but Shakotko et al. (1981) and Edwards and Grossman (1979)
focused on underweight as a measure of health.


                                                                                                                     3
        Studies of adolescents often find negative associations between obesity and educational

achievement.2 For example, Falkner et al. (2001) studied this issue using a sample of 10th, 11th, and 12th

grade students in Connecticut. Results from multivariate regression analyses indicated that obese girls

were 1.51 times more likely to be held back a grade than normal weight girls. A similar association was

not found for boys. Sabia (2007) studied a geographically broader sample of adolescents aged 14 to 17

drawn from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health, and he used a variety of statistical

methods (e.g., fixed effects and instrumental variables) to account for potential confounding from omitted

variables. In general, he found that obesity was negatively correlated with grade point average (GPA),

although the most robust and consistent evidence of this association was limited to white, female

adolescents. For this group, the GPA of obese girls was approximately 10 percent lower than that of

normal weight girls. Finally, Sigfusdotir et al. (2006) found that among Icelandic youth aged 14 to 15, a

high Body Mass Index (1 or 2 standard deviations above mean) was associated with lower grades after

adjusting for personal and family characteristics. While not an exhaustive review, these studies are the

largest and most sophisticated and their findings suggest that obesity is associated with lower educational

achievement of adolescents.3

        Studies of the effect of obesity on children’s educational achievement are particularly scarce. We

know of only three studies that used a large, geographically broad-based sample.4 Edwards and

Grossman (1979) used data on children aged 6 to 11 from the Cycle II of the National Health

Examination Survey, conducted between 1963 and 1965. They found that overweight kids had lower

scores on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC) and the Wide Range Achievement Test


2
  Shakotko, Edwards, and Grossman (1981) investigated the effect of being overweight in childhood (ages 6-11) on
scores from the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC) and the Wide Range Achievement
Test (WRAT) in adolescence (ages 12-17) using children who were examined in two consecutive National Health
Examination Surveys (II and III). Estimates were obtained in the context of a Granger-causality model.
Coefficients of overweight were positive, but not significant.
3
  Canning and Mayer (1967) compared obese and non-obese high school student in suburban Boston and found no
difference in test (SAT) scores or educational aspirations. Gortmaker et al. (1993) studied adolescents and young
adults from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and found that girls between the ages of
16 and 23 who were overweight had 0.3 years less education than normal weight girls eight years later.
4
  Geier et al. (2007) investigated the relationship between weight and school absences. Among a sample of
elementary school student in Philadelphia, obese students missed more school than non-obese students.


                                                                                                                    4
(WRAT) than children of normal weight. However, these effects were not statistically significant.

Datar and Sturm (2006) analyzed the association between becoming overweight (>95 percentile of BMI),

and changes in math and reading tests scores and grade repetition between Kindergarten and third grade.

The sample used in this study consisted of approximately 7,000 children from 1,000 Kindergarten classes

in the US who were part of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS). Datar and Sturm (2006)

used multivariate regression methods to obtain estimates of the association between changes in

overweight status and achievement and included controls for baseline achievement, child, family and

school characteristics. Results indicated that girls who became overweight had lower math and reading

scores than girls who were never overweight. The largest effect was for reading; becoming overweight

decreased reading scores by 12 to 14 percent of a standard deviation. For boys, becoming overweight had

no statistically significant effect on achievement.

         Averett and Stifel (2007) is the closest study to ours, as they used the same data, the children of

the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979 cohort), and studied children of similar ages (6 to 13).

They used a variety of statistical methods (e.g., fixed effects and instrumental variables) to control for

unmeasured factors and found that being overweight is associated with lower reading scores, but not

lower math scores. They also examined underweight and found that being underweight is associated with

lower math scores, but not lower reading scores. Most estimates are relatively small in magnitude

(approximately 10 percent of a standard deviation).5

         While the findings from previous studies suggest that obesity has an adverse effect on children’s

educational achievement, there are several reasons why more study is warranted. First, given that there

are only three previous studies, additional studies of the effect of obesity on educational achievement of

young children are needed. Second, there is a need for more research that addresses the probable

confounding from omitted variables. Children’s weight is likely to be correlated with several hard-to-

measure determinants of educational achievement. Therefore, cross sectional analyses that adjust for a


5
 Averett and Stifel (2007) also reported instrumental variables estimates, but these are imprecisely estimated and
implausibly large.


                                                                                                                     5
limited number of covariates are unlikely to provide an accurate estimate of the effect of obesity on

children’s educational achievement. Consider the results from Falkner et al. (2001). Unadjusted odds

ratio indicated that obese girls were 114 percent more likely to be held back a grade than normal weight

girls, but after adjusting for grade, race and parental socioeconomic status, this obesity disadvantage

decreased to 51 percent—approximately a halving of the effect size. While still statistically significant,

the large reported decrease in estimates when just a few covariates are included suggest a significant

amount of selection (omitted variables) and make it difficult to draw any conclusions from the Falkner et

al. (2001) study. Results reported by Sabia (2007) also indicate a significant amount of selection and

potential bias from omitted variables.6

         Only three studies have addressed the omitted variable problem directly: Datar and Sturm (2006),

Sabia (2007) and Averett and Steifel (2007). All three used longitudinal data to control for unmeasured,

time-invariant child and family characteristics, and Sabia (2007) and Averett and Stifel (2007) also used

an instrumental variables approach. The limited amount of research that accounts for the influence of

unobserved factors suggests the need for additional research and specifically, research that addresses this

issue.

         A third reason more research is needed is the theoretical models of the effect of obesity on

children’s educational achievement are complex and mapping such models into an appropriate empirical

specification is difficult (Todd and Wolpin 2003, 2007). Several issues arise. To begin, how should

weight and obesity be measured? To answer this question requires specification of the causal pathways

through which weight and obesity affect achievement. Consider discrimination. Does size (weight)

discrimination exhibit a dose-response relationship, or is it more apparent above a specific relative or

absolute weight? Similarly, do the physiological consequences of obesity that may adversely affect

achievement begin at a specific threshold? Is that threshold the 95th percentile (i.e., standard definition of

obesity) of the contemporaneous or historical weight distribution? The ambiguity as to how to measure

6
  Sabia used adolescent reports of parental obesity as an instrument for weight. The theoretical validity of this
instrument is suspect, as genetic factors and family resources are likely to be correlated with parental weight and
these factors will affect adolescent achievement.


                                                                                                                      6
weight is illustrated by differences between studies of the effect of obesity on health, which mostly use

measures of obesity based on an historical (1970s) weight distribution, and studies of the effect of obesity

on educational achievement, which use measures of obesity (overweight) based on the contemporaneous

weight distribution.

        Yet another empirical issue is how to account for the likelihood that current educational

achievement is a function of a lifetime of influences (Todd and Wolpin 2003, 2007). How do researchers

control for these past influences? How does current weight and obesity fit into such a model? Past

research has not paid much attention to these issues and has proceeded in an ad hoc basis. For example,

Datar and Sturm (2006) use a model that makes third grade achievement scores dependent on baseline

(Kindergarten) achievement, changes in obesity, and characteristics measured primarily at the time of

third grade, although for some covariates both baseline and third grade values are included. There is no

justification given for this specification. Perhaps because of the absence of a well conceived

specification, some results are counter intuitive and raise questions as to the validity of other findings.

For example, child age in third grade is negatively associated with math scores and positively associated

with reading scores. Similarly, birth weight is positively associated with test scores for girls and

negatively associated with test scores of boys. While there are many potential specifications consistent

with models of cognitive achievement, more research is needed that acknowledges these issues and which

provides a more defensible model specification and research design.

        To summarize, there are several potential pathways through which weight and obesity may

adversely affect children’s educational achievement. However, there has been little study of the issue,

particularly for young children. The paucity of research in this area is significant given the importance of

education to lifetime well being. Here we begin to address this shortfall by providing an analysis of the

effect of weight on children’s educational achievement using a large, national sample of children aged 5

to 12. We obtain age- and gender-specific estimates of the association between weight status (e.g.,

overweight) and educational achievement. Other contributions of this research are the attention paid to




                                                                                                              7
model specification and justification, and the use of methods to control for unobserved factors that may

confound the association between obesity and children’s educational achievement.



Causal Pathways

         To motivate our empirical analysis of the relationship between weight and children’s educational

achievement, we rely on standard economic theories of the household and child quality (Becker 1965;

Becker and Lewis 1973; Grossman 1972). In these models, consumption goods that produce utility (well

being, satisfaction) for family members are produced by the household using time and market purchased

goods. Money to buy goods is earned by household members in the labor market. One of the most

important goods produced by the household is child quality, in this case, educational achievement.

However, child health is another aspect of child quality that is particular relevant to our study because

weight and obesity are related to child health.

         A core aspect of these household models is the production function for household consumption

goods, which is the relationship between inputs—the quantities of market goods and time used to produce

household consumption—and outputs—the quantity of consumption. For example, an admittedly ad-hoc

production function for child educational achievement may be specified as follows:

                        t
      Eit = α i + γ t + ∑ (τ k OWN ik + β k HEALTH ik + δ k PARik ) +
                      k =0
(1)
                 t
                ∑ (λk TEACH ik + π k PEERik + Z ik Γk ) +uit
               k =0

Equation (1) indicates that the educational achievement (E) of child i at age t depends on a child-specific

endowment (αt), (developmental) age at time t (γt), the time the child spends in educational activities

(OWN) at each age from birth to age t, child health (HEALTH) at each age from birth to age t, time spent

by family members (e.g., mother) producing education (PAR) from birth to age t, the quantity and quality

of school and teacher inputs (TEACH) from birth to age t, the quantity and quality of peer inputs (PEER)




                                                                                                              8
from birth to age t, and other market goods (Z) from birth to age t that are used to produce educational

achievement.

           Equation (1) assumes that determinants of educational achievement have different effects

depending on age, for example, the parental time input (PAR) will have a different effect at age 6 than at

age 10. However, equation (1) assumes that effects do not depend on time since investments were made,

which is equivalent to assuming that there is no depreciation of education capital. This specification was

chosen to facilitate estimation, which we discuss in more detail below including ways to test the

restrictions embodied in equation (1).

           All goods produced by the household have a production function analogous to equation (1) and

household resources are allocated to the production of different household goods so as to maximize

household well being within some framework of bargaining among household members. In general, the

determinants of the quantity of resources allocated to the production of any particular household good,

and therefore the quantity of any good produced, are the following (in all periods from birth to age t):

           •   prices of market inputs (e.g., TEACH, PEER, and Z);
           •   wages (price of time) of household members;
           •   health and educational endowments of each family member;
           •   productivity of family members in the production of household goods;
           •   preferences of family members;
           •   and endowed wealth. 7


           Our interest is to obtain estimates of the effect of weight on educational achievement. There are

several reasons why weight (overweight) would affect educational achievement. Probably the most

prominently cited potential cause is because of size (weight) discrimination. Overweight and obese

children face a variety of discrimination from peers and teachers that may adversely affect educational

achievement (Ritts et al. 1992; NEA 1994; Neumark-Sztainer et al. 1998; Jalongo 1999; Solovay 200;

Puhl and Brownell 2003; Schwartz and Puhl 2003; Eisenberg et al. 2003; Janssen et al. 2004). In terms of

equation (1), size discrimination (weight) would affect the quantity and quality of school and teacher



7
    The determinants of the bargaining power of various household members may be added to the list.


                                                                                                               9
inputs and the quantity and quality of peer inputs. Weight may even affect the quantity and quality of

parental inputs if households allocate resources in response to size discrimination (Crandall 1995; Puhl

and Latner 2007).

        Discrimination against overweight and obese children may also lead to depression (health in

equation 1) that can adversely affect educational achievement (Wurtman 1993; Smith et al. 1998; Hoebel

et al. 1999; Goodman and Whitaker 2002). However, the causal relationship between obesity and

depression is unresolved and some have argued that depression causes obesity, for example, because of

affective disorders such as binge eating. Others argue that there is a common genetic component linking

depression and obesity (Mustillo et al. 2003; Bjontorp and Rosmond 2000; Rosmond et al. 2001).

Childhood obesity is also associated with other aspects of health such as asthma, sleep apnea and sleeping

disorders, which may adversely affect cognitive functioning and school attendance, and thus educational

achievement (Gozal 1998; Dietz 1998; Must and Strauss 1999; Redline et al. 1999; Mutius et al. 2001;

Gilliland et al. 2003; Beuther et al. 2006; Geier et al. 2007). In the case of sleeping disorders, the

direction of causality is uncertain, as some have argued that inadequate sleep is a cause of obesity (Sekine

et al. 2002).

        Size (weight) discrimination could also affect the child’s time use. Ostracism may lead a child to

have fewer social relationships and engage in fewer social activities. This may result in greater time spent

in educational activities and higher educational achievement (all else equal). A child’s weight may also

affect their physical fitness and prevent children from engaging in recreational activities, which again

may provide more time for educational activities.

        In sum, past study from a variety of disciplines (e.g., psychology and medicine) suggests that

overweight and obese children may have lower educational achievement than normal weight children,

although the alternative, that obesity is associated with higher achievement, is possible. One way to

incorporate these causal pathways in the conceptual model is to replace the proximate causes of

educational achievement (e.g., child health) with determinants of those causes, most notably child weight.

Making these substitutions results in the following:


                                                                                                           10
                          t
                                                       ~
(2) E it = α~i + γ~t +   ∑ ( ρ WEIGHT
                                k          ik   + Z ik Γk ) + u~it
                         k =0


Equation (2) is a quasi-reduced form model because we have substituted for the determinants of

educational achievement, but weight (WEIGHT) remains endogenous.8 We have used the symbol ~ to

indicate a reduced form parameter. The coefficient on weight will measure the effect of weight that

operates through changes in the quantity or quality of educational inputs (e.g., child’s use of time, child

health, and school resources). We will focus on the quasi-reduced form.

           Theoretically, families will take the educational consequences of obesity into consideration when

allocating resources to the production of various goods, and so one may wonder whether this is an issue

for public concern. Presumably, the family will make the best choices given their constraints (e.g.,

wealth) and thus the weight (health) and educational achievement of the children from this family are

optimal—what the family prefers. In this case, while it may be of interest to understand how families

allocate resources to produce child outcomes, a specific focus on obesity and educational achievement

may not be particularly important.

           However, as mentioned earlier, obesity may be a problem from a social point of view because of

government policies that affect (distort) prices, which in turn affect household resource allocation. For

example, farm subsidies may lower the price of high-caloric foods and transportation policy may raise the

price of physical activity (e.g., walking). These will tend to increase obesity, all else equal, and

potentially reduce educational achievement. Families will take this into account, but they will have made

decisions in part because of government policy that may or may not be warranted. Moreover, given that

there is evidence that child obesity persists into adulthood and is strongly associated with some significant

health problems, reduced educational achievement of obese children may exacerbate the social cost of

health-related obesity problems that stem from imperfections in the health insurance market. Therefore,

analyses of the effect of obesity on children’s educational achievement are particularly relevant for public

policy.

8
    We discuss the source of endogeneity below.


                                                                                                              11
Empirical Implications

          The quasi-reduced form production function represented by equation (2) is the basis of our

empirical model. The main problem associated with obtaining estimates of an empirical analog to

equation (2) is that weight (WEIGHT) may be correlated with the error, which includes unmeasured

exogenous determinants of the inputs in the production function (equation 1). Further, the data

requirements necessary to obtain unbiased estimates of equation (2) are daunting, as the entire lifetime

history of the exogenous determinants of production function inputs enter the model.

          One approach to address this problem is to use instrumental variables, which theoretically uses

variation in child weight that is uncorrelated with unmeasured determinants of child educational

achievement. For example, Sabia (2007) and Averett and Stifel (2007) used parental obesity (weight) as

an instrument for child obesity (weight). However, parental obesity is likely to be correlated with family

resources and educational inputs in all periods from birth to age t, for example, because of size (weight)

discrimination in labor markets (see Cawley 2004). Therefore, parental obesity is likely to be correlated

with unmeasured educational inputs and is not likely to be a valid instrument. In general, it will be very

difficult to identify a valid instrument in the context of equation (2).

          One way to reduce the data demands of equation (2) is to examine changes in educational

achievement between two ages. Such a model is given by:

(3) Eit − Ei ( t −1) = (γ t − γ t −1 ) + ρ tWEIGHTit + Z it Γt + (u it − u i ( t −1) )

As is made clear by equation (3), the difference in educational achievement between ages t-1 and t

depends on the difference in developmental age (γt - γt-1) and resources used between these ages.

Notably, endowed intelligence (αi) is eliminated from the model.9 However, one consequence of this

approach is that estimates of the effects of educational inputs are specific to age t (Todd and Wolpin

2003, 2007).




9
 This is not necessarily the case, as the endowment could have different age-specific effects. If so, there would be a
age subscript on the endowment in equation (1) and differencing would not eliminate the endowment effect.


                                                                                                                   12
        Three aspects of equation (3) merit discussion. The first point relates to the fact that the left hand

side of equation (3) is the change in educational achievement, but the right hand side variables are the

levels of inputs between ages t-1 and t, or the change in stock of what may be referred to as educational

capital. For example, it is the weight of the child between ages t-1 and t that enters and not the change in

weight between ages t-1 and t. Similarly, it is the parental time input between ages t-1 and t that enters

and not the change in the parental time input ages t-1 and t. This specification results from the

assumption of equation (1) that the effects of educational inputs are cumulative. Consider child weight

and the hypothesis that there is size (weight) discrimination. The change in achievement (e.g., test scores)

between ages t-1 and t depends on the child’s weight at (during) age t. This is reasonable. It is not the

change in weight that matters, but the weight itself that brings forth discrimination that adversely affects

achievement. Analogously, it is not the change in parental time inputs that matter, but the actual amount

of time spent during the period producing child education. This point has not been well understood by

previous researchers and as a result, their models have been mis-specified (Todd and Wolpin 2003). For

example, Averett and Stifel (2007) and Sabia (2007) used fixed effects methods that regress differences in

educational achievement (e.g., test scores) on differences in children’s weight, which is incorrect given

the specification of equation (1).10 Similar problems are present in Datar and Sturm (2006).

        Second, because most educational inputs are not measured, proxy variables (i.e., reduced form

determinants) are often used. For example, mother’s educational achievement is used as a measure of the

quality of parental time input. This “quality” input enters the production function each period and

therefore is included in equation (3) even if it is time-invariant. Similarly, a time-invariant demographic

characteristic such as race, which may be a proxy for unmeasured inputs, also enters the model because of

the age-specific effects of inputs.




10
  There may be a measurement error problem given the nature of most available data. In our case, weight is
measured at time t-2 and t and may not be constant during the period. Possible solutions include using the average
of time t-2 and t weights, which is our approach. Using the difference in weight between periods, however, is not
justified.


                                                                                                                 13
        The age-specific estimates of equation (3) merit further discussion. Consider the case in which

the period t-1 to t represents two years, as in our data. In this case, the coefficient on weight (e.g.,

obesity), which is best measured as obesity between time t-1 and t, measures the effect of obesity on the

growth in educational achievement between time t-1 and t. Obesity (and other inputs) may have a

different effect at each age. Indeed, it would be surprising if that was not the case as cognitive

development slows over time (see Table 1). Changes in achievement test scores between ages 7/8 and

9/10 are larger than changes in achievement test scores between ages 9/10 and 11/12. While this may

reflect a decrease in the amount of educational inputs with age, it more likely reflects a declining marginal

productivity (effects) of inputs, which is consistent with an age specific effect specified in equation (1).

However, there may be other causes of age-specificity of effects. For example, discrimination associated

with obesity may be more important at older than young ages.

While equation (3) reduces the data demands necessary to estimate the model considerably, it remains

unlikely that all relevant variables will be measured and estimates of the effect of weight (obesity) may

still be biased. Given the common set of underlying factors that affect resource allocation decisions, the

quantities of measured inputs (weight) are likely to be correlated with the error, which includes time-

varying, unmeasured exogenous (e.g., preferences) determinants of educational inputs. One solution is

instrumental variables and the structure of equation (3) suggests many potential instruments. Specifically,

inputs in periods prior to t-1 may be used as instruments because only time t inputs are included in

equation (3) (Todd and Wolpin 2003). The assumption underlying this approach is that the future does

not cause the past and therefore, for example, weight in period t-2 will be uncorrelated with the error

(uit − ui (t −1) ) in equation (3). Therefore, weight in period t-2 can be used as an instrument for weight in

period t. In our case, past weight is likely to be a particularly good instrument in that it is likely to be




                                                                                                                 14
strongly correlated with current weight given the documented persistence of weight (Serdula et al. 1993;

Lake et al. 1997; McTigue et al. 2002; Whitaker et al. 1998).11

        The fact that past period inputs, or their determinants, do not enter equation (3) provides the basis

of a specification test. If included, past period inputs should have no statistically significant effect on

achievement. In our case, we implemented this test by including lagged family income in some versions

of equation (3). In all cases, lagged income was not significantly related to achievement, which provides

evidence to support the specification of equation (3). We chose income to implement the test because it is

likely to be correlated with the level of inputs used in that period.



Data

        The data for the analysis are drawn from the children of the National Longitudinal Survey of

Youth (NLSY)—1979 Cohort. We focused on children between the ages of 7 and 12 who were born to

female respondents of the NLSY who themselves were born from 1957 to 1964 and who were living in

the United States in 1978. Children and mothers were interviewed every two years between 1986 and

2004, which is the last year of data used in the analysis. The NLSY child survey collected detailed

information about children and their mothers.

        Children’s cognitive achievement was assessed in several ways. We focus on the Peabody

Individual Achievement Test (PIATs) for math, reading recognition and reading comprehension. The

validity and reliability of these assessments are well documented (Center for Human Resources 2006).

The PIAT math test measures a child’s attainment in mathematics as taught in mainstream education.

The PIAT reading recognition test measures word recognition and pronunciation ability. The PIAT

reading comprehension test measures a child’s ability to derive meaning from sentences that are read

silently, and is given to children with a specified minimum score (19) on the PIAT reading recognition

test. Notably, all children age five and over take the same PIAT test, but begin the test at different points


11
  Note that while we used lagged weight as an instrument, we do so in the context of a first difference model. Sabia
(2007) and Averett and Stifel (2007) used lagged weight without taking differences.


                                                                                                                 15
appropriate for their age. A basal and ceiling are established for each child and scores are calculated as

the ceiling minus the number of incorrect answers between the basal and ceiling. This provides a

consistent metric to assess changes in test scores over time.

        The weight and height of children was recorded at each interview and for approximately two-

thirds of the children these measurements were made using a scale and tape. The remaining children’s

weight and height was reported by the mother. We use weight and height to calculate body mass index

(BMI). Specifically, we measure weight as the average of weights at times t-2 and t, as children are

surveyed every two years in the NLSY. As noted above, it is the weight during the period between time t-

2 and t that is the appropriate measure, and given available data the average weight is a good

approximation of this variable. We categorize children according to where their BMI falls in the

distribution of children’s weight in the First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey

(NHANES I).12 We use the following percentile categories for the first measure: 0-5, 6-15, 16-84, 85-94,

95-100. As can be seen in Table 1, the weight distribution of the children of the NLSY is shifted to the

right vis-à-vis the weight distribution of children in the NHANES I and this fact reflects the widely

reported growth in obesity of children. Approximately 30 percent of the NLSY children are considered

overweight on the basis of the NHANES I standard, and between 15 to 20 percent of the NLSY children

are in the top two NHANES I categories. As discussed earlier, it is unclear how weight may affect

educational achievement. For example, discrimination may be based on relative weight and therefore use

of the NAHNES I standard may be inappropriate. To address this issue, we also classified children based

on the contemporaneous weight distribution. Specifically we used the following percentile categories: 0-

10, 11-30, 31-50, 51-70, 71-90, 91-100. Results using these alternative categories were similar to those

reported below and are not presented, but are available form the authors.

        The NLSY also provides detailed data about the mothers and children. We make use of the

following information about the child: race, age, gender, grade in school, birth order, birth weight. For


12
  Published data on the weight distribution of children age 5 from the NHANES I was not available so we use the
cutoffs for children age 6.


                                                                                                                  16
mothers, we used information on: age at birth, age, BMI, educational attainment, AFQT test score, marital

status, number of children born, nativity, hours of work and weeks worked per year, and mother’s family

background (family structure at age 14, magazines and books in household).

          It is clear by the description of the data that we are missing information on most inputs that are

likely to enter the child educational production function. As is common in the literature, we use variables

that proxy for these inputs such as mother’s education, AFQT test score, and marital status, which are

likely to be correlated with the quantity and quality of maternal time spent producing child educational

achievement. Similarly, child characteristics (e.g., age and birth order) proxy for inputs related to the

child.

          The sample sizes by age and gender of child are provided in Table 1. In general, the sample sizes

are sufficiently large, approximately 2200 per two-year age group, to obtain precise estimates and to

detect reliably effect sizes of ten percent (or mean) or less. The smallest sample sizes are for children in

the low-weight categories. For these children, we do not have sufficient statistical power to detect small

effects. Descriptive information about the sample is provided in Tables 1 and 2.



Results

Descriptive Analysis

          Table 1 presents (unweighted) mean test scores for children by weight status. Figures are

presented separately by age and gender. Figures in Table 1 suggest that children in the top and bottom of

the weight distribution have lower achievement test scores than children in the middle of the weight

distribution. There is little evidence that tests scores of overweight (85-95 percentiles) children differ

from normal weight children, and only among girls is there consistent evidence that obese children have

lower test scores than normal weight children. Differences in test scores are not large. For example,

female children ages nine and over who are considered obese using the NHANES I standard (>95

percentile) have math and reading tests scores that are approximately one to two points (two to five

percent) lower than girls nine and over who are normal (15 to 85 percentiles) weight. Among males, with


                                                                                                               17
once exception, there are no statistically significant differences in test scores between those in the upper

tails of the weight distribution and those in the middle of the distribution. Boys and girls between who

are in the lowest (0 to 5 percentiles) tail of the weight distribution have achievement test scores that are

approximately four to six percent lower than similar children in the middle of the weight distribution.

           Overall, figures in Table 1 suggest that there may be some relatively small effects of weight on

children’s educational achievement. There is more consistent evidence of a low-weight effect than a

high-weight effect. It is only among girls ages 9 to 12 that we observe a significant difference in test

scores between obese girls and normal weight girls.

           Table 2 presents (unweighted) sample means of child and mother characteristics by weight for

females.13 The purpose of this table is to investigate whether there are significant differences in child and

mother characteristics by weight that may confound the relationship between weight and test scores

observed in Table 1. Figures in Table 2 show some systematic differences. Children in the upper tail of

the weight distribution are more likely to be Black and their mothers tend to be less educated, less likely

to be married and have lower AFQT test scores than children in the middle of the weight distribution.

There are few systematic differences between children in the lower tail (0 to 5 percentiles) of the weight

distribution and children in the middle of the weight distribution. The most consistent difference found in

Table 2 relates to mother’s BMI, which is positively and significantly correlated with child’s BMI. In

sum, figures in Table 2 provide some evidence that children in the upper tails of the weight distribution

may differ in measured and unmeasured ways and that these differences may confound the relationship

between weight and educational achievement.



Multivariate Analysis

           To account for differences in child and mother characteristics that may affect children’s education

achievement and be correlated with weight, we estimated several multivariate regression models based on

equations (1) and (2). We refer to estimates from models based on equation (1) as cross-sectional

13
     An analogous table for males provides similar evidence of some selection on observed characteristics.


                                                                                                               18
estimates. We obtain estimates for two specifications of this model: 1) a basic specification that includes

only child characteristics; and 2) a specification that adds a large set of maternal characteristics. While

the cross-sectional model is not our preferred model, estimates from it help establish whether there are

any significant correlations between weight and educational achievement, and whether these correlations

are sensitive to selection on observed covariates. Estimates from models based on equation (2) are

referred to as first-difference (FD) estimates. These are our preferred estimates, as they control for the

effect of time-invariant, unmeasured factors and are more consistent with a theoretical model of

educational achievement.

        Table 3 presents the estimates for male children. Estimates in column (1) indicate that there is a

consistent negative association between being in the lowest weight category and achievement test scores,

although most estimates are not statistically significant. Estimates in column (1) are also small in

magnitude (<5 percent of mean). Similarly, there is some evidence that being in the highest weight

category is negatively associated with achievement test scores, particularly for math. In this case, there is

only one statistically significant estimate and estimates are small (<3 percent mean). Adding maternal

characteristics to the basic cross-sectional model further erodes the evidence of adverse effects of low or

high weight on test scores. Estimates of the association between the extreme weight categories and test

scores in column (2) are usually less negative than those in column (1), particularly for the obese (95-100

percentiles) category, and virtually all but one are not statistically significant. In sum, cross-sectional

estimates in Table 3 provide little evidence that weight is significantly related to male children’s

achievement test scores. If anything, very-low weight male children may have slightly lower (2-3

percent) math and reading comprehension scores than normal weight male children.

        In column (3) we present the first-difference (FD) estimates. These are our preferred estimates.

Note here that the mean of the dependent variable is much smaller than the mean of the dependent

variable in columns (1) and (2). This is because we are examining the educational achievement during a

two-year period. In addition, achievement gains decline with age so that between ages 9/10 and 11/12,

male children are gaining approximately seven points on these achievement tests. Estimates in column


                                                                                                              19
(3) provide no consistent evidence that being in either tail of the weight distribution is associated with

lower test scores. Almost every estimate in column (3) is statistically insignificant and even the sign

pattern of the estimates does not suggest adverse effects. However, the first-difference analysis has less

statistical power than the cross-sectional analysis. Consider the standard errors associated with the

estimates of the association between obesity and test scores. They are in the range of 0.6 to 0.7.

Therefore, we could not reject effects that are plus or minus 1.2 to 1.4, which relative to the mean are

between 9 and 16 percent. Nonetheless, most effect sizes are well below one (<10 percent of mean) and

as noted, the pattern of results suggests little evidence of an association between weight status and

achievement test scores of male children.

        Table 4 presents instrumental variables estimates for male children. In this analysis, we have

collapsed weight categories to reduce the number of endogenous variables. We use three categories based

on the NHANES I weight distribution: low weight (0-15 percentiles), normal weight (16 to 94

percentiles) and obese (95-100 percentiles). Normal weight is the reference category. Instruments for

these two endogenous weight categories are the five weight categories used in previous analyses lagged

four years, which in our data is period t-2 because children are surveyed every two years. The partial

correlations between these instruments and the two endogenous weight categories are quite strong and

tests of the joint significance of the excluded instruments are all significant at the 0.01 level with partial

F-statistics of 100 or more. Due to the four-year lag of the instruments, we limit the sample to children

between the ages of 9 and 12. Because we have changed our weight categories slightly, we present both

first-difference (FD) estimates, which should be and are comparable to those in Table 3, and instrumental-

variables, first-difference (FDIV) estimates.

        FDIV estimates in Table 4 are imprecisely estimated. The magnitude of the standard errors of the

estimates implies that will not be able to detect reliably effect sizes of less than 30 to 40 percent (relative

to the mean). With this caveat in mind, we note that none of the FDIV estimates in Table 4 are

statistically significant. Moreover, the pattern of the estimates in terms of both signs and magnitudes




                                                                                                                 20
does not suggest a systematic effect. Thus, while we cannot reject the possibility that low- or high-weight

is significantly associated with achievement test scores, we can reject that theses associations are large.

        We now turn to estimates for the female sample, which are presented in Table 5. Table 5 has

same structure as Table 3. Estimates in this table tell a lead to similar conclusions as in the case of male

children. While cross-sectional estimates suggest that children in the highest and lowest weight may have

lower test scores, first-difference estimates reject this conclusion. Estimates in column (3) are rarely

statistically significant and almost always small—well below one and less than five percent of the mean.

In two of three instances in which estimates are statistically significant, they are counterintuitive;

overweight children have significantly higher tests scores than normal weight children.

        FDIV estimates are presented in Table 6. While imprecisely estimated, these estimates are

consistent with the FD estimates and do not suggest a systematic relationship between weight and

achievement test scores. In sum, estimates in Tables 5 and 6 provide little evidence of an association

between weight and female children’s achievement test scores.

        Throughout the paper, we have emphasized the importance of model specification. In particular,

that the effects of covariates are age-specific, that covariates should be measured in levels and not

changes, and that time-invariant covariates enter the model because of the age-specific nature of the

effects. To illustrate the importance of these issues, we present estimates of the effect of mother’s

education and child’s race on achievement test scores. We measure mother’s education as whether a

mother has a Bachelors or Professional degree (relative to less than a high school degree) and we measure

child’s race by whether the child is non-Hispanic, black (relative to non-Hispanic white). Estimates are

presented in Table 7. For females, the magnitude of the associations between being black and math test

scores declines (less negative) with age of child and increases with age of child in the case of reading

comprehension test scores. A similar pattern of age-specific effects is found for the associations between

mother’s education and math and reading comprehension test scores for female children. Among male

children, the age-pattern of effects is less clear, but estimates of the effects of child’s race and mother’s

education differ by age. In short, estimates in Table 7 clearly show the age-specific nature of the


                                                                                                                21
associations between child and mother characteristics and test scores, and underscore the importance of

model specification that we have emphasized.

        To this point, we have found little evidence of an association between weight and children’s

achievement test scores. One explanation of this may be that we have controlled for grade in school. If

weight is associated with grade repetition and grade in school affects achievement, we may have obscured

the effect of weight by controlling for grade in school. So we obtained estimates of the effect of weight

on grade attainment. Models used for this analysis are the same as those used previously. Table 8

presents the estimates of the effect of weight status on grade attainment. Estimates in Table 8 provide no

evidence that weight status is associated with grade attainment (grade retention). For male children, none

of the FD estimates are statistically significant or large (> 5 percent relative to the mean). For female

children, this is also the case except for children in the lowest weight categories. For this group, low-

weight is associated with a five percent decrease in the probability of advancing a grade per year of age

for girls ages 9 to 10 and a five percent higher probability of advancing a grade per year of age for girls

11 to 12.



Conclusion

        The rapid growth in child obesity in the last 30 years has caused alarm and focused public health

policy on fighting the obesity epidemic. Much of the evidence to support public intervention centers on

the health consequences of child obesity. However, obesity may affect other aspects of child well being

that will also have significant and long lasting consequences. One such outcome is educational

achievement. Indeed, it is widely believed that overweight and obese children face significant peer and

teacher discrimination that could adversely affect educational outcomes (NEA 1994). In addition,

contemporaneous health consequences of obesity such as elevated risk of asthma, sleeping disorders and

depression may adversely affect educational achievement.

        Despite the importance of educational achievement to future well being and the existence of

plausible mechanisms through which weight could affect educational achievement, there is very little


                                                                                                              22
study of this issue. In fact, there are only two other studies that looked at the association between weight

and educational achievement of children (Datar and Sturm 2006; Averett and Stifel 2007). Thus, the

purpose of this paper was to investigate the association between weight and children’s educational

achievement, as measured by PIAT achievement test scores and grade attainment. Data for the study

came from the children of the NLSY, which represents a large, national sample of children between the

ages of 5 and 12. We obtained estimates of the association between weight and achievement using

several regression model specifications that controlled for a variety of observed factors and time-invariant

characteristics of children.

        Our results suggest that, in general, children who are overweight or obese have achievement test

scores that are about the same as children with average weight. These results differ from Datar and Sturm

(2006) and Averett and Stifel (2007), but are consistent with results reported in Edwards and Grossman

(1979). Datar and Sturm (2006) found that becoming overweight was associated with lower educational

achievement of female children as they move from kindergarten to the third grade. Averett and Stifel

(2007) also reported that overweight children had lower test scores. A variety of factors may explain the

differences, but we believe an important one is the failure to specify and estimate a theoretically

consistent empirical model. We demonstrated that covariates have age-specific effects (see Table 7), so

combining children of different ages and restricting effects to be the same across ages, as in Averett and

Stifel (2007), is inappropriate. Also, dropping time-invariant covariates is not justified (again see Table

7). Further, Averett and Stifel (12007) control for time-invariant factors using a conventional fixed-

effects analysis that is inconsistent with the human capital production function that specifies that growth

in achievement depends on the level of inputs used during the interval for which growth is measured.

Similarly, the model used by Datar and Sturm (2006) is not consistent with the human capital production

function described here, and more importantly does not seem to have been derived from a clearly

specified behavioral model.

        These results also differ from most studies of adolescents who found that overweight and obese

status was associated with worse school performance, particularly for girls (Falkner et al. 1991; Sabia


                                                                                                          23
2007; Sigfusdotirr et al. 2006). One potential explanation of this difference is that size discrimination

becomes worse as children age and therefore the consequences of such bias may not manifest until older

ages. While the different ages of the samples may be part of the explanation, part of the explanation for

the different findings is likely due to model specification. Sabia (2007) used conventional fixed effects

methods that are not consistent with the standard human capital production function. In addition, the

instrumental variables procedure that Sabia (2007) used is unlikely to be valid.

        Our results also challenge the conclusions of the National Education Association that cited

discriminatory practices as a cause of poor educational outcomes of obese children. Simple correlations

between weight status and test scores did reveal a significant deficit for obese children, particularly girls.

However, after controlling for observed characteristics of the child and mother, there were no significant

associations between weight status and achievement. This was true even if we used the contemporaneous

weight distribution to classify children into weight categories, which may be appropriate if discrimination

is based on relative weight. Therefore, our results, at least for young children, are inconsistent with

discrimination by teachers and peers that adversely affects achievement. They are also inconsistent with

explanations that link obesity to educational achievement through health (Geier et al. 2007).

        It closing, we note that there are only a handful of studies of the issue. Further study is clearly

warranted given the potential importance of the issue and the inconsistency of empirical evidence. In

addition, while we have tried to advance the literature, there are several limitations of our study that we

acknowledge. First, our data contain very little information on inputs actually used to produce

educational achievement. School inputs are missing completely, and family inputs are only crudely

measured, for example, by the number of hours and weeks worked by the mother (proxy for time of

mother). Second, while the first-difference approach is valuable, it does not address the problem of

omitted time-varying factors and our solution to this problem, instrumental variables, was not efficacious.

The first-difference approach can also exacerbate measurement error problems. Finally, the sample sizes

were relatively small and in some analyses we lacked the statistical power to detect small effects. In the

case of instrumental variables, we lacked the statistical power to detect relatively large effects.


                                                                                                              24
References

Averett, S. L. and Stifel, D. C. (2007). Food for Thought: The Cognitive Effects of Childhood
        Malnutrition in the United States. mimeo, Lafayette College.

Becker, G. (1965). A Theory of the Allocation of Time. Economic Journal, 75: 493-517.

Becker, G. and Lewis, G. H. (1973). On the Interaction Between the Quantity and Quality of Children.
        Journal of Political Economy, 81(2): s279-88.

Beuther, D. A., Weiss, S. T. and Sutherland, E. R. (2006). Obesity and Asthma. American Journal of
       Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 174(2): 112-119.

Bjorntorp, P. and Rosmond, R. (2000). Neuroendocrine Abnormalities in Visceral Obesity. International
        Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 24: S80–S85

Blau, F. and Grossberg, A. J. (1992). Maternal Labor Supply and Children’s Cognitive Development.
        Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(3) (August):474-481

Canning H, Mayer J. Obesity: an Influence on High School Performance. The American Journal of
       Clinical Nutrition 1967; 20 (4); 352-354.

Cawley, J. (2004). The Impact of Obesity on Wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39(2): 451-474.

Crandall CS. Do Parents Discriminate Against Their Heavyweight Daughters? Personality and Social
       Psychology Bulletin 1995; 21 (7); 724-735.

Data, A. and Sturm, R. (2006). Childhood Overweight and Elementary School Outcomes. International
        Journal of Obesity, 1-12.

Dietz, W. H. (1998). Health Consequences of Obesity in Youth: Childhood Predictors of Adult Disease.
        Pediatrics, 101(3): 518-525.

Edwards, L. N. and Grossman, M. (1979). “Adolescent Health, Family Background, and Preventive
      Medical Care.” In Health: What Is it Worth, edited by Selma J. Mushkin and David W. Dunlop,
      Elmsford, New York: Pergamon Press, 1979, pp. 273-314.

Eisenberg, M. E., Neumark-Sztainer, D. and Story, M. (2003). Associations of Weight-Based Teasing and
       Emotional Well-being among Adolescents. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 157:
       733-738.

Falkner, N. F., Neumark-Sztainer, D., Story, M., Jeffery, R. W., Beuhring, T. and Resnick, M. D. (2001).
        Social, Educational, and Psychological Correlates of Weight Status in Adolescents. Obesity
        Research, 9(1): 33-42.

Gilliland, F. D., Berhane, K., Islam, T., McConnell, R., Gauderman, W. J., Gilliland, S. S., Avol, E. and
        Peters, J. M. (2003). Obesity and the Risk of Newly Diagnosed Asthma in School-Age Children.
        American Journal of Epidemiology, 158:406–415.

Goodman, E. and Whitaker, R. C. (2007). A Prospective Study of Role of Depression in the Development
      and Persistence of Adolescent Obesity. Pediatrics, 109(3): 497-504.


                                                                                                       25
Gortmaker SL, Must A, Perrin JM, Sobol AM, Dietz WH. Social and Economic Consequences of
      Overweight in Adolescence and Young Adulthood. The New England Journal of Medicine 1993;
      329; 1008-1012.

Gozal, D. (1998). Sleep-Disordered Breathing and School Performance in Children. Pediatrics, 102(3):
        616-620.

Grossman, M. (1972). On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health. Journal of Political
      Economy, 80(2): 223-55.

Hoebel, B. G., Rada, P. V., Mark, G. P. and Pothos, E. N. (1999). Neural Systems for Reinforcement and
        Inhibition of Behavior: Relevance to Eating, Addiction, and Depression. In . Well-Being: The
        Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, Edited by Kahneman D, Diener E and Schwarz N. New
        York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Jalongo, M. R. (1999). Matters of Size: Obesity as a Diversity Issue in the Field of Early Childhood.
        Early Childhood Education Journal, 27(2): 95-103.

Jsanssen, I., Craig, W., Boyce, W. and Pickett, W. (2004). Association Between Overweight and Obesity
        with Bully Behaviors in School-Aged Children. Pediatrics, 113(5)1187-94.

Kaestner, R. and Corman, H. (1995). The Impact of Child Health and Fmaily Inputs on Child Cognitive
       Development. NBER Working Paper #5257, Cambridge, MA: NBER

Korenman, S., Miller, J. and Sjaastad, J. (1995). Long-Term Poverty and Child Development in the
      United States: Results from the NLSY. Children and Youth Services Review,17:127-55

Must, A. and Strauss, R. S. (1999). Risks and Consequences of Childhood and Adolescent Obesity.
       International Journal of Obesity, 23(s2): s2-s11.

Mustillo, S., Worthman, C., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., Angold, A. and Costello, E. J. (2007). Obesity and
        Psychiatric Disorder: Developmental Trajectories. Pediatrics, 111(4): 851-859.

National Education Association, (1994). Report on Size Discrimination. Washington, DC.

Neumark-Sztainer, D., Story, M. and Faibisch, L. (1998). Perceived Stigmatization among Overweight
      African American and Caucasian Adolescent Girls. Journal of Adolescent Health. 23(5): 264-70.

Puhl, R. M. and Brownell, K. D. (2003). Psychosocial Origins of Obesity Stigma: Toward Changing a
        Powerful and Pervasive Bias. Obesity Reviews, 4(4): 213-227.

Puhl, R. M. and Latner, J. D. (2007). Stigma, Obesity and the Health of the Nation’s Children.
        Psychological Bulletin, 133(4): 557-580.

Redline, S., Tishler, P. V., Schluchter, M., Aylor, J., Clark, K. and Graham, G. (1999). Risk Factors for
        Sleep-Disordered Breathing in Children: Association with Obesity, Race and Respiratory
        Problems. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 159(5): 1527-32.

Ritts, V., Patterson, M. L. and Tubbs, M. (1992). Expectations, Impressions and Judgments of Physically
         Attractive Students: A Review. Review of Educational Research, 62(4): 413-26.


                                                                                                            26
Rogosa, D. R. and Willet, J. B. 1985. Understanding the Correlates of Change by Modeling Individual
       Differences in Growth. Psychometrica 50:203-228.

Rosenzweig, M. R. and Wolpin, K. I. (1994). Are There Increasing Returns to the Intergenerational
      Production of Human Capital? Maternal Schooling and Child Intellectual Achievement. Journal
      of Human Resources, 29(2): 670-693.

Sabia, J. (2007). The Effect of Body Weight on Adolescent Academic Performance. Southern Economic
         Journal, 73(4): 871-900.

Schwartz, M. B. and Puhl, R. (2003). Childhood Obesity: A Social Problem to Solve. Obesity Reviews, 4:
       57-70.

Sekine, M., Yamagami, T., Handa, K., Saito, T., Nanri, S., Kawaminami, K., Tokui, N., Toshida, K. and
        Kagamimori, S. (2002). A Dose-Response Relationship Between Short Sleeping Hours and
        Childhood Obesity: Results of Toyama Birth Cohort Study. Child: Care, Health and
        Development, 28(2): 163-170.

Shakoto, R. A., Edwards, L. N. and Grossman, M. (1981). An Exploration of the Dynamic Relationship
       Between Health and Cognitive Development in Adolescent. In Contributions to Economic
       Analysis: Health, Economics, and Health Economics. Edited by Jaques van der Gaag and Mark
       Perlman. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company.

Sigfusdotirr, I. D., Kristjansson, A. L. and Allegrante, J. P. (2006). Health Behavior and Academic
       Achievement in Icelandic School Children. Health Education Research, 22(1): 70-80.

Smith, D. E., Marcus, M. D., Lewis, C. E. , Fitzgibbon, M. and Schreiner, P. (1998). Prevalence of Binge
        Eating Disorder, Obesity, and Depression in a Biracial Cohort of Young Adults. Annals of
        Behavioral Medicine, 20: 227–332.

Solovay, S. (2000). Tipping the Scalesof Injustice: Fighting Weight-basedDiscrimiantion. Prometheus
       Books: Amherst, NY.

Taras, H. and Potts-Datema (2005). Sleep and Student Performance at School. Journal of School Health,
        75(7): 248-54.

Todd, P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2003). On the Specification and Estimation of the Production Function for
       Cognitive Achievement. Economic Journal, 113(485): F3-F33.

von Mutius, E., Schwartz, J., Neas, L. M., Dockery, D. and Weiss, S. T. (2001). Relation of Body Mass
      Index to Asthma and Atopy in Children: the National Health and Nutrition Examination Study
      III. Thorax, 56: 835–838

Wurtman, J. J. (1993). Depression and Weight Gain: the Serotonin Connection. Journal of Affective
      Disorders, 29(2-3):183–192.




                                                                                                        27
                                                   Table 1A
                         Achievement Scores of Male Children by NHANES I Weight Status

                                                           Weight Status (NHANES I Standard)
                                         0-5%             5-15%          15-85%        85-95%                 95-100%
Ages 7-8
PIAT-Math                                29.0*             31.4              31.1             31.8              29.7*
PIAT-Reading Recognition                 31.9              32.2              32.8             33.8              32.1
PIAT-Reading Comprehension               29.1*             29.9              30.7             30.9              30.0

Num. of Obs. (Column %)                 184 (7)          149 (6)          1418 (56)         393 (15)          407 (16)

Age 9-10
PIAT-Math                                40.5*             42.7              43.5             44.7*             43.3
PIAT-Reading Recognition                 42.5*             43.7              44.4             45.7              44.9
PIAT-Reading Comprehension               39.3              38.9*             40.8             41.8              41.2

Num. of Obs. (Column %)                 199 (8)          174 (7)          1430 (54)         417 (16)          410 (16)

Ages 11-12
PIAT-Math                                48.0*             50.1              50.7             51.7              50.1
PIAT-Reading Recognition                 50.5*             52.8              53.2             53.9              53.0
PIAT-Reading Comprehension               45.4*             47.7              48.1             48.8              48.2

Num. of Obs. (Column %)                 141 (6)             132 (5)          1308 (54)        442 (18)         398 (16)
Notes: 1. * indicates that estimate is statistically different (0.05 level) from estimate for children in 15-85
percentiles. 2. Number of observations refers to the number of valid scores on PIAT-Math.

                                                    Table 1B
                        Achievement Scores of Female Children by NHANES I Weight Status

                                                          Weight Status (NHANES I Standard)
                                        0-5%             5-15%          15-85%       85-95%                 95-100%
Ages 7-8
PIAT-Math                                29.4*            31.8              31.4             31.1              30.6
PIAT-Reading Recognition                 33.6             35.6              35.0             35.5              33.6*
PIAT-Reading Comprehension               31.5             33.4              32.6             32.8              31.6*

Num. of Obs. (Column %)                198 (8)           192 (8)         1236 (49)         397 (16)          477 (19)

Age 9-10
PIAT-Math                               41.0*             42.5              43.7             43.9             42.6*
PIAT-Reading Recognition                44.9*             47.1              47.3             47.0             45.0*
PIAT-Reading Comprehension              41.0*             42.0              42.9             43.1             41.2*

Num. of Obs. (Column %)                210 (8)           209 (8)         1304 (49)         474 (18)          451 (17)

Ages 11-12
PIAT-Math                                48.5*            47.8*             50.7             50.0             49.3*
PIAT-Reading Recognition                 53.4*            54.9              56.0             55.7             54.3*
PIAT-Reading Comprehension               48.2             48.7              49.2             48.8             46.7*

Num. of Obs. (Column %)                 119 (5)            112 (5)         1378 (57)         465 (19)         344 (14)
Notes: 1. * indicates that estimate is statistically different (0.05 level) from estimate for children in 15-85
percentiles. 2. Number of observations refers to the number of valid scores on PIAT-Math.



                                                                                                                          28
                                                       Table 2
               Individual and Family Characteristics of Female Children by NHANES I Weight Status

                                                       Weight Status (NHANES I Standard)
                                  0-5%               5-15%           15-85%        85-95%                  95-100%
  Ages 7-8
  Black                            0.28               0.27               0.26               0.30            0.42*
  Hispanic                         0.21               0.18               0.18               0.21            0.20
  Age in Months                    95.2               96.5               95.9               96.4            96.1

  Mom Age                          33.6               33.0               33.3               33.7            34.1*
  Mom AFQT                         35.7               37.3               39.4               37.1            30.6*
  Mom LTHS                         0.17               0.14               0.15               0.11*           0.14*
  Mom BA                           0.12*              0.16               0.18               0.15            0.12*
  Mom Married                      0.62               0.71               0.67               0.65            0.57*
  Mom BMI                          24.7*              24.6*              25.5               27.0*           29.3*

  Ages 9-10
  Black                           0.31               0.28               0.28                0.32             0.45*
  Hispanic                        0.25*              0.19               0.19                0.19            0.21
  Age in Months                  117.8*              118.5              119.6              120.3*           119.4

  Mom Age                          33.8               34.0               34.2               34.8*           34.5
  Mom AFQT                         34.6               35.7               37.6               35.4            27.8*
  Mom LTHS                         0.16               0.19               0.15               0.12            0.19*
  Mom BA                           0.13               0.11*              0.16               0.15            0.09*
  Mom Married                      0.63               0.63               0.65               0.62            0.56*
  Mom BMI                          25.2               24.8*              25.8               28.0*           30.6*

  Ages 11-12
  Black                            0.27               0.26              0.31               0.33              0.47*
  Hispanic                        0.18                0.20              0.18               0.21             0.21
  Age in Months                   142.4              140.9*             143.3              143.9            143.4

  Mom Age                           34.8                 34.9             35.5              35.7            35.6
  Mom AFQT                          35.5                 35.9             36.4              33.4*           26.3*
  Mom LTHS                          0.20                 0.21             0.17              0.14            0.22*
  Mom BA                            0.08*                0.11             0.15              0.12            0.08*
  Mom Married                       0.56                 0.69             0.62              0.59            0.53*
  Mom BMI                            25.1*               25.3             26.2              28.7*           31.0*
Notes:
1. * indicates that estimate is statistically different from estimate for children in 15-85 percentiles.




                                                                                                                     29
                                                         Table 3
              Estimates of the Effect of BMI (NHANES I Classification) on Achievement Scores of Male Children

                                PIAT-Math                     PIAT-Reading Recognition           PIAT-Reading Comprehension
                        (1)        (2)           (3)          (1)       (2)        (3)            (1)        (2)       (3)
Ages 7-8
BMI 0-5%              -1.34*        -0.95        0.03        -0.04        -0.21       -0.16       -0.69        -0.79       -1.15
                      (0.71)       (0.68)       (0.78)      (0.75)       (0.73)      (0.78)      (0.72)       (0.71)      (0.84)
BMI 5-15%              0.44          0.32        -0.57       -0.29        -0.66       -0.63       -0.28        -0.51       -0.22
                      (0.76)       (0.73)       (0.91)      (0.81)       (0.78)      (0.92)      (0.78)       (0.76)      (1.00)
BMI 85-95%             0.02         -0.08        0.54         0.15         0.07        0.08       -0.51        -0.61       -0.83
                      (0.51)       (0.50)       (0.71)      (0.54)       (0.54)      (0.72)      (0.52)       (0.52)      (0.78)
BMI 95-100%           -0.83*        -0.03        0.37        -0.43         0.27       -0.28       -0.28         0.39        0.13
                      (0.50)       (0.50)       (0.66)      (0.54)       (0.53)      (0.66)      (0.51)       (0.52)      (0.72)
Ext. Covariate Set      No           Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes          No          Yes         Yes
First Differences       No            No          Yes          No           No         Yes          No           No         Yes
Mean Dep. Var.         30.9          30.9         15.5        32.8         32.8        16.0        30.6         30.6        14.0
Number of Obs.         2490         2380         2303        2483         2372        2262        2390         2281        2093
Ages 9-10
BMI 0-5%              -1.94**     -1.62**        -0.41       -1.18        -0.47       1.12        -0.72        -0.19       0.32
                       (0.73)      (0.72)       (0.74)      (0.90)       (0.88)      (0.69)      (0.78)       (0.76)      (0.80)
BMI 5-15%               -0.33       -0.07         1.20       -0.24         0.19       0.95        -1.28        -0.84      -1.76*
                       (0.77)      (0.76)       (0.86)      (0.95)       (0.93)      (0.80)      (0.83)       (0.80)      (0.93)
BMI 85-95%               0.76      0.97*          0.69        0.58         0.73       0.71         0.62         0.88       0.15
                       (0.53)      (0.53)       (0.75)      (0.66)       (0.65)      (0.71)      (0.57)       (0.56)      (0.82)
BMI 95-100%            -0.88*        0.22        -0.30       -0.56         0.71       0.46        -0.12       1.10*        0.64
                       (0.54)      (0.55)       (0.69)      (0.67)       (0.68)      (0.65)      (0.58)       (0.58)      (0.76)
Ext. Covariate Set        No         Yes          Yes          No          Yes        Yes           No          Yes        Yes
First Differences         No          No          Yes          No           No        Yes           No           No        Yes
Mean Dep. Var.           43.4        43.4         13.6        44.5         44.6       12.7         40.8         40.9       11.0
Number of Obs.          2578        2452         2371        2572         2445        2352        2542         2419        2215
Ages 11-12
BMI 0-5%                -0.50       -0.20        0.64        -0.62        -0.86       0.57        -0.92        -0.92       0.47
                       (0.85)      (0.84)       (0.78)      (1.17)       (1.16)      (0.75)      (0.99)       (0.98)      (0.84)
BMI 5-15%               -0.25       -0.50        1.48         0.88         0.32       0.77         0.51         0.19       -0.32
                       (0.87)      (0.85)       (0.97)      (1.20)       (1.16)      (0.93)      (1.01)       (0.97)      (1.04)
BMI 85-95%               0.44        0.82        -0.38       -0.43        -0.25       0.02         0.04         0.41       -0.76
                       (0.53)      (0.52)       (0.69)      (0.73)       (0.71)      (0.66)      (0.61)       (0.60)      (0.74)
BMI 95-100%             -0.84       -0.15        0.40        -0.63         0.16       0.60         0.06         0.85        0.08
                       (0.54)      (0.55)       (0.66)      (0.75)       (0.76)      (0.63)      (0.63)       (0.63)      (0.71)
Ext. Covariate Set        No         Yes          Yes          No          Yes        Yes           No          Yes         Yes
First Differences         No          No          Yes          No           No        Yes           No           No         Yes
Mean Dep. Var.           50.7        50.8         7.6         53.2         53.3        9.1         48.1         48.2         7.4
Number of Obs.          2369        2252         2165        2361         2249        2160        2350         2237        2115
       Notes:
       1. All models include dummy variables for age in months, race/ethnicity, grade in school, year, region, and birth
       order. Extended covariate set also includes dummy variables for the following mother’s characteristics: age at birth,
       number of children born, BMI (quintiles), marital status, education, AFQT score (quadratic), family structure and
       environment at age 14, weeks worked in last year (quadratic), hours worked in last year (quadratic), and an
       interaction between weeks and hours worked in last year.
       2. Standard errors in parentheses.
       3. ** indicates p-value<0.05, * indicates 0.5 < p-value < 0.10




                                                                                                                         30
                                              Table 4
         Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of BMI (NHANES I Classification)
                             on Achievement Scores of Male Children

                                 PIAT-Math              PIAT-Reading          PIAT-Reading
                                                          Recognition         Comprehension
Ages 9-10                       (1)         (2)         (1)         (2)       (1)       (2)

BMI 0-15%                      -0.32       -3.30       0.52        3.53       -0.84         -1.11
                              (0.62)      (2.41)      (0.57)      (2.23)     (0.68)        (2.61)
BMI 95-100%                    -0.50       -1.84       0.20        2.97        0.65          1.07
                              (0.73)      (2.02)      (0.68)      (1.88)     (0.80)        (2.20)

Instrumental Variables          No         Yes          No         Yes         No          Yes
Mean Dep. Var.                 13.5        13.5        12.6        12.6       11.1         11.0
Number of Obs.                 2033        2033        2012        2352       1919         2215

Ages 11-12
BMI 0-15%                      1.25         2.55       0.79        -0.00       0.48         2.08
                              (0.65)      (1.77)      (0.63)      (1.72)     (0.69)        (1.90)
BMI 95-100%                    0.49        -1.51       0.84        1.31       -0.05         0.19
                              (0.69)      (1.45)      (0.67)      (1.41)     (0.74)        (1.54)

Instrumental Variables            No          Yes         No        Yes        No          Yes
Mean Dep. Var.                    7.5         7.5         9.0       9.0        7.7          7.4
Number of Obs.                  1897         1897        1890      1890       1858         1858
 Notes:
 1. All models use extended covariate set (see notes to Table 3).
 2. Instruments for BMI categories are BMI categories lagged four years.
 3. Standard errors in parentheses.
 4. ** indicates p-value<0.05, * indicates 0.5 < p-value < 0.10




                                                                                                    31
                                                         Table 5
             Estimates of the Effect of BMI (NHANES I Classification) on Achievement Scores of Female Children

                                PIAT-Math                     PIAT-Reading Recognition           PIAT-Reading Comprehension
                        (1)        (2)           (3)          (1)       (2)        (3)            (1)        (2)       (3)
Ages 7-8
BMI 0-5%              -1.41**       -1.06        -0.58       -0.81        0.01         0.23        -0.62        0.06        0.29
                       (0.67)      (0.66)       (0.80)      (0.69)       (0.69)      (0.80)       (0.67)      (0.66)      (0.81)
BMI 5-15%               -0.16        0.05        -0.50        0.14        0.10        -0.05         0.38        0.57       -0.15
                       (0.67)      (0.66)       (0.84)      (0.69)       (0.69)      (0.85)       (0.66)      (0.65)      (0.86)
BMI 85-95%              -0.73       -0.51        -0.08       -0.06        0.18         0.38        -0.23        0.04      1.51**
                       (0.50)      (0.50)       (0.71)      (0.52)       (0.52)      (0.71)       (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.72)
BMI 95-100%            -0.82*       -0.09        -0.13     -1.71**      -1.01**       -0.77      -0.96**       -0.44       -0.45
                       (0.48)      (0.48)       (0.63)      (0.49)       (0.50)      (0.64)       (0.47)      (0.48)      (0.64)
Ext. Covariate Set        No         Yes          Yes          No         Yes          Yes           No         Yes         Yes
First Differences         No          No          Yes          No          No          Yes           No          No         Yes
Mean Dep. Var.           31.1        31.2         15.2        34.8        34.9         16.9         32.4        32.5        14.8
Number of Obs.          2440        2303         2240        2440         2302        2195         2376        2245        2052
Ages 9-10
BMI 0-5%              -1.42**      -0.94*         0.20       -0.93        -0.18       0.10         -0.54       0.15        -0.05
                       (0.64)      (0.62)       (0.69)      (0.79)       (0.77)      (0.63)       (0.70)      (0.67)      (0.73)
BMI 5-15%               -0.35       -0.09        -0.42       0.86          0.81       0.69          0.03       -0.07       -0.27
                       (0.63)      (0.62)       (0.80)      (0.78)       (0.77)      (0.73)       (0.69)      (0.68)      (0.85)
BMI 85-95%              -0.50        0.02        -0.73      -1.01*        -0.45       0.52         -0.33       0.18        -0.39
                       (0.46)      (0.45)       (0.70)      (0.56)       (0.55)      (0.64)       (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.74)
BMI 95-100%             -0.67        0.41         0.48     -1.45**        -0.02       0.56       -1.14**       0.12         0.40
                       (0.47)      (0.48)       (0.65)      (0.58)       (0.59)      (0.59)       (0.52)      (0.52)      (0.69)
Ext. Covariate Set        No         Yes          Yes          No          Yes        Yes            No         Yes         Yes
First Differences         No          No          Yes          No           No        Yes            No          No         Yes
Mean Dep. Var.           43.3        43.3         13.1        46.7         46.8       12.7          42.4        42.4        10.7
Number of Obs.          2599        2447         2373        2599         2449        2369         2582        2432        2286
Ages 11-12
BMI 0-5%              -1.73**     -1.74**        -0.18       -1.76        -1.58       -0.46        -0.53       -0.37        1.12
                       (0.86)      (0.84)       (0.74)      (1.12)       (1.10)      (0.78)       (0.94)      (0.92)       (0.88)
BMI 5-15%             -2.08**     -2.30**        -0.03        0.29         0.80       -0.53         0.29        0.03        -1.50
                       (0.88)      (0.88)       (0.91)      (1.16)       (1.16)      (0.96)       (0.97)      (0.97)       (1.08)
BMI 85-95%              -0.30       -0.04         1.05       -0.23         0.19      2.11**        -0.07        0.14        -0.01
                       (0.48)      (0.47)       (0.64)      (0.63)       (0.62)      (0.67)       (0.53)      (0.52)       (0.76)
BMI 95-100%             -0.79       -0.07        -0.39       -1.17        -0.22       -0.14      -1.46**       -0.64      -1.83**
                       (0.55)      (0.55)       (0.65)      (0.71)       (0.72)      (0.68)       (0.60)      (0.60)       (0.76)
Ext. Covariate Set        No         Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes           No         Yes          Yes
First Differences         No          No          Yes          No           No         Yes           No          No          Yes
Mean Dep. Var.           50.1        50.1          7.2        55.6         55.6        9.1          48.7        48.8         6.4
Number of Obs.          2375        2251         2178        2368         2246        2182         2352        2229         2146
       Notes:
       1. All models include dummy variables for age in months, race/ethnicity, grade in school, year, region, and birth
       order. Extended covariate set also includes dummy variables for the following mother’s characteristics: age at birth,
       number of children born, BMI (quintiles), marital status, education, AFQT score (quadratic), family structure and
       environment at age 14, weeks worked in last year (quadratic), hours worked in last year (quadratic), and an
       interaction between weeks and hours worked in last year.
       2. Standard errors in parentheses.
       3. ** indicates p-value<0.05, * indicates 0.5 < p-value < 0.10




                                                                                                                         32
                                              Table 6
         Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effect of BMI (NHANES I Classification)
                           on Achievement Scores of Female Children

                                 PIAT-Math              PIAT-Reading          PIAT-Reading
                                                          Recognition         Comprehension
Ages 9-10                       (1)         (2)         (1)         (2)       (1)       (2)

BMI 0-15%                      -0.06       -1.50       0.20        1.05       -0.21         0.80
                              (0.56)      (1.71)      (0.51)      (1.54)     (0.60)        (1.81)
BMI 95-100%                    0.78        -2.38       0.82        0.92        0.66         0.82
                              (0.68)      (1.82)      (0.62)      (1.65)     (0.73)        (1.94)

Instrumental Variables          No         Yes          No         Yes         No          Yes
Mean Dep. Var.                 12.7        12.7        12.5        12.5       10.8         10.8
Number of Obs.                 2060        2060        2054        2054       1997         1997

Ages 11-12
BMI 0-15%                      -0.41       0.38        -1.12       -1.33      0.31           2.53
                              (0.62)      (1.41)      (0.65)      (1.47)     (0.73)        (1.66)
BMI 95-100%                    -0.29       0.33        -0.89        0.17    -2.05**         -1.43
                              (0.67)      (1.28)      (0.70)      (1.34)     (0.79)        (1.51)

Instrumental Variables            No          Yes         No        Yes        No          Yes
Mean Dep. Var.                    7.2         7.2         9.1       9.1        6.5          6.5
Number of Obs.                  1924         1924        1922      1922       1897         1897
 Notes:
 1. All models use extended covariate set (see notes to Table 5).
 2. Instruments for BMI categories are BMI categories lagged four years.
 3. Standard errors in parentheses.
 4. ** indicates p-value<0.05, * indicates 0.5 < p-value < 0.10




                                                                                                    33
                                                             Table 7
                 Estimates of the Effect of Child’s Race and Mothers Education on Achievement Scores by Age

                                PIAT-Math                   PIAT-Reading Recognition        PIAT-Reading Comprehension
                     Ages 7-8     Ages 9- Ages 11-       Ages 7-8   Ages 9-   Ages 11-     Ages 7-8  Ages 9-   Ages 11-
Females                              10      12                       10          12                    10         12
Child is Black       -1.88**      -1.14**  -0.91*          -0.19     -0.66      -0.28        -0.26     -0.51    -1.43**
                      (0.53)       (0.50)  (0.51)         (0.56)    (0.62)     (0.72)       (0.53)    (0.54)     (0.60)
Mothers Has BA       3.73**         1.21   1.61*          3.47**    2.40**       1.63         1.23    2.73**     2.75**
                      (0.86)       (0.81)  (0.90)         (0.89)    (1.01)     (1.18)       (0.85)    (0.89)     (0.99)
Males
Child is Black       -3.18**     -2.93**     -3.32**       0.08           -0.34    -1.97     -0.61      -0.85   -2.52**
                      (0.56)      (0.59)      (0.61)      (0.59)         (0.73)   (0.84)    (0.58)     (0.62)    (0.70)
Mothers Has BA       3.33**        1.22       1.66*        0.10            1.32     1.59      0.80     2.56**     1.67
                      (0.85)      (0.90)      (0.95)      (0.91)         (1.11)   (1.31)    (0.88)     (0.95)    (1.10)

      Notes:
      1. Models based on extended covariate set. See notes to Table 3.
      2. Standard errors in parentheses.
      3. ** indicates p-value<0.05, * indicates 0.5 < p-value < 0.10




                                                                                                                34
                                              Table 8
            Estimates of the Effect of BMI (NHANES I Classification) on Grade in School

                                        Male Children                        Female Children
                                  (1)                   (2)               (1)               (2)
Ages 9-10
BMI 0-5%                         0.03                0.00                -0.08*          -0.10**
                                (0.05)              (0.05)               (0.04)           (0.05)
BMI 5-15%                        -0.04               -0.09              -0.09**            0.05
                                (0.05)              (0.06)               (0.04)           (0.05)
BMI 85-95%                        0.03               -0.05                0.03             0.03
                                (0.03)              (0.05)               (0.05)           (0.05)
BMI 95-100%                      0.04                -0.02                0.05             0.01
                                (0.04)              (0.05)               (0.03)           (0.04)
Ext. Covariate Set                Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
First Differences                  No                 Yes                  No              Yes
Mean Dep. Var.                     3.7                1.94                 3.9             1.98
Number of Obs.                   2557                2421                 2522             2424
Ages 11-12
BMI 0-5%                        -0.14**              -0.01               -0.01            0.09*
                                 (0.06)             (0.05)              (0.06)            (0.05)
BMI 5-15%                       -0.12**              0.00                -0.00             -0.03
                                 (0.06)             (0.07)              (0.06)            (0.06)
BMI 85-95%                       0.11**              0.03                -0.01             0.06
                                 (0.03)             (0.05)              (0.03)            (0.04)
BMI 95-100%                       0.03               0.04                 0.02             -0.02
                                 (0.04)             (0.05)              (0.04)            (0.04)
Ext. Covariate Set                Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
First Differences                  No                 Yes                  No               Yes
Mean Dep. Var.                     5.7                2.0                  5.8              1.98
Number of Obs.                    2371               2327                2323              2282
 Notes:
 1. All models include extended covariate set (see notes to Table 3).
 2. Standard errors in parentheses.
 3. ** indicates p-value<0.05, * indicates 0.5 < p-value < 0.10




                                                                                                   35
