NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE 2007 U.S. SUB-PRIME FINANCIAL CRISIS SO DIFFERENT? AN INTERNATIONAL
HISTORICAL COMPARISON
Carmen M. Reinhart
Kenneth S. Rogoff
Working Paper 13761
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13761

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2008

This paper prepared for the American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. Reinhart: School
of Public Policy and Department of Economics, 4105 Van Munching Hall, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland 20742; email: creinhar@umd.edu; and Rogoff: Economics Department, 231
Littauer Center, Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138-3001; email: krogoff@harvard.edu. The
authors would like to thank Vincent R. Reinhart and Alan Taylor for their helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Is the 2007 U.S. Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So Different? An International Historical Comparison
Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 13761
January 2008
JEL No. E44,F30,N20
ABSTRACT
Is the 2007-2008 U.S. sub-prime mortgage financial crisis truly a new and different phenomena? Our
examination of the longer historical record finds stunning qualitative and quantitative parallels to 18
earlier post-war banking crises in industrialized countries. Specifically, the run-up in U.S. equity and
housing prices (which, for countries experiencing large capital inflows, stands out as the best leading
indicator in the financial crisis literature) closely tracks the average of the earlier crises. Another
important parallel is the inverted v-shape curve for output growth the U.S. experienced as its economy
slowed in the eve of the crisis. Among other indicators, the run-up in U.S. public debt and is actually
somewhat below the average of other episodes, and its pre-crisis inflation level is also lower. On the
other hand, the United States current account deficit trajectory is worse than average. A critical question
is whether the U.S. crisis will prove similar to the most severe industrialized-country crises, in which
case growth may fall significantly below trend for an extended period. Or will it prove like one of
the milder episodes, where the recovery is relatively fast? Much will depend on how large the shock
to the financial system proves to be and, to a lesser extent, on the efficacy of the subsequent policy
response.

Carmen M. Reinhart
University of Maryland
School of Public Policy and Department of Economic
4105 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
creinhar@umd.edu
Kenneth S. Rogoff
Thomas D Cabot Professor of Public Policy
Economics Department
Harvard University
Littauer Center 232
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
krogoff@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
The first major financial crisis of the 21st century involves esoteric instruments,
unaware regulators, and skittish investors. It also follows a well-trodden path laid down
by centuries of financial folly. Is the “special” problem of sub-prime mortgages this time
really different?

Our examination of the longer historical record, which is part of a larger effort on
currency and debt crises, finds stunning qualitative and quantitative parallels across a
number of standard financial crisis indicators. To name a few, the run-up in U.S. equity
and housing prices that Graciela L. Kaminsky and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999) find to be
the best leading indicators of crisis in countries experiencing large capital inflows closely
tracks the average of the previous eighteen post World War II banking crises in industrial
countries. So, too, does the inverted v-shape of real growth in the years prior to the
crisis. Despite widespread concern about the effects on national debt of the early 2000s
tax cuts, the run-up in U.S. public debt is actually somewhat below the average of other
crisis episodes. In contrast, the pattern of United States current account deficits is
markedly worse.
At this juncture, the book is still open on the how the current dislocations in the
United States will play out. The precedent found in the aftermath of other episodes
suggests that the strains can be quite severe, depending especially on the initial degree of
trauma to the financial system (and to some extent, the policy response). The average
drop in (real per capita) output growth is over 2 percent, and it typically takes two years

2

to return to trend. For the five most catastrophic cases (which include episodes in
Finland, Japan, Norway, Spain and Sweden), the drop in annual output growth from peak
to trough is over 5 percent, and growth remained well below pre-crisis trend even after
three years. These more catastrophic cases, of course, mark the boundary that
policymakers particularly want to avoid.

II. Post War Bank-Centered Financial Crises: The Data
Our comparisons employ a small piece of a much larger and longer historical data
set we have constructed (see Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2008.) The extended data
set catalogues banking and financial crises around the entire world dating back to 1800
(in some cases earlier). In order to focus here on data most relevant to present U.S.
situation, we do not consider the plethora of emerging market crises, nor industrialized
country financial crises from the Great Depression or the 1800s. Nevertheless, even in
the smaller sample considered in this paper, the refrain that “this time is different”
syndrome has been repeated many times.
First come rationalizations. This time, many analysts argued, the huge run-up in
U.S. housing prices was not at all a bubble, but rather justified by financial innovation
(including to sub-prime mortgages), as well as by the steady inflow of capital from Asia
and petroleum exporters. The huge run-up in equity prices was similarly argued to be
sustainable thanks to a surge in U.S. productivity growth a fall in risk that accompanied
the “Great Moderation” in macroeconomic volatility. As for the extraordinary string of
outsized U.S. current account deficits, which at their peak accounted for more than twothirds of all the world’s current account surpluses, many analysts argued that these, too,

3

could be justified by new elements of the global economy. Thanks to a combination of a
flexible economy and the innovation of the tech boom, the United States could be
expected to enjoy superior productivity growth for decades, while superior American
know-how meant higher returns on physical and financial investment than foreigners
could expect in the United States.
Next comes reality. Starting in the summer of 2007, the United States
experienced a striking contraction in wealth, increase in risk spreads, and deterioration in
credit market functioning. The 2007 United States sub-prime crisis, of course, has it
roots in falling U.S. housing prices, which have in turn led to higher default levels
particularly among less credit-worthy borrowers. The impact of these defaults on the
financial sector has been greatly magnified due to the complex bundling of obligations
that was thought to spread risk efficiently. Unfortunately, that innovation also made the
resulting instruments extremely nontransparent and illiquid in the face of falling house
prices.
As a benchmark for the 2007 U.S. sub-prime crisis, we draw on data from the
eighteen bank-centered financial crises from the post-War period, as identified by
Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Gerard Caprio et. al. (2005), and Andrew Mullineux
(1990).
These crisis episodes include:
The Big Five Crises: Spain (1977), Norway (1987), Finland (1991),
Sweden (1991) and Japan (1992), where the starting year is in parenthesis.
Other Banking and Financial Crises: Australia (1989), Canada (1983),
Denmark (1987), France (1994), Germany (1977), Greece (1991), Iceland

4

(1985), and Italy (1990), and New Zealand (1987), United Kingdom
(1973, 1991, 1995), and United States (1984).
The “Big Five” crises are all protracted large scale financial crises that are
associated with major declines in economic performance for an extended period. Japan
(1992), of course, is the start of the “lost decade,” although the others all left deep marks
as well.
The remaining rich country financial crises represent a broad range of lesser
events. The 1984 U.S. crisis, for example, is the savings and loan crisis. In terms of
fiscal costs (3.2 percent of GDP), it is just a notch below the “Big Five” 1. Some of the
other 13 crisis are relatively minor affairs, such as the 1995 Barings (investment) bank
crisis in the United Kingdom or the 1994 Credit Lyonnaise bailout in France. Excluding
these smaller crises would certainly not weaken our results, as the imbalances in the runsup were minor compared to the larger blowouts.

III. Comparisons
We now proceed to a variety of simple comparisons between the 2007 U.S. crisis
and previous episodes. Drawing on the standard literature on financial crises, we look at
asset prices, real economic growth, and public debt. We begin in Figure 1 by comparing
the run-up in housing prices. Period T represents the year of the onset of the financial
crisis. By that convention, period T-4 is four years prior to the crisis, and the graph in

1

The fiscal costs of cleaning up after banking crises can be enormous. The fiscal cleanup from Sweden’s

1991 crisis was 6 percent of GDP and Norway’s 1987 crisis was 8 percent. Spain’s post-1977 cleanup cost
over 16 percent of GDP. Estimates for Japan’s bill vary widely, with many in excess of 20 percent of GDP.

5

each case continues to T+3, except of course in the case of the U.S. 2007 crisis, which
remains in the hands of the fates.2 The chart confirms the case study literature, showing
the significant run-up in housing prices prior to a financial crisis. Notably, the run-up in
housing prices in the United States exceeds that of the “Big Five” .

Figure 1: Real Housing Prices and Banking Crises
135

130

125

US, 2003=100

120

Index

115

110
Average for banking crises in
advanced economies
105

100

Average for the "Big 5"
Crises

Index t-4=100
95
t-4

2

t-3

t-2

t-1

T

t+1

t+2

t+3

For the United States, house prices are measured by the Case-Shiller index, described and provided in

Robert Shiller (2005). The remaining house price data were made available by the Bank for International
Settlements and are described in Gregory D. Sutton (2002).

6

Figure 2 looks at real rates of growth in equity market price indices. (For the United
States, the index is the S&P 500; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2008, provide the complete listing
for foreign markets.)
Once again, the United States looks like the archetypical crisis country, only more
so. The Big Five crisis countries tended to experience equity price falls earlier on than
the U.S. has, perhaps because the U.S. Federal Reserve pumped in an extraordinary
amount of stimulus in the early part of the most recent episode.

Figure 2: Real Equity Prices and Banking Crises
135
130
125
US, 2003=100
120
115
110

Index

105
100
Average for banking crises in
advanced economies

95
90
85

Average for the "Big 5"
Crises

Index t-4=100

80
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

T

7

t+1

t+2

t+3

Figure 3: Current Account Balance/GDP on the Eve of Banking Crises
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

0

-1

percent of GDP

-2

-3

-4

-5
U.S.
-6
Average for banking crises in
advanced economies

-7

Figure 3 looks at the current account as a share of GDP. Again, the United States
is on a typical trajectory, with capital inflows accelerating up to the eve of the crisis.
Indeed, the U.S. deficits are more severe, reaching over six percent of GDP. As already
mentioned, there is a large and growing literature that attempts to rationalize why the
United States might be able run a large sustained current account deficit without great
risk of trauma. Whether the U.S. case is quite as different as this literature suggests
remains to be seen.
Real per capita GDP growth in the run-up to debt crises is illustrated in Figure 4.
The United States 2007 crisis follows the same inverted V shape that characterizes the
earlier episodes. Growth momentum falls going into the typical crisis, and remains low

8

for two years after. In the more severe “Big Five” cases, however, the growth shock is
considerably larger and more prolonged than for the average. Of course this implies that
the growth effects are quite a bit less in the mildest cases, although the U.S. case has so
many markers of larger problems that one cannot take too much comfort in this caveat.
Figure 4: Real GDP Growth per Capita and Banking Crises
(PPP basis)
5
4

Percent

3

US

Average for banking crises in
advanced economies

2
1
Average for the "Big 5"
Crises

0
-1
-2
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

t+1

t+2

Figure 5 looks at public debt as a share of GDP. Rising public debt is a near
universal precursor of other post-war crises, not least the 1984 U.S. crisis. It is notable
that U.S. public debt rises much more slowly than it did in run-up to the Big Five crisis.
However, if one were to incorporate the huge buildup in private U.S. debt into these
measures, the comparisons would be notably less favorable.

9

The correlations in these graphs are not necessarily causal, but in combination
nevertheless suggest that if the United States does not experience a significant and

Figure 5: Public Debt and Banking Crises
250

230

210

190
Index

Average for banking crises in
advanced economies

170

150
Average for the "Big 5" Crises
130
US, 1997=100
Index t-10=100
110

90
t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

T

t+1

t+2

t+3

protracted growth slowdown, it should either be considered very lucky or even more
“special” that most optimistic theories suggest. Indeed, given the severity of most crisis
indicators in the run-up to its 2007 financial crisis, the United States should consider
itself quite fortunate if its downturn ends up being a relatively short and mild one.

10

IV. Conclusions
Tolstoy famously begins his classic novel Anna Karenina with “Every happy
family is alike, but every unhappy family is unhappy in their own way.” While each
financial crisis no doubt is distinct, they also share striking similarities, in the run-up of
asset prices, in debt accumulation, in growth patterns, and in current account deficits.
The majority of historical crises are preceded by financial liberalization, as documented
in Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). While in the case of the United States, there has been
no striking de jure liberalization, there certainly has been a de facto liberalization. New
unregulated, or lightly regulated, financial entities have come to play a much larger role
in the financial system, undoubtedly enhancing stability against some kinds of shocks,
but possibly increasing vulnerabilities against others. Technological progress has plowed
ahead, shaving the cost of transacting in financial markets and broadening the menu of
instruments.
Perhaps the United States will prove a different kind of happy family. Despite
many superficial similarities to a typical crisis country, it may yet suffer a growth lapse
comparable only to the mildest cases. Perhaps this time will be different as so many
argue. Nevertheless, the quantitative and qualitative parallels in run-ups to earlier postwar industrialized-country financial crises are worthy of note. Of course, inflation is
lower and better anchored today worldwide, and this may prove an important mitigating
factor. The United States does not suffer the handicap of a fixed exchange rate system.
On the other hand, the apparent decline in U.S. productivity growth and in housing prices
does not provide a particularly favorable backdrop for withstanding a credit contraction.

11

Another parallel deserves mention. During the 1970s, the U.S. banking system
stood as an intermediary between oil-exporter surpluses and emerging market borrowers
in Latin America and elsewhere. While much praised at the time, 1970s petro-dollar
recycling ultimately led to the 1980s debt crisis, which in turn placed enormous strain on
money center banks.3 It is true that this time, a large volume of petro-dollars are again
flowing into the United States, but many emerging markets have been running current
account surpluses, lending rather than borrowing. Instead, a large chunk of money has
effectively been recycled to a developing economy that exists within the United States’
own borders. Over a trillion dollars was channeled into the sub-prime mortgage market,
which is comprised of the poorest and least credit worth borrowers within the United
States. The final claimant is different, but in many ways, the mechanism is the same.
Finally, we note that although this paper has concentrated on the United States,
many of the same parallels hold for other countries that began experiencing housing price
duress during the 2007, including Spain, the United Kingdom and Ireland. Indeed, as
Appendix Table 1 reminds us for the panic of 1907 and the crash of 1929, the global
dimension of the current crisis is neither new nor unique to this episode. As history has
shown, there can be similarities across unhappy families, too.

3

See Rudi Dornbsuch’s concise assessment of the recycling of petrodollars in the third and fourth chapters

of Dornbusch (1986).

12

REFERENCES
Caprio, Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel, Luc Laeven and Guillermo Noguera. 2005.
“Banking Crisis Database.” In Patrick Honohan and Luc Laeven (eds.) Systemic
Financial Crises. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1986. Dollars, Debts, and Deficits. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The
Causes of Banking and Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic Review
Vol. 89: 473-500.
Mullineux, Andrew. 1990. Business Cycles and Financial Crises (Hemel Hempstead).
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. This Time is Different: Six Centuries
of Financial Folly. Forthcoming.
Shiller, Robert. 2005. Irrational Exuberance (Second Edition). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Sutton, Gregory D. 2002. “Explaining Changes in House Prices.” BIS Quarterly
Review. (September): 46-55.

13

Appendix Table 1. Born in the USA:
Earlier US-Triggered Global Banking Crises, Affected Countries
Advanced economies

Developing Countries

The Panic of 1907: October, United States
Denmark
France
Italy
Japan
Sweden

Mexico

The Wall Street Crash of October 1929 and the Great Depression
1929
Brazil
India
Mexico
1930
France
Italy
1931
Belgium
Argentina
Finland
China
Germany
Greece
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Sources: Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) and sources cited therein.
Notes: In 1914 alone there are 10 banking crises worldwide, eight of these in advanced
economies. Given the outbreak of a world war, we do not include these as an example of
a global financial crisis episode.

14

