                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     NEIGHBORHOOD VIOLENCE AND URBAN YOUTH

                                               Anna Aizer

                                         Working Paper 13773
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13773


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2008




This research was funded by the Annie E. Casey Foundation. We thank them for their support but
acknowledge that the findings and conclusions presented in this report are those of the author alone,
and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the Foundation. The author would also like to thank Jonathan
Gruber and Jens Ludwig for very useful comments and Jeffrey Grogger, Goerge Tita and Bing-ru
Teh for generously providing the LA crime data used in this chapter. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Anna Aizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Neighborhood Violence and Urban Youth
Anna Aizer
NBER Working Paper No. 13773
February 2008
JEL No. I1,I3,J15,J24,K42

                                               ABSTRACT

Three quarters of American children have been exposed to neighborhood violence in their lifetimes.
Most of the existing research has concluded that exposure to violence leads to restricted emotional
development, aggressive behavior and poor school outcomes. However, this literature fails to account
for the fact that children exposed to neighborhood violence are highly disadvantaged in other ways:
they are more likely to be black, poor and have poorly educated parents. As such, it is not clear whether
exposure to violence or the underlying measures of disadvantage are responsible for the poor child
outcomes observed. Using individual survey data on urban youth and their families from Los Angeles,
we find that the most violent neighborhoods are also characterized by the highest degree of disadvantage:
greatest poverty, highest unemployment, least education. And while living in a violent neighborhood
increases the probability of exposure to violence, within violent neighborhoods those personally exposed
to street violence are significantly more disadvantaged and are more likely to associate with violent
peers than their unexposed neighbors. Once we control for observed and unobserved family disadvantage,
the impact of violence declines for some child outcomes, suggesting that underlying disadvantage
explains some of the negative outcomes observed, but not all - it is still the case that associating with
violent peers is negatively correlated with cognitive test scores. In addition, when we control for underlying
differences across families, the relationship between violence and internalizing behavioral problems
appears stronger.


Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu
Introduction

In a 1997 survey nearly three quarters of American children reported having been

exposed to neighborhood violence (Hill and Jones, 1997; Boney-McCoy and Finkelhor,

1997). These rates are highest among low-income urban youth. There have been

numerous studies of the impact of exposure to violence on children that have linked

exposure to violence with restricted emotional development, aggressive behavior,

depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, learning problems and truancy.

         However, the existing literature on neighborhood violence is characterized by a

number of shortcomings. In a review of the literature, psychiatrist Joy Osofsky identifies

a number of these shortcomings and calls for future research to address them.1 One

shortcoming relates to the difficulty defining or characterizing neighborhood violence

which leads to significant measurement error. Another is the fact that neighborhood

violence is often correlated with high rates of domestic violence and other types of

disadvantage (racial, income and parental education) which in turn have been shown to

have deleterious effects on child outcomes.2 As such, research documenting a

relationship between neighborhood violence and poor child outcomes may overstate the

relationship.

         In this chapter we seek to answer the following questions: 1) In what other ways

do violent neighborhoods differ from non-violent ones? 2) Who is exposed to
1
 Osofsky, J. “The Impact of Violence on Children.” The Future of Children: Domestic Violence and
Children (1999) 9:33-49.
2
 Research conducted in the early 1990s concluded that three to ten million children witness assaults against
a parent by an intimate partner each year (Straus, 1992). More recent work has found that violence against
pregnant women (most often perpetrated by an intimate partner) has a negative and significant impact on
birth outcomes which have been linked to worse economic outcomes later in life (Aizer, 2006).



                                                     2
neighborhood violence? Is exposure to violence random? and 3) Does exposure to

violence affect child outcomes or does it reflect other poor circumstances or types of

disadvantage?

       This research contributes to the existing body of work on the impact of exposure

to violence on child outcomes by examining this issue with new data that is well-suited to

address many of the shortcomings of the existing work. Importantly, we use established

econometric techniques (referred to as neighborhood and family fixed effects) that allow

one to control for both observed and unobserved measures of neighborhood and family

disadvantage that might be correlated with both exposure to violence and poor child

outcomes, thereby enabling causal inference. The data come from the Los Angeles

Family and Neighborhood Study (LA FANS), an individual survey of children and their

families residing in 65 neighborhoods in Los Angeles, California. The survey contains

information on child and parent characteristics including exposure to violence and

association with violent peers as well as family characteristics and multiple measures of

child well-being. Because all the children in the sample reside in one county, they are

subject to the same macroeconomic conditions and government programs so that we can

implicitly control for differences along these dimensions and focus on the impact of

neighborhood differences on child well-being.

       In addition, we utilize alternative measures of community or neighborhood

violence. Typically, measures of neighborhood violence consist of police or crime

reports available only at an aggregate level such as the county or city that is not truly

representative of a child’s neighborhood. In addition, they no not necessarily reflect true

violence or victimization but rather a combination of underlying violence and police




                                              3
response to that violence. Instead, we use two alternative measures of violence designed

to overcome these shortcomings. The first is the rate of hospitalizations for assault

developed from California Hospital Discharge data which is an administrative database

consisting of all hospitalizations in the state. These data allow one to create measures of

violence at the zipcode (which is more local than the county or city) that are not subject

to recall or self-reporting bias and do not reflect policing policies. The second source of

data on neighborhood violence is based on police data for individual reporting districts in

LA City. While these data are generated by the LA Police Department and therefore

reflect both underlying violence and police reports, the data are available at a very fine

level of detail (the census tract) and therefore more closely approximate one’s immediate

neighborhood – even more so than a zipcode.

       Combining the individual level data from the LAFANS survey with measures of

neighborhood violence and other neighborhood characteristics from the 2000 Census

yields a dataset with a wide range of information on child, family and neighborhood

characteristics. These data enable one to explore both the effects of exposure to violence

on child well-being and how individual, family and neighborhood characteristics affect

one’s exposure to violence. In addition, we employ econometric techniques, referred to

as “fixed effects,” (described in greater detail later) that allow us to control for underlying

disadvantage at the neighborhood and family level that is unobserved by the researcher.

In so doing, we can isolate the causal impact of exposure to violence, separate from

underlying family and neighborhood disadvantage, on child outcomes. This research will

help us to better understand the role of violence in the lives of disadvantaged children. It

should be stressed that the focus of this work is estimating the impact of intermittent




                                              4
exposure to neighborhood violence on child outcomes. As such, these results are not

generalizable to children who are the victims of repeated victimization such as child

abuse.3



    I.       Literature Review

There have been numerous studies of the impact of exposure to violence on children,

with most of the research conducted by psychologists, psychiatrists and social workers.

This research has linked exposure to violence with restricted emotional development,

aggressive behavior, depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, learning problems and

truancy.4

          The earliest studies focused on single nonrecurring acts of violence such as sniper

shootings in school playgrounds (Pynoos et al, 1987). These studies generally found

posttraumatic stress symptom responses related to internalizing problems (anxiety and

depression) that varied with proximity to the actual violence. However, it has since been

noted that the clinicians in these studies were not blind to the subjects’ exposure to

violence, which some believe may have biased the findings (Cooley-Quille et al, 1995).

          More recently, researchers have focused on exposure to chronic community

violence. These studies have, in general, linked exposure to community violence to

externalizing behavioral problems (Bell and Jenkins, 1993). For example, in a study of

37 school children age seven through 12, Cooley-Quille et at (1995) found that exposure


3
 For example, recent work by Currie and Tekin (2006) suggests that repeated child abuse and
maltreatment leads to large and significant reductions in child well-being.

4
 Fonagy, Target, Steele, and Steele, 1997; Gorman-Smith, and Tolan, 1998; Jenkins, 1995; Loeber, Wung,
Keenan, et al. 1993; Schwab-Stone, Ayers, Kasprow, et al., 1995.



                                                   5
to high levels of community violence was not related to internalizing behavior and

disorders, but was associated with externalizing behavior problems – restlessness, and

impaired social and behavioral functioning. However, the authors also note that “families

of children with high exposure to community violence were characterized by high

conflict and lack of cohesiveness.” This leads the authors to conclude that “An important

caution is needed in interpreting the relationship between exposure to violence and

behavior problems. Because of the study’s correlational nature, it cannot be determined

whether one variable causes the other or whether both are mediated by a third factor.”

       In another (larger) survey of 2248 6th, 8th and 10th graders in an urban public

school system, Schwab-Stone et al (1995) find that 40% of youth reported exposure to a

shooting or a stabbing in the past year. Children exposed to high levels of violence were

more likely to be black and/or Latino and more likely to receive free lunch. Using one

way ANOVA to examine differences in child outcomes, they found that violence

exposure was associated with greater willingness to use physical aggression, diminished

perception of risk, lowered personal expectations for the future, dysphoric mood,

antisocial activity, alcohol use and diminished academic achievement. However, in their

discussion, the authors also acknowledge the difficulty establishing a causal relationship,

writing “from the current study one cannot say that violence exposure or feeling unsafe

causes any of the attitudes or aspects of adaptation that are significantly related,

statistically speaking, to them.”

       Few economists have studied the impact of exposure to violence on child

outcomes. The little work that does exist explicitly recognizes the difficulty of making

causal inference as exposure to violence may be correlated with other sources of




                                              6
disadvantage that may be responsible for the poor outcomes observed. Grogger (1998)

estimates the impact of school violence on high school graduation rates based on a large

survey of school children and their school administrators. School violence can affect

graduation rates by reducing school attendance and/or the ability to concentrate when in

school, thereby lowering the probability of graduation. A major problem estimating the

impact of school violence on outcomes is that more violent schools may have lower

graduation rates simply because violent students are less likely to complete high school.

Grogger overcomes this problem by focusing on the high school graduation rates of non-

violent students. He finds that higher rates of school violence as reported by principals

among one’s peers was related to lower rates of graduation among the non-violent

students.

       But it may still be the case that non-violent children in violent schools differ in

important ways from non-violent children in non-violent schools. Violent schools are

more likely to be in poorer neighborhoods and parents who send their children to violent

schools may suffer from other forms of disadvantage relative to parents who send their

children to non-violent schools. It may be these differences, not differences in school

violence per se, that are responsible for these differences.

       More recent work by Kling, Liebman and Katz (2004) and Ludwig, Duncan and

Hirschfield (2001) based on the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) demonstration provides

experimental evidence of the impact of neighborhoods on child well-being. In the MTO

study, poor families were randomly selected to receive subsidies to move to higher

income neighborhoods. The MTO study overcomes previous difficulties estimating the

impact of environment on child well-being – because of the random assignment, families




                                              7
living in poor and non-poor neighborhoods will not differ in significant ways. The

analysis consisted of in-depth interviews with families followed by a quantitative analysis

of how moving to a higher income neighborhood affected child outcomes. In the

qualitative analysis, the authors found that fear of random violence caused parents to

focus much of their time and energy on keeping their children safe and that parental

monitoring declined when they moved to higher income neighborhoods.

       In the quantitative analysis that followed, the authors found a positive and

significant impact of moving to a higher income neighborhood on girls but no impact on

boys (Kling and Liebman, 2005). Females experienced improvements in education and

mental health and were less likely to engage in risky behaviors. While the focus of the

MTO study is to evaluate the impact of poor neighborhoods (and not violence

specifically) on child outcomes, the authors find that families that move to higher income

neighborhoods report lower rates of victimization, especially for females, but the

reductions are not statistically significant. There are, however, significant differences

between poor and non-poor neighborhoods in the quality of the school environments, the

presence of adult role models and the health of the environment. Thus while the

qualitative analysis suggested that safety and lack of fear of random violence would

explain improved outcomes associated with moving to a higher income neighborhood,

the quantitative evidence does not appear to support this.

       Finally, recent work by Ludwig and Kling (2006) investigates whether the

findings of Ludwig, Duncan, and Hirschfield (2001) that moving to a lower-poverty

neighborhood reduces violent criminal behavior among youths can be explained by

reductions in exposure to criminal activity as measured by neighborhood crime rates.




                                             8
Ludwig and Kling (2006) find no support for the hypothesis that crime is “contagious.”

Rather, they find that neighborhood racial segregation appears to be a much more

important factor than neighborhood crime rates in explaining youth crime. Although the

focus of their work is criminal activity, crime and violence are highly correlated and

these results provide further suggestive evidence that exposure to neighborhood violence

may not have a strong causal impact on youth behavior or outcomes but that the

underlying level of neighborhood disadvantage may be more important.

       Thus the existing literature on the impact of violence on child well-being appears

to be mixed. While work by psychiatrists and psychologists has found an association

between exposure to community violence and externalizing behavioral problems, there is

also evidence that children exposed to more community violence are disadvantaged in

other respects – they are poorer, more likely to be Black, and their families suffer from

“lack of cohesiveness.” As such, it is difficult to make causal inferences regarding the

relationship between exposure to violence and child well-being. Work by economists

that has sought to overcome this difficulty through randomized assignment to

neighborhood has found that moving out of poor neighborhoods does improve outcomes

for girls, but cannot attribute the improvements to reductions in violence. In addition,

they have found that the reductions in criminal activity associated with moving to a lower

poverty neighborhood are not attributable to reductions in neighborhood crime but are

more likely explained by improvements in other measures of neighborhood disadvantage

– racial and income segregation (Kling and Ludwig, 2006).

       In the work presented here, we attempt to distinguish the impact of violence from

other forms of disadvantage. In other words, we attempt to answer the question: does




                                             9
exposure to community violence cause child outcomes to worsen? Or rather, is it the

case that disadvantaged youth are exposed to more violence, and it is the underlying

disadvantage, not the violence, that is responsible for the worse child outcomes? We

proceed in two stages. First, we include multiple controls for neighborhood and family

disadvantage that are available in the data. Second, we employ neighborhood and family

“fixed effects” which enable us to control for forms of neighborhood and family

disadvantage that may be correlated with exposure to violence but not captured in the

data. This method is described in greater detail in section V.



II. Data

The Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Study (LA FANS)

The LA FANS is a panel study of a representative sample of all neighborhoods in LA.

Poor neighborhoods and children are oversampled and all analyses presented here are

weighted using the survey weights which are deigned to provide estimates generalizable

to the population of all children living in Los Angeles. While the survey is designed as a

panel, only data for the first wave (conducted in 1999-2000) are currently available. In

wave 1, an average of 41 households within each neighborhood were randomly selected

for interview. Sampled adults were asked questions about household economic status,

health insurance, participation in welfare programs, use of social services as well as

questions about their neighborhoods. Caregivers provided information on the home

environment, children’s behavioral problems and school performance. Cognitive

assessments were administered to children over three. Children older than nine were also




                                            10
asked about exposure to violence, their friends and social interaction; as such, the

analysis sample is limited to this older group of 785 children.

       To compare the analysis sample with the overall population of children in the US,

we present descriptive statistics for this sample and for the sample of children living in

LA and the nation from the 2000 census in table 1. In column one are the unweighted

means for the LA FANS sample, column two contains the weighted means. In column

three are population means for families with at least one child between the ages of ten

and nineteen in LA county from the 2000 census and in column four are means for the

entire US population of families with at least one child between ten and nineteen.

       The children included in this analysis are, on average, 15 years old. Thirty six

percent of mothers are high school dropouts, 67 percent are married and 34 percent live

below poverty. Eleven percent of the mothers receive cash welfare benefits. Given that

the survey was conducted in Los Angeles, it is not surprising that 55 percent are

Hispanic, ten percent Black, 27 percent white and eight percent Asian. If we compare the

raw means in column 1 with the weighted means in column 2, we see that when we

weight the sample means, the children appear slightly less disadvantaged. When we

compare the weighted means to those from the 2000 Census, we conclude that the LA

FANS sample is slightly more disadvantaged relative to the LA county population

(column 3) in terms of race (LA FANS is more likely to include Black and Hispanic

children) as well as poverty (LAFANs includes more poor families and families that rely

on welfare or SSI). However, when we compare the average characteristics of children

sampled in the LA FANS with those in the nation more generally, we find that the LA

FANS children are much more disadvantaged in terms of income, race, and maternal




                                             11
education (column 4). The fact that the analyses are based on a disadvantaged (and non-

representative) population of children should be taken into account when interpreting the

results.

           Exposure to violence in this sample is somewhat common. Twenty one percent of

children in this sample report having violent peers as measured by whether they know a

gang member (girls are as likely to report violent peers as boys in this sample). As for

exposure to street violence, 11 percent reported being robbed and eight percent witnessed

a shooting in the past year.5



California Hospital Discharge Data

           The LA FANS data, which contain the household census tract, are merged with

measures of neighborhood violence developed from California’s hospital discharge

database. The hospital data is available at the zipcode level. As such, for analyses

involving these data, the child’s neighborhood is defined as the zipcode in which he/she

lives. A zipcode(s) is a far more precise measure of one’s neighborhood than measures

typically used (cities or counties) for the purpose of measuring neighborhood violence.

Information on the number of individuals in each zipcode (to compute an assault rate) as

well as characteristics of the zipcode (poverty rate, racial composition, share low skilled,

etc) comes from the 2000 census. There is considerable variation in the number and rate

of admissions for assault across LA’s neighborhoods. For example, in South Central Los

5
  Eighteen percent report exposure to family violence, as measured by reports of family members “often
hitting.” However, the characteristics of the families of children who report family violence differ
considerably from the characteristics of violent families reported in other data, suggesting that this measure
may be unreliable in the LAFANS. For this reason, we do not use this measure in the analysis. However,
when we conduct the family fixed effect analysis (described later) we implicitly control for measures of
domestic violence.



                                                     12
Angeles there were 501 admissions for assaults among those age 15-44 in 2000 (or 45 per

10,000). In Compton there were 213 admissions (36 per 10,000) and in Beverly Hills

there were 5 (3 per 10,000). 6

         The main advantage of using hospital discharge data to calculate measures of

neighborhood violence is that it enables one to calculate much more local measures than

other datasets and does not rely on self-reports or police reports.7 In addition, the

measures can be broken down by race and whether the violence involved a gun. But

there are potential drawbacks to these data. First, they capture extreme acts of violence

(though they are likely highly correlated with less severe violence). Second, because

they are based on hospital utilization, they may capture violence perpetrated against those

most likely to rely on hospitals as a source of medical care (those with fewer resources or

those located closest to hospitals). However, the measure is based only on admission to

the hospital, not emergency department utilization, and as there is less discretion in

hospital admission, we believe that the potential for this measure to capture poverty is

minimal and that it fairly accurately captures neighborhood violence. But in a

conservative effort to limit any potential for bias we recalculate our measure of

neighborhood violence not as a rate of assaults, but as the share of all hospitalizations for

an injury that are due to assaults. The latter implicitly controls for greater reliance on

hospitals for care in some zipcodes relative to others.



6
  South Central includes zipcodes 90001, 90002, 90003, 90047 and 90059; Compton 90220, 90221 and
90222; and Beverly Hills includes zipcodes 90210,90211, and 90212.
7
  Calculations by the author based on the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) of 2004 reveal that
the vast majority of violent crime occurs near the victim’s home. For example, among those age 12-19
who were victim of an assault, 15 percent reported that the assault happened in or very near the home, 47.7
percent reported that it happened within 1 mile, and 76.2 percent reported that it occurred within five miles.
This suggests that assault rates calculated from hospital discharge data that identify the patient’s zipcode of
residence do accurately reflect violence in the zipcode.


                                                      13
Violent Crime by Census Tract for LA City

We can link information on violent crime by census tract (a smaller area than zipcode) to

the roughly 475 youth surveyed as part of the LAFANS and who reside in LA City (a

subset of LA County). These data were first compiled by Grogger (2002)8. As noted

previously, while these data are based on police reports and thus capture not only

violence but reports to the police, they are available at the finest level of detail possible –

the census tract which includes on average 5,800 individuals in LA county, as opposed to

a zipcode which includes on average 67,000 individuals. These data are not available by

race or age. Rates of violent crime for the year 1999 range from 0 to 1910 per 10,000,

with an average of 136, which is considerably lower than it was in the early 1990s. In

1992, the first year for which these data are available, the average rate of violent crime

per census tract in LA was 275 per 10,000, representing a 50 percent decline in violent

crime over an eight year period.

           The next three sections contain our analysis of the role of violence in the lives of

urban youth. In the next section (section III), we seek to answer the first of the three

questions: 1) in what other ways do violent neighborhoods differ from non-violent ones?

In section IV, we answer the second set of questions: who is exposed to neighborhood

violent? Is exposure to violent random or correlated with other forms of family

disadvantage? Finally, in section V, we answer the last of our three questions, does

exposure to violence affect child outcomes or does it reflect other poor circumstances or

types of disadvantage?



III. How do violent neighborhoods differ from non-violent ones?
8
    The data were subsequently updated by George Tita.


                                                    14
Our first measure of neighborhood violence is the share of all hospitalizations for an

injury in a zipcode that are the result of an assault. This measure should reduce, if not

eliminate, any bias in the measures of violence that derives from one group’s greater

reliance on hospitals for care.9 We also decompose the assault rate into gun and non-gun

assaults.

           In Figure 1 we present graphic evidence of a relationship between this measure of

community violence and various community characteristics. As is evident from all

graphs, there is a positive correlation between neighborhood violence among youths

(those aged 15-19) and neighborhood measures of disadvantage. Zipcodes with higher

levels of violence have a greater share of high school drop outs, individuals below

poverty, households receiving welfare, black individuals and a higher unemployment

rate. These relationships persist for adults (age 25-44) as well.

           The two most important predictors of violence are the share below poverty and

the share black in a neighborhood. Among youths, if the share below poverty increases

by a standard deviation (.104) then the assault rate (as a ratio) increases 15 percent of a

standard deviation. If the share black increases by a standard deviation, then violence

increases by 28 percent of a standard deviation. Among adults, poverty appears to have a

greater impact than race in predicting violence.

           In Figures 2A and 2B are the rates decomposed into gun-related assaults and non

gun-related assaults, respectively. In Los Angeles, among those age 15-19, gun violence

is responsible for a large share of hospital admissions: 12 percent of all hospital

admissions for an injury and 61 percent of all hospital admissions for an assault. As is

evident from Figures 2A and 2B, the relationship between violence and neighborhood
9
    Results based on the assault rate are very similar but tend to yield more “outlier” observations.


                                                        15
disadvantage is driven almost entirely by gun violence, and, as with the total assault rate,

the share below poverty and the share black appear to be the most important predictors of

neighborhood violence.

       In Figure 3 we present results from a similar exercise based on census tracts in

LA City. The findings are similar: race (share black) is highly correlated with violent

crime at the census tract level, as are the share receiving welfare and the share below

poverty. Unlike the hospitalization data, the crime data do not allow us to look at gun vs

non-gun crimes or differences by age.

       Overall, this preliminary analysis based on aggregate data suggests that

community violence (and gun violence, in particular) is correlated with multiple

measures of disadvantage. This will affect our ability to attribute any negative

relationship that we observe between violence and child well-being to violence and not

the underlying disadvantage without adequately controlling for underlying sources of

disadvantage.



IV. Who is exposed to violence? Are children from disadvantaged families exposed
to more violence?

What determines personal exposure to violence? Is living in a violent neighborhood the

most important factor? How much do family characteristics matter? We begin to answer

these questions by comparing hospitalization rates across races and age groups. In Table

2 we see that hospitalization for assault is more common among youths age 15-19 than

adults (age 25-44) and children (age 0-15, not shown). The decline in violence by age is

even more striking when we focus on gun violence (column 3). In addition, blacks have

much higher rates of assault than other groups: nearly 4 per 1000 compared to .5 per



                                             16
1000 for whites and 1.4 for Hispanics. This is particularly true for gun assaults (column

3). But the higher rates for blacks reflect, in part, their greater reliance on hospitals for

care. In column 2 of Table 2 we present the share of all hospitalizations for an injury that

are the result of an assault and in columns 4 and 5 the share of all hospitals for an assault

and any injury that are the results of a gun assault, respectively. When we correct for the

greater reliance on hospitals for care among some groups, we find that blacks still have

the highest rate of assault (42 percent of all injuries are assaults as opposed to 8 percent

for whites) but the gap is somewhat smaller. Interestingly, racial differences in assault

rates are greater for youths than adults.

        We follow the analysis based on aggregate data with an analysis of personal

exposure to violence as reported in the LAFANS survey. In Table 3 we present the

probabilities of exposure to different types of violence by neighborhood type (Columns

1-2). Personal exposure to violence consists of exposure to violent peers and exposure to

street violence. The former is defined as whether the child knows any gang members and

the latter is defined in one of two ways – whether the person witnessed a shooting or was

robbed in the past year.

        A violent neighborhood is defined as one in the top one third of the distribution of

violence as measured by the hospitalization rate for assault and a non-violent

neighborhood is in the bottom third of the distribution of violence. Living in a violent

neighborhood increases one’s exposure to violence: those in violent neighborhoods are

more likely to know a gang member, witness a shooting or be robbed. However, certain

parental characteristics are just as important in determining exposure to violence. For

example, whether a child’s mother often knows his or her whereabouts is just as




                                              17
predictive of exposure to violence as a violent neighborhood (columns 3 and 4). In other

words, watchful parents appear to be just as protective as safe neighborhoods. A more

formal decomposition of the effects of family versus neighborhood on exposure to

violence suggests that family characteristics explain more of the variation in exposure to

violence than do neighborhood characteristics, the degree of difference depends on the

measure of violence. For example, neighborhood characteristics explain less than 13

percent of the variation in violence as measured by whether the child knows a gang

member and family characteristics explain slightly more than 15 percent. For witnessing

a shooting, the difference is much greater: neighborhood characteristics explain 12

percent while family characteristics explain 36 percent. For being robbed, family (5

percent) and neighborhood (1.8 percent) characteristics appear to explain much less of

the variation.

       There is also considerable overlap in the types of violence to which children in

this sample are exposed. Of the children who report knowing someone in a gang, 16.36

percent of them were also robbed, 20.12 percent witnessed a shooting and 28.48 percent

reported that family members “often hit.” Likewise for those who witness a shooting,

33.85 report being robbed and 50 percent know someone in a gang and for those who

have been robbed, 25 percent witnessed a shooting and 31 percent knew someone in a

gang (Table 4).

       In table 5 we present evidence that the family characteristics of those exposed to

violence are significantly different from those not exposed. The table includes three

panels. The first is based on the full sample, the second and third are based on non-

violent and violent neighborhoods, respectively. We find important differences in the




                                            18
family background characteristics of those who are exposed to violence in this sample,

even when we control for the underlying level of neighborhood violence as we implicitly

do in panels two and three. Those personally exposed to violence are more

disadvantaged than those who are not, even conditional on the level of neighborhood

violence. The largest differences are observed for those who witnessed a shooting

(versus those who did not) and those who know gang members. We find considerably

smaller differences for those who were robbed versus those who were not which may

suggest that of the measures of violence considered here, being robbed may be the least

reflective of family disadvantage and may include a greater random or exogenous

component than the other measures.

       These descriptive analyses yield a number of interesting findings with respect to

the role of violence in the lives of urban youth. First, violent neighborhoods are

correlated with higher exposure to violence, but families living in violent neighborhoods

are poorer, less educated and more likely to be Black or Hispanic than those living in

non-violent neighborhoods. Second, violence does not appear to be random. Children

exposed to street violence (shootings and robbery) often associate with violent peers. In

addition, even within violent neighborhoods, only some children report personal exposure

to violence and those who do are more disadvantaged than those who do not. Together

this preliminary evidence suggests that other forms of disadvantage, not simply

neighborhood violence, may be responsible for the negative child outcomes associated

with exposure to violence.

       In order to determine whether it is exposure to violence itself or other

characteristics that are correlated with violence and child outcomes, we must control for




                                            19
the underlying level of disadvantage as well as possible. For this we turn to regression

analysis in the next section.



V. Does exposure to neighborhood violence affect child outcomes?

       We pursue two empirical estimation strategies in order to determine whether it is

exposure to violence that negatively affects child well-being or whether other types of

disadvantage (income, educational, racial) which may be correlated with violence that

affect child outcomes. In the first, we conduct ordinary least squares (OLS) regression

analysis of the impact of violence on child outcomes with and without controlling for

other types of disadvantage. The first equation estimated is:



Y= β0 + β1Violence + ε                                                      (1A)



where Y is cognitive test scores for reading comprehension and math. The cognitive test

scores are a percentile (0-100), normed against other children of the same age and sex.

We focus on cognitive test scores because they are objective measures of child cognitive

achievement which have been shown to significantly affect a child’s future economic

success (Currie and Thomas, 2001, Zax and Rees, 2001, Murname et al, 2005). Previous

studies of the impact of violence on child outcomes have examined cognitive scores,

GPAs, psychological evaluations and the Behavior Problems Index (BPI). We also look

at the impact of violence on the BPI. However, both GPA and BPI have strong

subjective components which can bias these measures, whereas cognitive test scores

suffer no such bias.




                                            20
        Violence in the above equation is one of five measures of violence. The first and

second are measures of neighborhood violence - the rate of assaults among those aged

15-19 (or the ratio, as defined previously) in the neighborhood (zipcode) in which the

child lives and the level of violent crime in the census tract.10 The third is peer violence

which is defined as whether the child knows any gang members. The fourth and fifth

measures of violence in the above equation are defined in one of two ways – whether the

person witnessed a shooting or was robbed in the past year. The error term ε includes all

child, family and neighborhood characteristics not included in the regression that

influence child outcomes. Finally, we redefine neighborhood violence as the natural log

of the violent crime rate in the census tract.

         In the top panel of Table 6A are regression estimates of the impact of violence

(neighborhood, peer violence, and street violence) on child outcomes without any

additional controls (equation 1A). It appears that neighborhood violence, as measured by

the rate of hospitalizations for assaults, has a large negative and significant impact on

both reading and math test scores, (columns 1 and 2). If the level of violence in one’s

neighborhood were to increase by one standard deviation (13 assaults per 10,000), then

reading and math scores would decline by 7 and 6 points respectively (or 23 and 22

percent of a standard deviation). Violent neighborhoods are also associated with both

internalizing and externalizing behavioral problems (columns 3 and 4). Internalizing

behavioral problems refer to all problems that are directed inwardly. They include low or

restricted activity levels, being shy, timid and unassertive, withdrawing from social


10
  The census tract of children in the LAFANS is known and matched to the corresponding zipcode. Of the
89 census tracts in the LAFANS, 58 matched to only one zipcode and 31 matched to two or three zipcodes.
For children in census tracts with more than one zipcode, the average assault rate across all zipcodes that
comprise the census tract was used.


                                                    21
situation and acting in a fearful manner. The BPI (internalizing index) ranges from zero

to 20, with a mean and standard deviation of 3. Externalizing behavioral problems

include such behaviors as aggression, delinquency and hyperactivity. The BPI

externalizing index ranges from zero to 31, with a mean and standard deviation of 6. A

standard deviation increase in neighborhood violence is associated with a half point

increase in both the internalizing and externalizing BPI, or 17 and 8 percent of a standard

deviation increase, respectively.

       Personal exposure to violence is also associated with worse test scores and greater

behavioral problems. Association with violent peers (columns 5 and 6) results in an 11

and 16 point drop in reading and math scores, respectively (37 and 54 percent of a

standard deviation) and a one point and three point increase in internalizing and

externalizing behavioral problems, respectively (30 percent and 50 percent of a standard

deviation). Witnessing a shooting is associated with 16 and 18 point drops in test scores

(49 and 61 percent of a standard deviation), and with a 45 and 55 percent standard

deviation increase in internalizing and externalizing behavioral problems. Finally, being

robbed in the past year is associated with 10 and 6 point drops (35 and 23 percent of a

standard deviation, respectively) in reading and math, and a small insignificant increase

in internalizing behaviors and a small (15 percent of a standard deviation), but significant

increase in externalizing behaviors.

       However, these estimates may be biased. Recall that n equation (1A) estimated

above, the error term ε includes all child, family and neighborhood characteristics not

included in the regression that influence child outcomes. These include all other types of

disadvantage (racial, income, etc). If these omitted variables are correlated with violence,




                                             22
(that is, if otherwise disadvantaged children are also exposed to more violence) then our

estimate of β1 will suffer from omitted variable bias – capturing not only the impact of

violence on child outcomes, but also other types of disadvantage that can negatively

affect child outcomes independent of violence. The bias in most cases will likely be

upward if violence and disadvantage are positive correlated and child outcomes are

negatively correlated with disadvantage. An upward bias means that our estimate of β1

will be an overestimate of the true impact of violence on child well being. It is possible,

however, for our estimate of β1 to be an under-estimate of the impact of violence on child

outcomes if either disadvantage is positively correlated with child outcomes and exposure

to violence or disadvantage is negatively correlated with both child outcomes and

exposure to violence. There is evidence, for example, that poor and minority families

under-report their children’s behavioral problems so that disadvantage and child

outcomes are positively correlated for behavioral problems (Lambert et al, 1992 and

McMiller and Weisz, 1996). It might also be the case that children in the most

disadvantaged families are less likely to report exposure to violence if it might implicate

them in criminal activity (such as knowing a gang member).

       To correct for this bias, we include many detailed controls for locational, racial,

income, and parental education disadvantage. As we control for these variables, the

estimate of β1 should decrease in magnitude. The second regression is:



Y= β0 + β1Violence + β2Child + β3Family + β4Neighborhood + ε                         (1B)




                                             23
Where Child refers to a vector of child characteristics (sex, age, race and number of

siblings) and Family refers to a vector of family characteristics which include income and

parental education disadvantage (maternal education, maternal age, marital status, family

earnings and welfare receipt). Neighborhood refers to a vector of neighborhood

characteristics (share receiving welfare, share below poverty, share with less than a high

school degree, the unemployment rate and the share black) defined at the neighborhood

level (either the zipcode or the census tract, depending on the analysis) and based on data

from the 2000 census.

       Estimates of equation 1B are presented in panel 2 of Table 6A. The following

neighborhood (zipcode level) controls are included: share on welfare, share below

poverty, share with less than a high school degree, the unemployment rate and the share

black. When we include these controls for other neighborhood characteristics, many of

the previous estimates of the impact of violence on child outcomes fall considerably. The

impact of neighborhood violence falls by more than 80 percent for math and reading

scores and is no longer significant. The impact of neighborhood violence on behavioral

problems also falls and is no longer statistically significantly different from zero. The

impact of peer violence and witnessing a shooting on cognitive test scores and behavioral

problems both fall by approximately 30 percent. The impact of being robbed, however,

falls the least once we control for neighborhood characteristics, falling only between 10

and 15 percent.

       In the third panel, we include controls for neighborhood and family

characteristics. When we do, the impact of peer violence on cognitive performance and

behavioral problems falls further still and remains significant for externalizing behavioral




                                             24
problems and math scores only. The impact of witnessing a shooting on all but

externalizing behavioral problems falls and is no longer statistically significantly

different from zero. Interestingly, the impact of being robbed in the past year on child

scores changes very little when we control for family characteristics and is still

significantly negatively associated with child test scores in reading and math.

       In Table 6B we present estimated regression coefficients for the full set of family

and neighborhood controls from the previous regression. Of the neighborhood

characteristics included, only the share of adults with less than a high school degree

appears to largely, significantly and negatively affect child outcomes. However, it could

be that we are simply not including the most important neighborhood characteristics

because they are intangible or unobservable to the researcher, a point to which we return.

As for personal or family characteristics, race (being Black or Hispanic), maternal

education, family earnings and welfare receipt have the largest effects on child outcomes.

       But these estimates are still subject to the criticism that many important forms of

neighborhood disadvantage are not captured in the data. If true, then our estimates of β1

may still be biased. To address this, we include neighborhood fixed effects. The

inclusion of fixed effects defined at the neighborhood level essentially limits our analysis

to a comparison of children who have been exposed to violence with children who have

not been exposed and reside in the same neighborhood. In so doing, we implicitly

control for all sources of neighborhood disadvantage, observed or unobserved, that might

be correlated with exposure to violence and could bias our results.

       Panel four includes family controls and neighborhood (zipcode) fixed effects. By

including zipcode fixed effects we are able to isolate the impact of exposure to violence




                                             25
separate from other forms of neighborhood disadvantage. When we do, the impact of

violent peers on reading scores falls further still, while the impact on math score also falls

but is still significant (5.8 points) as does the impact on externalizing behavioral

problems. Again, the inclusion of these controls does not affect the impact of being

robbed on child test scores which is still negative and significant (10.2 and 5.4 points on

reading and math, respectively) and the null effect on behavioral problems remains.

       We re-estimate the regressions presented in Table 6A re-defining the

neighborhood at the census tract and the measure of neighborhood violence as the nature

log of the violent crime rate. We do this because, as noted previously, the crime rate is

available at a considerably smaller area (census tract) than the zipcode which may better

approximate a neighborhood. Note that since the violent crime data at the level for the

census tract is available only for Los Angeles City (and not all of Los Angeles County),

the sample size available for these analyses is smaller (approximately 500 versus 800).

When we exclude all controls (top panel of Table 6C) we see that the violent crime rate

has a negative and significant impact on all child outcomes, though the effect is not very

large. For example, a 100% drop in violent crime would raise reading scores by 16

points (slightly more than a standard deviation). As we include neighborhood and family

controls (second and third panels), the point estimates decrease considerably and lose

significance, just as we observed for the zipcode-level regressions. The remaining

columns (columns 4 -15) present estimates of the impact of personal exposure to violence

on child outcomes with controls for neighborhood characteristics defined at the smaller

geographic level (census tract). In the last panel, we include neighborhood (census tract)




                                             26
fixed effects. In general, the results are very similar to those in which neighborhood is

defined at the larger level of the zipcode.

       The results from the above regressions suggest that once we control for other

forms of disadvantage, violent neighborhoods, violent peers and witnessing a shooting do

not significantly negatively affect child cognitive achievement or internalizing behavioral

problems – suggesting that underlying sources of disadvantage associated with both

exposure to violence and child outcomes are likely responsible for the poor outcomes

observed. They do seem to be correlated with externalizing behavior problems. The fact

that the estimated impact of these types of violence on child outcomes falls as more child,

family and neighborhood controls are included underscores the importance of controlling

for underlying disadvantage that may be correlated with both exposure to violence and

child outcomes to produce unbiased estimates.

       In contrast, the negative impact of one measure of violence (being robbed in the

past year) on child test scores remains once we control for neighborhood and family

characteristics, though there do not appear to be any significant effects on behavioral

problems. It could be that we are not adequately controlling for differences across

families within neighborhoods that are correlated with both exposure to violence and

poor child outcomes. Recall from Table 5 that the observed family characteristics of

those who were robbed were very different from those who were not, even when limiting

the comparison to families in violent neighborhoods. If families differ in observed ways,

they may also differ in unobserved ways for which we cannot control and which may

continue to bias our estimates. An important example may be domestic violence – as

noted previously, children in disadvantaged families are more likely to witness domestic




                                              27
violence which may also be correlated with exposure to street violence. Since the LA

FANS does not contain credible measures of domestic violence, we are not able to

control for this directly.

        To address this concern, we present estimates of the impact of exposure to

violence on child outcomes including family fixed effects in Table 7. By including

family fixed effects we limit our analysis to a comparison to children who have been

exposed to violence with their siblings who have not been exposed, thereby implicitly

controlling for all measures of family disadvantage, both observed and unobserved, that

may be correlated with worse child outcomes and exposure to violence. This would

include, for example, exposure to domestic violence. An analysis that includes family

fixed effects must, by definition, include only those children in families with at least two

children included in the LA FANS survey. This limits our sample to roughly 575

children in the case of violent peers, and 375 for the two other measures of exposure to

violence (witness a shooting or being robbed last year). Because the sample has changed,

for purposes of comparison in the top panel of Table 7 we present OLS estimates of the

impact of exposure to violence on child outcomes including family controls and

neighborhood fixed effects but not family fixed effects and in the bottom panel we

include family fixed effects. When we include family fixed effects in the last panel the

large and significant effects of being robbed on reading and math scores are close to zero

and no longer significant. However, those who know someone in a gang still have lower

reading scores (8 points or 60 percent of a standard deviation). One concern over

interpreting this latter estimate as causal, however, is that those of lower cognitive ability

may choose to associate with violent appears. While the family fixed effect estimate




                                              28
does partially address this concern because cognitive ability within families is highly

correlated (and much more so than across families), differences in cognitive ability across

siblings still exist and may drive this relationship.

       Interestingly, the impact of all three measures of violence on internalizing

behavioral problems increases and becomes borderline significant when family fixed

effects are included. The point estimates of 1.23, 1.99 and 1.50 suggest that exposure to

violence increases the BPI by half a standard deviation. This is an interesting finding that

may be explained by the fact that the BPI is based on parent reports and parents in

disadvantaged families may be less likely to report behavior as problematic. For

example, in the LAFANS, the average internalizing BPI of black children is 2.84

compared with 3.17 for non-black children (the numbers are 6.1 and 7.7 for the

externalizing BPI score). This is consistent with the findings of others (see Spencer et al,

2005 and Ng, 2006) based on other larger data sets. As such, when we limit our

comparison to that between siblings within the same family, we eliminate the family-

based reporting bias that can bias downwards our estimates of the impact of exposure to

violence on children’s internalizing behavioral problems.



VI. Conclusion

       Together these results suggest that care should be taken in interpreting estimates

of the impact of exposure to neighborhood violence on child outcomes. Previous work

has found that exposure to violence is associated with many negative child outcomes

(both cognitive and behavioral) but much of this work, while acknowledging that

children exposed to violence are often more disadvantaged in other ways, rarely controls




                                              29
for such differences. Without controlling for such differences estimates of the impact of

exposure to violence on child outcomes are likely biased – reflecting the impact of both

exposure to violence and underlying neighborhood and family disadvantage on child

outcomes. In the work presented here we employ econometric strategies to control for

such differences by including multiple measures of neighborhood and family

disadvantage as covariates. We also include neighborhood and family fixed effects

which control for both observed and unobserved characteristics of a child’s neighborhood

and family that might bias estimates of the impact of violence on child outcomes.

       Once we control for underlying disadvantage, the impact of violence declines for

some child outcomes, suggesting that underlying disadvantage does explain some of the

negative outcomes observed, but not all. In fact, for internalizing behavior problems,

controlling for underlying differences across families actually tends to increase the

impact of all three measures violence. And it is still the case that even when we control

for observed and unobserved underlying disadvantage, having violent peers (knowing a

gang member) is negatively correlated with cognitive test scores.

       These findings have implications for public policies regarding the reduction of

violence as well as housing for the poor. In particular, the evidence presented here

suggests that reducing neighborhood violence via enhanced law enforcement policies

without reducing other sources of neighborhood disadvantage may have a limited impact

on the youth outcomes examined here. Housing policies, and in particular, housing

subsidies that enable low-income families to move to less disadvantaged neighborhoods,

may be more effective in this regard, especially if they improve the personal

circumstances (ie employment and income) of the target families. In this respect, policies




                                            30
aimed directly at lessening the income and educational disadvantages of families may

prove the most effective.




                                          31
                                        References

Aizer, A (2006) “Wages, Violence and Health in the Household” mimeo, Brown
University.

Bell CC and EJ Jenkins (1992) “Community Violence and Children on the Southside of
Chicago.” Psychiatry 56:46-54.

Cooley-Quille, M.R., Turner, S.M., and Beidel, D.C. (2001) “Emotional impact of
children's exposure to community violence: A preliminary study.” The American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 34:1362-68

Currie, J. and D. Thomas (2001) “Early Test Scores, School Quality and SES: Long-run
Effects on Wages and Employment Outcomes”, Research in Labour Economics, 20: 103-
132.

Currie, J and E. Tekin (2006) “Does Child Abuse Cause Crime?” NBER working Paper
#12171.

Fantuzzo, J. and Mohr, W. (1999) “Prevalence and Effects of Child Exposure to
Domestic Violence.” The Future of Children: Domestic Violence and Children 9:21-32

Fonagy, P., Target, M., Steele, M., and Steele, H. “The development of violence and
crime as it relates to security of attachment.” In Children in a violent society. J.D.
Osofsky, ed. New York: Guilford Press, 1997

Gorman-Smith, D., and Tolan, P. (1998) “The role of exposure to community violence
and developmental problems among inner-city youth.” Development and
Psychopathology 10:99-114

Grogger, J. (1998) “Local Violence and Educational Attainment.” Journal of Human
Resources XXXII: 659-682.

Grogger, J (2002) “The Effects of Civil Gang Injunctions on Reported Violent Crime:
Evidence from Los Angeles County.” Journal of Law and Economics XLV: 69-90.

Jenkins, E.J. (1995) “Violence exposure, psychological distress and risk behaviors in a
sample of inner-city youth.” In Trends, risks, and interventions: Proceedings of the Third
Annual Spring Symposium of the Homicide Working Group. R. Block and C. Block, eds.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice: 287-98.

Kling, Jeffrey and Jeffrey Liebman (2004) “Exprimental Analysis of Neighborhood
Effects on Youth.” Industrial Relations Section Princeton University Working Paper
#483.




                                            32
Kling, Jeffrey, Liebman, Jeffrey and Lawrence Katz (2005) “Bullets Don't Got No Name:
Consequences of Fear in the Ghetto” in Discovering Successful Pathways in Children's
Development: Mixed Methods in the Study of Childhood and Family Life. Edited by
Thomas S. Weisner. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Lambert, M.,Weisz, J., Knight, F., Desrosiers, M., Overly, K., and Thesiger, C. (1992).
“Jamaican and American adult perspectives on child psychopathology: Further
exploration of the threshold model.” Journal of Consulting Clinical Psychology, 60, 146-
149.

Loeber, R., Wung, P., Keenan, K., et al. (1995) “Developmental pathways in disruptive
child behavior.” Development and Psychopathology 5:101-33.

McMiller, W., & Weisz, J. (1996). “Help-seeking preceding mental health clinic intake
among African-American, Latino, and Caucasian youths.” Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 1086-1094.

Murnane, R., Willett, J., and F. Levy, (1995), ” The Growing Importance of Cognitive
Skills in Wage Determination” Review of Economics and Statistics 77: 251-266.

Ng, I. (2006) “The Effect of Intergenerational and Neighborhood Factors on Adolescent
Problem Behavior” University of Michigan mimeo.

Osofsky, J. (1999) “The Impact of Violence on Children.” The Future of Children:
Domestic Violence and Children 9:33-49.

Pynoos RS, Frederick C, Nader K et al . “Life Threat and Posttraumatic Stress in School-
Age Children.” Archives of General Psychiatry 56:7-21.

Schwab-Stone, M.E., Ayers, T.S., Kasprow, W., et al (1995) “No safe haven: A study of
violence exposure in an urban community.” Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry 34:1343-52.

Skogan, W and K Frydl (2004) Fairness and Effectiveness in Policing: The Evidence
National Academy Press: Committee on Law and Justice

Spencer, M Fitch D, Grogan-Kaylor A and B Mcbeath (2005) “ The Equivalence of the
Behavior Problem Index Across U.S. Ethnic Groups” Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, Vol. 36, No. 5: 573-589.

Zax, J.S. & D.I. Rees, (2002), “IQ, Academic Performance, Environment, and Earnings”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 84: 600-616.




                                           33
                                                 Table 1 Comparison of LA FANS with 2000 Census


                                  LAFANS - Unweighted            LAFANS - Weighted                Census - LA County   Census - US
Family/Child Characteristics
Maternal education (years)               11.99                         12.37                            11.14             12.77
Mother <HS                               0.36                          0.32                             0.39              0.16
Black                                    0.10                          0.12                             0.08              0.11
Hispanic                                 0.55                          0.51                             0.49              0.12
White                                    0.27                          0.27                             0.34              0.65
Asian                                    0.08                          0.11                             0.14              0.04
Married                                  0.67                          0.68                             0.77              0.69
Family Earnings (in thousands)           43.53                         46.62                            47.87             52.57
Below Poverty                            0.34                          0.29                             0.19              0.13
Welfare Participation                    0.11                          0.11                             0.09              0.04
SSI receipt                              0.04                          0.04                             0.01              0.02
Maternal Age                             42.4                          41.8                             41.37             40.90
Child age                                15.1                          15.1                             14.11             14.21
Male                                     0.51                          0.51                             0.51              0.51
Number of siblings                       1.32                          1.43                             1.83              1.45

Violence Measures
Know gang members                        0.21                          0.20
Witnessed shooting in past year          0.08                          0.06
Robbed in past year                      0.11                          0.11
Family often hits                        0.18                          0.17
                                 Table 2 Hospitalization for Assaults by Race and Age - LA County 2000


Age 15-19
            Assaults per 1,000       Assaults/Total Injuries    Gun Assaults per 1000        Gun Assaults/Total Injuries   Gun Assaults/Total Assaults   Population
White             0.456                      0.083                     0.167                           0.07                         0.366                 179725
Black             3.913                      0.415                     3.203                          0.267                         0.819                  70533
Hispanic          1.390                      0.270                     0.889                          0.147                         0.639                 390588
Asian             0.374                      0.131                     0.054                          0.025                         0.144                  85587
Other             0.081                      0.217                     0.035                          0.097                         0.433                 222698
Total             1.002                      0.221                     0.649                          0.119                         0.647                 949131


Age 25-44
            Assaults per 1,000       Assaults/Total Injuries                                                                                             Population
White             0.323                      0.055                      0.064                            0.006                       0.198                1098897
Black             2.638                      0.262                      1.077                            0.077                       0.408                 307807
Hispanic          0.698                      0.150                      0.226                            0.042                       0.324                1551054
Asian             0.133                      0.063                      0.023                            0.009                       0.172                 419679
Other             0.037                      0.100                      0.004                            0.013                       0.108                 839816
Total             0.554                      0.115                      0.180                            0.027                       0.325                4217253
                        Table 3 Personal Exposure to Violence Conditional on Neighborhood Violence and Maternal Vigilance


                                                                                                                All Neighborhoods
                                        Non violent Neighborhood   Violent Neighborhood               Mother Knows             Mother Not Know
Know Gang Member                                  0.16                      0.23                          0.126                      0.18
Family Hits                                       0.18                      0.22                          0.166                     0.233
Witnessed Shooting                                0.04                      0.14                          0.048                     0.078
Robbed                                            0.07                      0.15                           0.09                     0.161

Mother often knows whereabouts                   0.698                    0.609
Father often knows whereabouts                   0.43                     0.299
                                   Table 4 The Overlap in Violence

                                          Know gang               Shooting              Robbed
Robbed                                      16.36                  33.85
Witnessed shooting                          20.12                                          25
Family often hits                           28.48                  39.39                  36.36
Know gang                                                           50                    31.03

Note: as an example of how to read this table, 16.36 % of those who know a gang member were robbed
                                               Table 5 Personal Exposure to Violence and Underlying family Characteristics


                                           Witness Shooting                                       Robbed                                 Peers (know gang)
All Neighborhoods            non violent        violent     Difference           non violent      violent        Difference   non violent       violent    Difference
Maternal education             12.32            10.05           2.27               12.26           11.76            0.51        12.31           11.22         1.09
Mother <HS                      0.34             0.54          -0.21                0.34           0.39             -0.05        0.35            0.43         -0.09
Black                           0.13             0.18          -0.05                0.13           0.16             -0.03        0.12            0.18         -0.05
White                           0.29             0.13           0.16                0.28           0.29             -0.01        0.30            0.20         0.10
Hispanic                        0.53             0.72          -0.19                0.54           0.54             0.00         0.52            0.66         -0.14
Asian                           0.12             0.02           0.10                0.12           0.03             0.09         0.12            0.05         0.08
Male                            0.51             0.59          -0.09                0.48           0.77             -0.29        0.54            0.52         0.02
Child age                      15.05            15.24          -0.19               15.07           14.95            0.12        13.17           14.46         -1.28
Family Earnings (in 1000s)     46.92            15.59         31.33                46.20           36.35            9.85        45.88           32.87        13.01
Married                         0.67             0.56           0.11                0.67           0.67             -0.01        0.69            0.55         0.14
Welfare receipt                 0.10             0.33          -0.23                0.10           0.21             -0.11        0.10            0.24         -0.14
SSI receipt                     0.04             0.06          -0.02                0.04           0.05             0.00         0.04            0.09         -0.05


                                           Witness Shooting                                       Robbed                                 Peers (know gang)
Non-Violent Neigborhoods     non violent        violent     Difference           non violent      violent        Difference   non violent       violent    Difference
Maternal education             13.80            10.79           3.01               13.86           12.28            1.58        13.69           12.55         1.13
Mother <HS                      0.20             0.47          -0.27                0.19           0.37             -0.18        0.21            0.27         -0.06
Black                           0.09             0.07           0.03                0.09           0.10             -0.01        0.08            0.13         -0.04
White                           0.45             0.14           0.31                0.43           0.51             -0.09        0.47            0.34         0.13
Hispanic                        0.43             0.79          -0.36                0.46           0.36             0.10         0.40            0.62         -0.23
Asian                           0.15             0.00           0.15                0.16           0.00             0.16         0.13            0.10         0.03
Male                            0.52             0.50           0.03                0.49           0.80             -0.31        0.56            0.53         0.03
Child age                      15.03            15.06          -0.03               15.07           14.72            0.35        13.29           13.98         -0.70
Family Earnings (in 1000s)     61.73            16.50         45.23                61.03           50.35           10.68        61.90           41.70        20.20
Married                         0.71             0.78          -0.07                0.71           0.78             -0.07        0.77            0.54         0.23
Welfare receipt                 0.03             0.41          -0.38                0.04           0.13             -0.09        0.04            0.19         -0.15
SSI receipt                     0.03             0.03           0.00                0.03           0.04             -0.01        0.03            0.07         -0.05


                                           Witness Shooting                                       Robbed                                 Peers (know gang)
Violent Neighborhoods        non violent        violent     Difference           non violent      violent        Difference   non violent       violent    Difference
Maternal education              9.29             9.30          -0.01                9.06           10.47            -1.42        9.52            9.87         -0.35
Mother <HS                      0.61             0.60           0.01                0.64           0.43             0.21         0.60            0.59         0.01
Black                           0.20             0.31          -0.10                0.20           0.29             -0.09        0.19            0.27         -0.08
White                           0.04             0.02           0.01                0.04           0.01             0.03         0.05            0.02         0.03
Hispanic                        0.76             0.69           0.07                0.75           0.75             0.00         0.77            0.71         0.07
Asian                           0.01             0.01           0.00                0.01           0.00             0.00         0.02            0.00         0.02
Male                            0.48             0.67          -0.19                0.43           0.80             -0.36        0.53            0.53         0.00
Child age                      14.92            15.47          -0.55               15.04           14.71            0.33        12.77           14.72         -1.95
Family Earnings (in 1000s)     25.53            12.21         13.32                24.43           21.56            2.87        23.41           19.04         4.37
Married                         0.61             0.40           0.22                0.58           0.63             -0.05        0.62            0.47         0.15
Welfare receipt                 0.17             0.36          -0.19                0.18           0.24             -0.06        0.17            0.38         -0.21
SSI receipt                     0.04             0.06          -0.02                0.04           0.04             0.00         0.02            0.07         -0.05
                                                                                                  Table 6A Impact of Violence on Child Outcomes - Zipcode Level


No Controls                                               Reading        Math        BPI (int)    BPI (ext)       Reading      Math       BPI (int)   BPI (ext)   Reading    Math     BPI (int)   BPI (ext)   Reading   Math      BPI (int)   BPI (ext)
assault rate in zipcode                                  -4,903.18     -4,676.34     367.812       376.07
                                                         [732.222]     [704.495]     [76.838]    [159.347]
know someone in a gang                                                                                            -10.636     -15.706       0.992      2.94
                                                                                                                  [2.541]     [2.411]      [0.271]    [0.552]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                                                      -15.65    -18.144    1.359       3.365
                                                                                                                                                                  [4.302]   [4.122]   [0.451]     [0.926]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                                              -10.556    -7.33     0.495       1.413
                                                                                                                                                                                                              [3.181]   [3.068]   [0.330]     [0.676]
Observations                                                827           827          811         794              819         819         803         786        827       827        811         794         826       826       810         793
R-squared                                                   0.05          0.05         0.03        0.01             0.02        0.05        0.02        0.03       0.02      0.02       0.01        0.02        0.01     0.01        0         0.01



Neighborhood (zipcode) Controls
assault rate in zipcode                                   -332.286       732.312      191.221     61.696
                                                         [1,105.978]   [1,057.376]   [120.283]   [250.346]
know someone in a gang                                                                                             -7.168     -12.124       0.772      2.727
                                                                                                                   [2.430]    [2.300]      [0.269]    [0.556]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                                                      -10.361   -12.867    0.932       2.907
                                                                                                                                                                  [4.094]   [3.905]   [0.448]     [0.933]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                                              -9.478    -6.075     0.45        1.366
                                                                                                                                                                                                              [3.000]   [2.877]   [0.325]     [0.677]
Observations                                                827           827          811         794              819         819         803         786        827       827        811         794         826       826       810         793
R-squared                                                   0.13          0.14         0.05        0.02             0.14        0.17        0.06        0.05       0.14      0.15       0.06        0.03       0.14      0.14      0.05        0.03



Neighborhood (zipcode) & Family Controls
assault rate in zipcode                                    131.784      1,023.61      266.94      171.19
                                                         [1,139.301]   [1,054.268]   [124.276]   [266.645]
know someone in a gang                                                                                             -3.406     -7.705        0.446      2.232
                                                                                                                   [2.474]    [2.280]      [0.274]    [0.584]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                                                      -3.029    -6.247     0.757       2.066
                                                                                                                                                                  [4.136]   [3.824]   [0.454]     [0.978]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                                              -10.715   -6.074     0.412       0.665
                                                                                                                                                                                                              [3.121]   [2.905]   [0.340]     [0.732]
Observations                                                740           740          725         708              732         732         717         700        740       740        725         708         739       739       724         707
R-squared                                                   0.27          0.32         0.15        0.12             0.27        0.33        0.14        0.14       0.27      0.32       0.14        0.12        0.28     0.32      0.14        0.12



Neighborhood (zipcode) Fixed Effects & Family Controls
know someone in a gang                                                                                             -2.473     -5.802        0.508      2.274
                                                                                                                   [2.633]    [2.365]      [0.274]    [0.581]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                                                      -3.743    -5.938     0.862       2.22
                                                                                                                                                                  [4.354]   [3.912]   [0.455]     [0.975]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                                              -10.233   -5.412     0.341       0.595
                                                                                                                                                                                                              [3.184]   [2.879]   [0.340]     [0.727]
Observations                                                                                                        732         732         717         700        740       740        725         708         739       739       724         707
R-squared                                                                                                           0.35        0.44        0.13        0.13       0.35      0.43       0.13        0.12        0.36     0.43      0.12        0.11
                               Table 6B Impact of Violence on Child Outcomes - Full Set of Neighborhood, Family and Individual Controls

                                  Reading     Math      BPI (int) BPI (ext)      Reading      Math      BPI (int)   BPI (ext)     Reading      Math      BPI (int)   BPI (ext)   Reading     Math      BPI (int)   BPI (ext)
assault rate in neighborhood      131.784 1,023.61      266.94     171.19
                                [1,139.301][1,054.268] [124.276] [266.645]
know someone in a gang                                                            -3.406     -7.705      0.446        2.232
                                                                                  [2.474]    [2.280]    [0.274]      [0.584]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                       -3.029     -6.247      0.757        2.066
                                                                                                                                   [4.136]    [3.824]    [0.454]      [0.978]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                 -10.715    -6.074      0.412        0.665
                                                                                                                                                                                  [3.121]   [2.905]    [0.340]      [0.732]
Community Characteristics
share on welfare                   29.569     -7.224    -2.393     -1.057         29.371      -4.783    -2.381      -1.496          29.706     -6.737    -2.353      -1.015       30.458     -6.589    -2.347      -1.031
                                  [16.179]   [14.972]   [1.760]    [3.786]       [16.334]    [15.050]   [1.781]     [3.789]        [16.171]   [14.952]   [1.762]     [3.774]     [16.059]   [14.946]   [1.766]     [3.787]
share below poverty                14.865     -9.062     3.965      9.208         16.792       4.549     5.866       9.446          17.397      2.408     5.792       9.692       11.222     -3.539     6.32       10.917
                                  [24.787]   [22.937]   [2.691]    [5.801]       [23.037]    [21.225]   [2.513]     [5.377]        [22.984]   [21.251]   [2.507]     [5.401]     [22.791]   [21.211]   [2.509]     [5.417]
Share <HS                         -36.401    -61.485     1.079      4.361        -33.688     -56.727     2.252       5.506         -36.183    -57.676     2.337       5.266      -34.957    -56.443     2.242       5.071
                                  [26.303]   [24.340]   [2.884]    [6.206]       [25.940]    [23.899]   [2.853]     [6.068]        [25.802]   [23.856]   [2.834]     [6.069]     [25.614]   [23.839]   [2.839]     [6.089]
unemployment rate                  -1.061      0.583    -0.069     -0.286         -1.092       0.455    -0.079      -0.291          -1.093      0.481    -0.074      -0.279        -0.97       0.6     -0.084      -0.301
                                   [0.676]    [0.626]   [0.072]    [0.156]        [0.676]     [0.622]   [0.072]     [0.155]         [0.675]    [0.624]   [0.072]     [0.155]      [0.670]    [0.624]   [0.072]     [0.156]
Share black                        -0.207     -5.403    -0.478      1.205          1.091      -2.358     0.129       1.536           0.176     -2.625     0.194       1.625         3.06     -1.096     0.097       1.473
                                   [9.829]    [9.096]   [1.050]    [2.252]        [9.385]     [8.647]   [1.009]     [2.139]         [9.353]    [8.648]   [1.004]     [2.143]      [9.325]    [8.679]   [1.009]     [2.159]
Family Characteristics
Maternal education                  1.353      1.336    -0.028     -0.046          1.381       1.383    -0.032       -0.06           1.351      1.331    -0.027      -0.046        1.322      1.315    -0.026      -0.043
                                   [0.316]    [0.293]   [0.035]    [0.075]        [0.318]     [0.293]   [0.035]     [0.075]         [0.316]    [0.292]   [0.035]     [0.075]      [0.314]    [0.292]   [0.035]     [0.075]
Black                               1.198      2.034    -0.198     -0.674          0.905       1.722      -0.1      -0.584            1.23       2.18    -0.162      -0.661        0.237      1.565    -0.117      -0.574
                                   [6.246]    [5.779]   [0.676]    [1.491]        [6.260]     [5.767]   [0.679]     [1.481]         [6.242]    [5.771]   [0.676]     [1.486]      [6.205]    [5.775]   [0.678]     [1.493]
Hispanic                           -4.928      0.293     0.731     -0.191         -4.882       0.191     0.547      -0.522          -4.956      -0.22     0.556      -0.318       -6.401     -1.127     0.621      -0.197
                                   [5.793]    [5.361]   [0.626]    [1.382]        [5.762]     [5.309]   [0.624]     [1.365]         [5.750]    [5.317]   [0.622]     [1.369]      [5.723]    [5.327]   [0.625]     [1.377]
White                               7.292      8.636     0.112      1.031          6.822       7.304    -0.032       1.001            7.21      7.947    -0.084       0.919        6.436      7.474    -0.054       0.967
                                   [6.025]    [5.575]   [0.652]    [1.441]        [5.983]     [5.513]   [0.649]     [1.419]         [5.971]    [5.520]   [0.646]     [1.425]      [5.933]    [5.521]   [0.648]     [1.431]
Asian                               7.746     15.628     0.241     -1.248          7.645      14.532     0.103       -1.28           7.666     15.111     0.106       -1.31         5.82     14.083     0.172       -1.21
                                   [6.221]    [5.757]   [0.673]    [1.478]        [6.212]     [5.723]   [0.673]     [1.462]         [6.196]    [5.729]   [0.670]     [1.468]      [6.176]    [5.748]   [0.674]     [1.479]
married                            -1.976      1.084    -0.263     -0.747         -2.142       0.577    -0.253      -0.625           -1.92      1.177    -0.275      -0.792       -1.587      1.298    -0.279      -0.774
                                   [2.317]    [2.144]   [0.252]    [0.548]        [2.326]     [2.143]   [0.254]     [0.546]         [2.317]    [2.143]   [0.253]     [0.547]      [2.303]    [2.143]   [0.254]     [0.549]
Family earnings in 1000s            0.061      0.098    -0.005     -0.009          0.061       0.099    -0.005      -0.009           0.059      0.094    -0.005      -0.008        0.056      0.094    -0.005      -0.009
                                   [0.027]    [0.025]   [0.003]    [0.006]        [0.027]     [0.025]   [0.003]     [0.006]         [0.027]    [0.025]   [0.003]     [0.006]      [0.027]    [0.025]   [0.003]     [0.006]
Welfare participation              -5.973      -5.92     0.929      3.753         -5.528      -5.222     0.827       3.421          -5.661     -5.441     0.799       3.472       -5.186     -5.724     0.861       3.684
                                   [3.333]    [3.084]   [0.370]    [0.796]        [3.343]     [3.080]   [0.373]     [0.794]         [3.354]    [3.102]   [0.374]     [0.803]      [3.308]    [3.079]   [0.372]     [0.798]
SSI receipt                       -15.245     -15.36    -1.329     -4.084        -14.898     -14.693    -1.396      -4.323         -15.395    -15.772    -1.295      -4.011      -15.678    -15.473    -1.328      -4.099
                                   [4.781]    [4.424]   [0.544]    [1.243]        [4.793]     [4.416]   [0.548]     [1.236]         [4.780]    [4.420]   [0.544]     [1.240]      [4.775]    [4.444]   [0.549]     [1.255]
Maternal age                        0.257      0.181    -0.006     -0.004          0.245       0.167    -0.003      -0.003           0.257      0.184    -0.004      -0.003        0.218      0.161    -0.003         0
                                   [0.140]    [0.130]   [0.016]    [0.035]        [0.141]     [0.130]   [0.016]     [0.035]         [0.140]    [0.129]   [0.016]     [0.035]      [0.139]    [0.130]   [0.016]     [0.035]
Child age 10-12                   -10.356     24.198    -2.959     -3.509        -13.296      18.761    -2.858      -3.154         -10.064     25.621    -2.969      -3.549        -7.99     26.591    -3.049      -3.658
                                  [22.855]   [21.150]   [1.014]    [2.167]       [22.940]    [21.136]   [1.019]     [2.154]        [22.814]   [21.094]   [1.016]     [2.160]     [22.660]   [21.090]   [1.020]     [2.174]
Child age 13-15                   -12.482     21.907    -2.852     -4.058        -14.797      17.417    -2.825      -3.961         -12.097     23.463    -2.905      -4.187       -10.88     23.814    -2.932      -4.177
                                  [22.768]   [21.069]   [0.985]    [2.104]       [22.835]    [21.039]   [0.989]     [2.090]        [22.733]   [21.019]   [0.987]     [2.099]     [22.573]   [21.009]   [0.990]     [2.109]
Child age 16-18                   -13.022     19.273     -3.61     -5.212        -15.231      14.624    -3.623      -5.115         -12.694     20.691    -3.659        -5.3      -11.506     21.079    -3.698      -5.331
                                  [22.770]   [21.071]   [0.990]    [2.117]       [22.841]    [21.044]   [0.994]     [2.102]        [22.736]   [21.021]   [0.991]     [2.111]     [22.576]   [21.011]   [0.994]     [2.121]
male                               -1.745      5.991    -0.343      0.261         -1.895       5.803    -0.314       0.343          -1.655      6.207    -0.363        0.21       -0.456      6.785    -0.395       0.179
                                   [1.893]    [1.752]   [0.208]    [0.451]        [1.904]     [1.755]   [0.210]     [0.450]         [1.895]    [1.753]   [0.209]     [0.450]      [1.917]    [1.784]   [0.213]     [0.460]
Number of siblings                  0.286      1.723    -0.036      0.165          0.219       1.656    -0.022       0.178           0.299      1.767     -0.03       0.157        0.259      1.735    -0.025       0.173
                                   [0.832]    [0.770]   [0.093]    [0.203]        [0.834]     [0.768]   [0.094]     [0.201]         [0.831]    [0.768]   [0.093]     [0.202]      [0.825]    [0.768]   [0.094]     [0.202]
Observations                         740        740       725        708            732         732       717         700             740        740       725         708          739        739       724         707
R-squared                           0.27        0.32      0.15      0.12           0.27        0.33      0.14         0.14            0.27       0.32      0.14        0.12         0.28      0.32      0.14         0.12
Standard errors in brackets
                                                                                              Table 6C Impact of Violence on Child Outomces - Census Tract Level


No Controls                                                   Reading    Math     BPI (int)    BPI (ext)        Reading       Math       BPI (int)   BPI (ext)     Reading    Math     BPI (int)   BPI (ext)   Reading   Math      BPI (int)   BPI (ext)
ln (violent crime in census tract)                            -16.333   -14.961    1.244         1.661
                                                              [1.486]   [1.543]   [0.196]       [0.345]
know someone in a gang

witnessed shooting last year

robbed last year

Observations                                                   528       528        509          503
R-squared                                                      0.19      0.2        0.08         0.05



Neighborhood (census tract) Controls
ln (violent crime in census tract)                            -11.132   -11.924    0.478         0.745
                                                              [2.501]   [2.617]   [0.333]       [0.600]
know someone in a gang                                                                                           -6.125      -11.17       0.671       2.732
                                                                                                                 [2.417]     [2.265]     [0.263]     [0.562]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                                                        -7.88    -11.967    0.84        2.746
                                                                                                                                                                   [4.102]   [3.868]   [0.439]     [0.946]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                                               -8.908    -8.048     0.44        1.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                               [3.013]   [2.852]   [0.320]     [0.690]
Observations                                                   528       528        509          503              819         819          788         771          827       827        796         779         826       826       795         778
R-squared                                                      0.22      0.21       0.11         0.06             0.16        0.2          0.1         0.07         0.16      0.19       0.1         0.05       0.16      0.19      0.09        0.04



Neighborhood (census tract) & Family Controls
ln (violent crime in census tract)                            -3.525    -4.532     0.07          1.151
                                                              [2.871]   [2.947]   [0.387]       [0.720]
know someone in a gang                                                                                           -3.603      -7.985       0.484       2.339
                                                                                                                 [2.445]     [2.248]     [0.273]     [0.586]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                                                       -3.058    -6.313     0.863       2.098
                                                                                                                                                                   [4.123]   [3.806]   [0.452]     [0.981]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                                               -10.197   -5.727     0.243       0.496
                                                                                                                                                                                                               [3.096]   [2.875]   [0.337]     [0.729]
Observations                                                   472       472        457          450              732         732          705         688          740       740        713         696         739       739       712         695
R-squared                                                      0.31      0.31       0.19         0.13             0.26        0.32         0.12        0.13         0.26      0.32       0.12        0.11        0.27     0.32      0.12        0.11



Neighborhood (census tract) Fixed Effects & Family Controls
know someone in a gang                                                                                           -2.964      -6.049       0.458       2.047
                                                                                                                 [2.657]     [2.379]     [0.292]     [0.636]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                                                                                       -4.294    -6.242     0.503       2.067
                                                                                                                                                                   [4.423]   [3.961]   [0.480]     [1.041]
robbed last year                                                                                                                                                                                               -10.285     -5.4     0.327       0.458
                                                                                                                                                                                                               [3.217]   [2.899]   [0.347]     [0.754]
Observations                                                                                                      732         732          705         688          740       740        713         696         739       739       712         695
R-squared                                                                                                         0.33        0.42         0.23        0.23         0.33      0.42       0.22        0.22        0.34     0.42      0.22        0.22
Standard errors in brackets
                                                           Table 7 Impact of Violence on Child Outcomes, Family Fixed Effects

Family Controls and Neighborhood Fixed Effects   Reading     Math     BPI (Int)   BPI (Ext)     Reading     Math     BPI (Int)   BPI (Ext)   Reading   Math      BPI (Int)   BPI (Ext)
know someone in a gang                            -2.397    -7.623     1.112        2.569
                                                 [2.954]    [2.996]   [0.382]      [0.712]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                    -6.681     -12.147   -0.679        1.741
                                                                                                [6.252]    [5.426]   [0.747]      [1.413]
robbed last year                                                                                                                             -11.244   -6.157     0.226       -0.043
                                                                                                                                             [4.606]   [4.057]   [0.550]      [1.044]
Observations                                      577        576        570         561           384       384        381         371         384       384       380          370
R-squared                                         0.47       0.51       0.31        0.43          0.51      0.62       0.33        0.49        0.52     0.62      0.33         0.49
Standard errors in brackets




Family Fixed Effects
know someone in a gang                           -4.601     -8.259     1.23         0.723
                                                 [3.666]    [3.913]   [0.452]      [1.153]
witnessed shooting last year                                                                      7.23     -3.892     1.991        4.735
                                                                                                [11.103]   [9.428]   [1.192]      [2.486]
robbed last year                                                                                                                             -1.776     1.436     1.497       -1.165
                                                                                                                                             [7.048]   [5.965]   [0.770]      [1.556]
Observations                                      577        576        570         561           384       384        381         371         384       384       380          370
R-squared                                         0.77       0.79       0.78        0.81          0.88      0.91       0.86        0.88       0.87      0.91      0.86         0.88
Standard errors in brackets
Fig 1 : Neighborhood Characteristics and Assaults / Total Injuries
   1




                                        1




                                                                                 1
                                                                                 .8
   .8




                                        .8




                                                                                 .6
   .6




                                        .6




                                                                                 .4
   .4




                                        .4




                                                                                 .2
   .2




                                        .2




                                                                                 0
   0




                                        0
        0      .2        .4        .6        0           .1       .2        .3        0   .1      .2    .3    .4   .5
            share below poverty                           share <HS                            share on welfare
   1




                                        1
   .8




                                        .8
   .6




                                        .6
   .4




                                        .4
   .2




                                        .2
   0




                                        0




        0    .2       .4      .6   .8        0      10   20     30     40   50
                  share black                    unemployment rate in zipcode


                                                                                                                        fi
Fig 2A : Neighborhood Characteristics and Gun Assaults / Total Injuries
      .5




                                           .5




                                                                                    .5
                                                                                    .4
                                           .4
      .4




                                                                                    .3
                                           .3
      .3




                                                                                    .2
                                           .2
      .2




                                                                                    .1
                                           .1
      .1




                                                                                    0
                                           0
      0




           0      .2        .4        .6        0           .1       .2        .3        0   .1      .2    .3    .4   .5
               share below poverty                           share <HS                            share on welfare
      .5




                                           .6
      .4




                                           .4
      .3
      .2




                                           .2
      .1




                                           0
      0




           0    .2       .4      .6   .8        0      10   20     30     40   50
                     share black                    unemployment rate in zipcode


                                                                                                                           fi
Fig 2B : Neighborhood Characteristics and Non − Gun Assaults / Total Injuries
         1




                                              1




                                                                                       1
         .8




                                              .8




                                                                                       .8
         .6




                                              .6




                                                                                       .6
         .4




                                              .4




                                                                                       .4
         .2




                                              .2




                                                                                       .2
         0




                                              0




                                                                                       0
              0      .2        .4        .6        0           .1       .2        .3        0   .1      .2    .3    .4   .5
                  share below poverty                           share <HS                            share on welfare
         1




                                              1
         .8




                                              .8
         .6




                                              .6
         .4




                                              .4
         .2




                                              .2
         0




                                              0




              0    .2       .4      .6   .8        0      10   20     30     40   50
                        share black                    unemployment rate in zipcode


                                                                                                                              fi
Figure 3 : Neighborhood Characteristics and Violent Crime
800




                                       800




                                                                             800
600




                                       600




                                                                             600
400




                                       400




                                                                             400
200




                                       200




                                                                             200
0




                                       0




                                                                             0
      0    .2      .4    .6       .8         0   .2      .4    .6     .8           0   .1      .2      .3   .4
          share below poverty                         share <HS                         share on welfare
800




                                       800
600




                                       600
400




                                       400
200




                                       200
0




                                       0




      0   .2    .4     .6    .8   1          0   .5   1    1.5    2    2.5
               share black                        unemployment rate


                                                                                                                 fi
