                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR THE RISING SOPHISTICATION OF CHINA'S EXPORTS?

                                              Zhi Wang
                                            Shang-Jin Wei

                                        Working Paper 13771
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13771


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




This paper was prepared for the NBER Project on the Evolving Role of China in the World Trade,
directed by Robert Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei. The views in the paper are those of the authors and
are not the official views of the US ITC, the IMF, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or
any other organization that the authors are or have been affiliated with. The authors thank Kyle Caswell
and Chang Hong for efficient research assistance; John Klopfer for able editorial assistance; and Xuepeng
Liu, William Power, participants in the NBER conference for the project, and especially Galina Hale,
for helpful comments.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Zhi Wang and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What Accounts for the Rising Sophistication of China's Exports?
Zhi Wang and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 13771
February 2008
JEL No. F1,O1

                                                ABSTRACT

Chinese exports have become increasingly sophisticated. This has generated anxiety in developed
countries as competitive pressure may increasingly be felt outside labor-intensive industries. Using
product-level data on exports from different cities within China, this paper investigates the contributing
factors to China's rising export sophistication. Somewhat surprisingly, neither processing trade nor
foreign invested firms are found to play an important role in generating the increased overlap between
China’s export structure and that of high-income countries. Instead, improvement in human capital
and government policies in the form of tax-favored high-tech zones appear to be the key to the country's
evolving export structure. On the other hand, processing trade, foreign invested firms, and government-sponsored
high-tech zones all have contributed significantly to raising the unit values of Chinese exports within
a given product category.


Zhi Wang
Research Division
Office of Economics
United States International Trade Commission
Washington, DC 20436
zhi.wang@usitc.gov

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall, Room 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
“Everyone knew that we would lose jobs in labor-intensive industries like textiles and apparel,
but we thought we could hold our own in the capital-intensive, high-tech arena. The numbers
we’re seeing now put the lie to that hope—as China expands its share even in core industries
such as autos and aerospace.”
                                                    Robert Scott, US Economic Policy Institute,
                        Author of a report presented to the US-China Economic and Security Review Commission,
                                               Quoted in au.biz.yahoo.com/050111/33/2x8r.html, January 12, 2005

1. Introduction

China’s rise as a trading power has taken the world by storm. Its exports have risen from 18
billion dollars or less than 4% of its GDP in 1980 to more than 760 billion dollars or about 35%
of its GDP by 2005. Besides the rapid expansion of its trade volume, researchers have noted
another feature: China’s level of sophistication has been rising steadily. This sophistication can
be seen in three aspects, two noted in the literature, and the third presented here, by us. First, as
Schott (2006) noted, China’s export structure increasingly resembles the collective export
structure of the high-income countries in a way that seems unusual given China’s endowment
and level of development. Second, as Rodrik (2006) observed, the level of GDP per capita
associated with countries exporting the same basket of goods as China is much higher than
China’s actual level of income per capita. Third, as we will show, the fraction of product lines
that the United States, the 15-member European Union and Japan (referred to thereafter as G-3)
export, that China does not, is shrinking steadily. Obviously, these three trends are not
independent from each other. Taken at their face value, they may suggest that China is
competing head to head with producers from developed and developing nations alike. This has
generated a tremendous amount of anxiety in many nations. Why would China, a country with
extreme abundance in labor, but relative scarcity in capital, skilled labor, and R&D investment,
produce and export a bundle of goods which resembles those of developed countries? Schott’s
(2006) conjecture is that China’s export bundle results from a combination of large regional
variations in factor endowment and large impediments to factor mobility across regions.

The evolution of China’s export sophistication during 1996-2005 is traced out in Table 1. This
table shows that the level of dissimilarity between China’s export structure and that of the G3
economies declined from 133.7 in 1996 to 121.5 by 2005.1 During the same period, the number
of HS 6-digit product lines exported by G3 countries but not by China fell from 101 in 1996 to
83 in 2005, out of 4143 and 4212 in total, respectively. As a share of the product lines that the
G3 export, those not manufactured by China fell from 2.44% of the total in 1996 to 1.97% in
2005. This count is slightly misleading as China exports a very small volume (i.e. less than $1
million) in several product lines. Excluding these lines, the share of products exported by the G3
but not by China fell from 28.7% (1189/4143) in 1996 to 13.7% (578/4212) in 20052.

How much should developed countries be concerned with rising competitive pressure from
increasingly sophisticated Chinese exports? The answer depends on the sources of China’s rising

1
    This is computed at national level using equation (2) (excluding the region subscript).
2
    There is virtually no product that China exports but G-3 does not.



                                                      2
sophistication. On the one hand, this sophistication, as measured, could be a statistical mirage
due to processing trade. For example, both the United States and China may export notebook
computers, but Chinese manufacturers may have to import the computer’s most sophisticated
components, such as processors (CPUs) made by Intel or ADM in the United States. In such a
case, Chinese producers may specialize in the unsophisticated stage of production, although the
final product is classified as sophisticated. If one were able to classify a product further into its
components, China and developed countries might be found to produce different components.
That is, they do not compete directly with each other. In this scenario, there is very little for the
developed countries to worry about.

As a variation of this scenario, China and the high-income economies may export the same set of
product lines, but they may export very different varieties within each product line, with China
exporting varieties of much lower quality.3 Competition between the high-income economies and
China need not be tense.

On the other hand, the Chinese authorities, including governments at the regional/local levels,
have been actively promoting quality upgrades to China’s product structure through tax and
other policy incentives. A particular manifestation of these incentives is the proliferation of
economic and technological development zones, high-tech industrial zones, and export
processing zones around the country. Their collective share in China’s exports rose from less
than 6% in 1995 to about 25% by 2005. These policy incentives could increase the similarity of
Chinese exports to those of developed countries, though they are unlikely to be efficient (unless
learning by doing confers a significant positive externality). If policy is the primary driver for
rising sophistication (rather than the mis-measurement induced by processing trade) then China
may come into more direct competition with developed countries.

Foreign-invested firms in China straddle these two explanations. The share of China’s total
exports produced by wholly foreign-owned firms and Sino-foreign joint ventures has risen
steadily over time, from about 31% in 1995 to more than 58% by 2005 (Table 2). These foreign-
invested firms may choose to produce and export much more sophisticated products than would
indigenous Chinese firms. In this scenario, while China-made products may compete with those
from developed countries, the profits from such activities contribute directly to the GNPs of
developed countries. Besides the direct effect of foreign invested firms on China’s export
upgrading, the presence of foreign firms may help indirectly to raise the sophistication of
Chinese exports through various spillovers to domestic firms (Hale and Long 2006). The above
three possible explanations can reinforce each other, rather than being mutually exclusive. For
example, a foreign-invested firm may engage in processing trade while located in a high-tech
zone.
3
  Xu (2007) noted that for the same product, the unit value of China’s exports tends to be lower
than that of rich countries, indicating that China’s varieties are of lower quality and presumably
of lesser sophistication. Fontagne, Gaulier and Zignago (2007, Tables 1 and 2) show that China’s
export structure, defined the same way as in Schott (2006) but at the HS 6-digit level, is more
similar to Japan, the United States, and the European Union than to those of Brazil and Russia.
However, judged on unit values, Chinese exports are more likely to be in the low end of the
market than are those of the high-income countries.



                                                  3
To the best of our knowledge, direct evidence on the importance of these channels is not yet
available in the literature. By using a very detailed product-level data set on Chinese exports,
disaggregated by firm ownership types and across about 240 Chinese cities, this paper aims to
provide some answers.

To preview some of our key findings, we will argue that it is important to look both at export
structure and at the unit value of exports. We will report evidence that neither processing trade
nor foreign invested firms play an important role in generating the increased overlap between
China’s export structure and that of the high-income countries. Instead, improvement in human
capital and government policies in the form of tax-favored high-tech zones appear to contribute
significantly to the rising sophistication of China’s exports.

An analysis of unit values adds important insights. Processing trade is positively associated with
higher unit values. In the absence of data on value added from imported inputs versus domestic
inputs, it is difficult to say whether processing trade has generated any skill upgrading for China.
However, after controlling for processing trade, exports by foreign-invested firms tend to have
systematically higher unit values, suggesting that they produce higher-end product varieties
(beyond promoting processing exports). High-tech zones and other policy zones set up by the
government are likewise associated with higher unit values (beyond promoting processing trade).
Therefore, both foreign investment and government policy zones are conducive to greater
product sophistication, by increasing the overlap in China’s export structure with that of the
advanced economies and/or by producing higher-end varieties within a given product category.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains the basic specification and the
underlying data, Section 3 reports a series of statistical analyses, and Section 4 concludes.

2. Specification and Data

Our strategy is to make use of variations across Chinese cities in both export sophistication and
its potential determinants to study their relationship. We look at two measures of export
sophistication: (a) the similarity between local export structure to that of the G3 economies, and
(b) the unit value of local exports. We consider several categories of determinants, including the
level of human capital, the use of processing trade, and the promotion of sophistication by
governments through high-tech and economic development zones.

2.1 Data and Basic Facts

Data on China’s exports were obtained from the China Customs General Administration at the
HS 8-digit level (the most disaggregated level of classification available). The administration’s
database reports the geographic origin of exports (from more than 400 cities in China), policy
zone designation (i.e., whether an exporter is located in any type of policy zone), firm ownership,
and transaction type (whether an export is related to processing trade, as determined by customs
declarations) for the period from 1995 through 2005.




                                                 4
We link this database with a separate database on Chinese cities, including gross metropolitan
product (GMP) per capita, population, college enrolment, and FDI data, downloaded from China
Data Online (a site managed by the University of Michigan China Data Center). Unfortunately,
the coverage of this second database is more limited (240 cities from 1996 through 2004), which
effectively constrains the ultimate sample for the statistical analyses. Our sample of cities is
listed in Appendix Table 3.

The exports by the G3 economies at HS 6-digit level come from the United Nations’
COMTRADE database, downloaded from the World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS). We
wish to focus on manufactured goods, not on natural resources, and have therefore excluded the
goods in HS Chapters 1-27 (agricultural and mineral products) and raw materials and their
simple transformations (mostly at HS 4-digit level) in other HS chapters. A list of excluded
products is reported in Appendix Table 4.

Summary statistics are reported in Tables 2-4. Table 2 reports a breakdown of export value by
the ownership of exporters. A number of features are worth noting. First, the share of China’s
exports produced by state-owned firms declined steadily from 66.7% in 1995 to 39.8% in 2005.
This reduction in the role of state-owned firms in exports mirrors the reduced economic role of
the state in general. Second, foreign-invested firms (both wholly foreign-owned firms and Sino-
foreign joint ventures) play a significant role in China’s exports. Their share of China’s exports
also grew steadily from 31.5% in 1995 to 58.3% in 2005. The role played by foreign firms in
China’s export industries is greater than their role in most other countries with a population over
10 million. Third, exports by truly private domestic firms are relatively small, though their share
in China’s exports has similarly increased over time, from basically nothing before 1997 to
17.8% by 2005. Some growth in exports by domestic private firms is achieved by a change in
firm ownership. For example, the laptop manufacturer Lenovo was established as a partly state-
owned firm. By 2003, it was a privately owned firm. By now, Lenovo has attracted foreign
investment, acquired the original IBM PC division, and exported products under the IBM brand.

Table 3a reports a breakdown of China’s exports into processing trade, normal trade, and other
categories according to exporters’ customs declarations. Processing exports come from three
areas: (a) export processing zones, (b) various high-tech zones, and (c) areas outside any policy
zones. Collectively, their share of the country’s total exports increased from 43%
(=0+3.2%+39.8%) in 1995 to 52% (=4.6%+11.8%+35.6%) in 2005. As we lack information on
the share of processing exports for other countries, we cannot conduct a formal international
comparison. Our conjecture is that few developing countries would have a share of processing
exports as large as China’s. On the other hand, we conjecture that China’s reported processing
trade may be exaggerated due to some firms’ desire to evade tariffs on the domestic sale of
imported ‘inputs.’4

Table 3b tabulates the distribution of firm ownership for exports from each type of policy zone.
Foreign-invested firms are dominant in processing exports, accounting for 100% of exports out
4
  Fisman and Wei (2004) provide evidence of massive tariff evasion on China’s imports. Fisman,
Moustakerski, and Wei (2008) suggest that entrepot trade via Hong Kong may have been used as
a conduit for part of the tariff evasion.



                                                 5
of export processing zones, 95% of processing exports out of high-tech zones, and 67% of
processing exports from the rest of China. State-owned firms account for the bulk of the
remaining processing trade. Therefore, wholly and partly foreign-owned firms handle most
processing exports. The reverse is not true—foreign firms also engage in normal (i.e. “non-
processing”) exports, accounting in 2004 for 40% of non-processing exports out of high-tech
zones, and for 24% of normal trade outside policy zones.

We can compute a breakdown of export type (processing or non-processing) by ownership. The
result is reported in Table 4b. For both wholly foreign-owned firms and Sino-foreign joint
ventures, processing trade accounts for nearly 50% of exports. For state-owned firms and
collectively owned firms, the share of processing exports in their total exports is 18% and 13%,
respectively. Domestic private firms engage in comparatively little processing trade, making less
than 7% of their exports in this category.

As part of its development strategy, China established a number of special economic zones and
other areas where special incentives were applied following 1979. Five special economic zones
(SEZs) were set up and should be distinguished from other special economic areas. These
include all of Hainan province, three cities in Guangdong province (Shenzhen, Zhuhai, and
Shantou), and a city in Fujian Province (Xiamen). Other special economic areas are much
smaller geographically and are classified as Economic and Technological Development Areas
(ETDAs), Hi-Technology Industry Development Areas (HTIDA), and Export Processing Zones
(EPZs). Some of these special incentive zones and areas are located within the five SEZs. We
will also refer to these incentive zones or areas as “policy zones”.

ETDAs and HTIDAs are tax-favored enclaves established by central or local governments (with
approval by the central government) to promote development of sectors designated as “high and
new tech,” albeit by somewhat poorly defined criteria. In theory, there are differences between
the two types of zones. In practice, however, the line between the two is often blurred. The
determination of what firms should go into a particular type of zone is somewhat arbitrary;
therefore, we group them together in our subsequent discussions. With progressively more
ETDAs and HTIDAs being established, their share in China’s exports has grown steadily in our
sample, from only 4.3% in 1995 to 15.4% in 2005 (sum of Columns 4 and 5 in Table 3a). Since
most cities do not yet have such zones, an unweighted average of their share in a city’s exports,
across all cities and years, comes to only 2% (sum of Column 4 and 5 in top panel of Table 4b).

Dedicated export processing zones (which exclusively export processing trade) were first
established in 2001, and are present in only 26 cities today. By 2005, only 3.5% of exports came
from all the export processing zones together (Table 3a). On simple average (across cities and
years), only 0.04% of exports come from EPZs. This means that most of China’s processing
exports are produced outside export processing zones. It is useful to bear this in mind when
interpreting the regression coefficients in the subsequent tables.

Foreign-invested firms dominate processing exports from EPZs and high-tech zones (in our
sample period, 99 % and 95% respectively—see Table 3b), and also took a lion’s share of
processing trade (67%) outside those policy zones. State-owned firms are the major players in
normal exports, accounting for 58% of normal exports from high-tech zones and 63% of normal



                                                6
exports outside policy zones, during our sample period. Though they played a small role in
processing trade, collectively owned and private firms produced an important share of China’s
normal exports, accounting for 8.5% of normal exports from high-tech zones and 18% of exports
outside policy zones (Table 3b).

2.2 Basic Specification

We relate the sophistication level of local export structure to its plausible determinants, including
the role of processing trade, foreign investment, and local human capital. Formally, the
econometric specification is given by the following equation (or by variations to be noted):

        Ln( EDI rft ) = city_fixed + year_fixed+β 1 EPZ_sharerft
        +β 2 High_tech_zone_processing_Sharerft
        +β 3 Processing_outside_anyzone_sharerft                                              (1)
        +β 4 High_tech_zone_nonprocessing_sharerft
        +β 5 Ln(GMP rt )+ β 6 SKILLrt +other_controls + μ rft

Where Ln(EDI) is the log of a dissimilarity index between a Chinese city’s export structure and
the combined export structure of the United States, Japan, and the European Union. β1 β2,…, β6
are coefficients to be estimated. μrft is the error term. Other regressors and the sources of our
data are explained in Appendix Table 1. Robust standard errors, clustered by city, are reported.

We define an index for a lack of sophistication by the dissimilarity between the product structure
of a region’s exports and that of the G3 economies, or the export dissimilarity index (EDI), as:

        EDIrft = 100(∑ abs(sirft −si,tref ))                                                  (2)
                            i

                                 E irft
       where        sirft =                                                                   (3)
                                ∑ E irft
                                 i


Where sirft is the share of HS product i at 6 digit level in Chinese city r’s exports for firm type f
in year t, and si,tref is the share of HS product i in the 6-digit level exports of G3 developed
countries. The greater the value of the index, the more dissimilar the compared export structures
are. If the two export structures were identical, then the value of the index would be zero; if the
two export structures were to have no overlap, then the index would take the value of 200. We
regard an export structure as more sophisticated if the index takes a smaller value. Alternatively,
one could use the similarity index proposed by Finger and Kreinin (1979) and used by Schott
(2006) (except for the scale):

       ESIrft = 100 ∑ min (sirft , si,tref )                                                  (4)
                        i


This index is bounded by zero and 100. If Chinese city r’s export structure had no overlap with
that of the G3 developed countries, then ESI would be zero; if the two export structures had a


                                                   7
perfect overlap, then the index would take the value of 100. It can be verified that there is a one-
to-one, linear mapping between ESI and EDI:

                   200 − EDIrft
        ESIrft =                                                                            (5)
                        2

Appendix Table 7 reports regressions that use ESI and EDI in levels, respectively, as the
dependent variables. It can be seen that the coefficient on any given regressor always has the
opposite sign in each of the two specifications. These linear specificatione have the drawback
that the error term is far from being normally distributed. A better specification would use logged
EDI or logged ESI as the dependent variable. However, log(ESI) is related to log(EDI) only non-
linearly. Economic theory does not give much guidance to the exact functional form. Our
experimentation suggests that using log(EDI) as the dependent variable is more likely to produce
robustly significant coefficients. Most importantly, the sign patterns on the coefficient estimates
are consistent between regressions using logged EDI and EDI, respectively, as the dependent
variables; but they are inconsistent between regressions using logged ESI and ESI as the left-
hand-side variables. Therefore, in our analysis, we use log(EDI) as the dependent variable.

3. Analysis

3.1 Basic Results

Our regression results are reported in Table 5. In the first four columns, the sophistication of a
city’s export structure is measured on a year-by-year basis by its similarity with that of the G3
high-income countries. As a robustness check, in the last four columns, export sophistication is
measured against the export structure of the high-income countries in a fixed year (2004, the last
in our sample period). The change in reference year for export sophistication does not turn out to
matter qualitatively.

The coefficient on “export processing zone exports as a share of total city exports” is negative
and significant, implying that exports from EPZs tend to be more similar to those of the G3 high-
income countries than are typical Chinese exports. However, as a majority of Chinese cities do
not have EPZs, this does not contribute much to explaining cross-city differences in export
sophistication.

The coefficients on the two variables describing exports from high-tech zones (“processing
exports from high-tech zones” and “non-processing exports from high-tech zones”) are negative
and significant, implying that the high-tech zones do contribute to raising the sophistication of
the Chinese export structure. Comparing the two point estimates, however, one sees that the non-
processing exports from the two types of high-tech zones in fact contribute more to raising
export sophistication than do processing exports.

The coefficient of processing exports outside any policy zones is positive and significant: the
more processing trade outside any policy zones, the less sophisticated a city’s exports are.
Taking the discussion of the last four coefficients together, we argue that processing trade
(outside policy zones) is unlikely to have promoted the resemblance of the Chinese export


                                                 8
structure to that of the high-income countries. This argument is consistent with the intuition that
processing trade in many areas of China, excepting policy zones, is relatively labor-intensive.

The coefficient on student enrollment in colleges or graduate schools as a share of a given city’s
non-agricultural population— a proxy for that city’s level of human capital— is negative and
significant, consistent with the notion that a city with more skilled labor tends to have a more
sophisticated export structure. In column 2 of Table 5, we use a gross metropolitan product
(GMP) per capita as an alternative measure of a city’s level of human capital. This variable also
produces a negative coefficient, indicating an association between more human capital and more
sophisticated export structure.

In columns 3-4 of Table 5, we include measures of the presence of foreign firms in a city. The
estimated coefficient for exports by wholly foreign-owned firms as a share of a city’s total
exports is not significantly different from zero. Interestingly, the share of exports by joint-
venture firms has a positive coefficient: the more a city’s exports come from joint-venture firms,
the less that city’s export structure resembles that of the high-income countries. These results
suggest that foreign-invested firms in China are not directly responsible for the rising
sophistication of China’s export structure, or at least not in a simple linear fashion.

As we explained earlier, columns 5-8 of Table 5 replicate the first four columns except that the
left-hand-side variables are re-calibrated against the export structure of the G3 economies in
2004. The qualitative results remain essentially the same. To summarize the key findings that
emerge from the series of regressions in Table 5, we find that:

(a) Cross-city differences in human capital are linked to cross-city differences in the level of
sophistication of export structures. A higher level of human capital, measured either by GMP per
capita, or by college and graduate school enrollment, is associated with a more sophisticated
export structure.

(b) High-tech zones are associated with more sophisticated export structures. The higher the
share of a city’s exports produced in high-tech zones, the more likely that city’s export structure
is to resemble that of the G3 high-income economies.

(c) The export processing zones (EPZs) contribute to rising sophistication in export structures.
However, since only a small fraction of Chinese cities have EPZs, these play a very small
quantitative role in explaining cross-city differences in export structure sophistication.

(d) Processing trade is not generally a major factor in explaining cross-city differences in export
structure sophistication. This can be seen in two ways. First, with regards to exports outside
policy zones (which represent the lion’s share of all exports), more processing trade is in fact
associated with less resemblance to the export structure of the high-income countries. Second,
with regards to exports produced in high-tech zones, non-processing trade is more responsible
for a resemblance to the export structure of the high-income countries than processing trade.

(e) After controlling for exports from major policy zones, foreign investment appears not to play
a major role in explaining cross-city differences in the level of sophistication of their export



                                                 9
structures. If anything, joint-venture firms may create some divergence between a city’s export
structure and that of the high-income economies.

These findings reject the view that China’s increasingly sophisticated export structure is the
product of processing trade and/or foreign invested firms. Meanwhile, these findings confirm the
importance of human capital and government-sponsored high-tech zones in increasing the
sophistication of China’s export structure.

The specification used in Table 5 includes city fixed effects, as is expected in panel regressions
such as ours. However, to ensure that the variables we have proposed—processing trade, foreign
ownership, high-tech zones, human capital, etc.—collectively have sufficient explanatory power
over observed cross-city export structure dissimilarities, we have run similar regressions without
city fixed effects (see Appendix Table 8). The signs on the coefficient estimates and their
statistical significance are generally similar in Appendix Table 8 and in Table 5. Equally
important, the values of R-square in this second set of regressions lie in the range of 66-68%.
This suggests that much of the cross-city differences in export patterns are explained by the
included regressors, and not by city fixed effects.

3.2 Exports by Firms of Different Ownership

Because China is still transitioning from a centrally planned system to a market based economy,
and has become very open to foreign direct investment (as the greatest developing-country
recipient of FDI since 1995), its exports are primarily generated by state-owned firms and
foreign-invested firms rather than by domestic privately owned firms. State-owned and foreign-
invested firms account for 40% and 51% of China’s total exports during our sample period,
respectively (Table 2). It will be beneficial to examine the determinants of export structure
sophistication by firm ownership type.

Table 6 reports a series of regressions of the export structure dissimilarity index for state-owned
firms (that are otherwise identically specified as those in Table 5). The results shown in Table 6
are qualitatively very similar to those in Table 5. In particular, differences in the degree of
processing trade (outside policy zones) are not shown to be responsible for cross-city differences
in export structure sophistication. If anything, processing trade outside policy zones may have
reduced the resemblance of Chinese export structures to those of high-income countries. More
human capital, as measured by either GMP per capita or college student enrollment, is associated
with an increased resemblance of state-owned enterprise (SOE) export structures to that of the
high-income countries.

Columns 3-4 and 7-8 of Table 6 can be interpreted as a test of possible spillover from foreign-
invested firms to local SOEs in any given city.5 The coefficients on the shares of wholly foreign-
owned firms or joint ventures in a city’s total exports are essentially zero, statistically. Therefore,


5
  Hale and Long (2006) suggest that foreign firms in China generate technological spillover to
local firms in part through the re-employment of skilled labor from foreign-invested firms by
local firms.


                                                  10
the presence by foreign firms in the same industry and in the same city does not appear to affect
whether SOE exports resemble those of the high-income countries.

Tables 7 and 8 report similar regressions for wholly foreign-owned and Sino-foreign joint-
venture firms, respectively. In these tables, unlike in Tables 5 and 6, no regressor except the
proxies for human capital is statistically significant. This reinforces our earlier conclusion that,
during our sample period, foreign-invested firms did not contribute to the rising sophistication of
China’s export structure. Tables 7 and 8 suggest that this is true whether foreign firms are
located in EPZs, high-tech zones, or elsewhere. Unfortunately, data limitations prevent us from
examining whether FDI from different source countries has differentially promoted the
sophistication of China’s export structure.6

For completeness, we also examine the dissimilarity index of export structures relative to the G3
economies for collectively and privately owned firms, respectively (see Tables 9 and 10). For
each type of firm, a higher level of local human capital is associated with the greater
resemblance of its exports to those of the high-income countries. For collectively owned firms
alone, there is evidence that processing trade both within and without policy zones may have
slowed the rise in the sophistication of these firms’ export structures. This is consistent with the
possibility that most of these collectively owned firms operate in labor-intensive industries.

For domestic private firms (but not for collectively owned firms) EPZs promote a similar export
structure to that of the rich countries. However, EPZs do not exist in most cities. In contrast to
the SOEs, wholly foreign-owned firms or joint ventures in the same city have some impact on
private firms’ export structure sophistication;,both coefficients are negative (the coefficient for
wholly foreign-owned firms is statistically significant). This is evidence that the presence of
foreign invested firms may have helped Chinese private firms increase their export sophistication
over the sample period.

3.3 Unit Value

Recent literature emphasizes the importance of specialization across varieties within a product
(Schott 2004); we now look at cross-city differences in the unit value of the same product, where
a product is defined both by its HS 8-digit code and by its physical unit code. For example, HS
“94053000” refers to “lighting sets used for Christmas trees”, but there are two different physical
units used to measure the quantities of exports of this product: number of items and mass in
kilograms. We take (94053000, number of items) and (94503000, kilograms) as two different
products in our estimation.

Our assumption is that different unit values for the same product reflect different varieties (and
statistical noise). For example, both high-end and low-end digital cameras fit into the same HS 8-
digit product classification, but high-end cameras command a higher unit value. We note,

6
  Xu and Lu (2007) report differences between firms from Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan, and
those from the United States and other OECD countries.




                                                 11
however, that differences in unit value within an 8-digit product category may also reflect factors
other than quality, such as differences in production costs (see Hallack 2006; and Hallack and
Schott 2006). We will assume that these factors generate noise in the mapping of unit value
against product variety.

We now investigate the roles of processing trade, high-tech zones, and firm ownership in
explaining differences in unit value (which proxy for differences in variety) within a product
category. To fix intuition, let us look at two examples. As a first example, color video monitors
(HS code 852821) were produced and exported in 2005 by local and foreign-invested firms
located in export processing zones and high-tech zones, and also outside policy zones. The
average unit value of monitors produced by foreign-invested firms was $241.50. Even monitors
produced entirely by foreign-invested firms in China showed variations in unit value dependent
on where the producer was located and whether the export was of processing trade or normal
trade. The unit value of monitors exported from an export processing zone was $347.80;
processing-export monitors from a high-tech zone were valued at $456.70, while normal-export
monitors from the same zone were sold for $364.80; in distinction, processing-export monitors
from outside any policy zone were valued at only $56.80, and normal-trade monitors from
outside any policy zone cost $73.60. Ownership also matters. The unit value of a monitor was
$207.00 when it was exported by a state-owned firm, and only $77.2 when it was exported by a
domestic private firm. For comparison, the average unit value of the same product, as exported
by producers from the United States, the European Union, and Japan was $467.40.7 Generally
speaking, the unit values of the Chinese exports are lower than those from high-income countries.
In this example, of the Chinese varieties, the processing-export monitor produced by a foreign
firm located in a high-tech zone had the highest unit value, roughly 98% of the value of G3
exports, suggesting that it may substitute closely for the high-income countries’ variety.

As a second example, video cameras (HS code 852540) were also produced and exported by
firms of various ownership, located in areas with different policy incentives. The average unit
value for video cameras exported by by foreign-invested firms was $51.50 in 2005, compared to
$30.20 for a similar camera made by state-owned firms. Both export type and firm location
matter as well. Of processing-exports cameras produced by foreign-invested firms, the unit value
was $154.6 for exports from a high-tech zone, $66.30 for those from outside any policy zone,
and $51.50 for those assembled in an export processing zone. For normal-export cameras made
by a foreign firm, the unit value was $21.60 for those from a high-tech zone, and only $13.20 for
those from outside any policy zone. Again, processing exports from a high-tech zone had the
highest unit value, and normal exports not from any policy zone had the lowest value. Cameras
produced by foreign-invested firms generally had a higher unit value than did local firms. For
comparison, the average unit value of a camera manufactured in the G3 countries (the United
States, Japan and the European Union) was $331.50. In this example, even China’s priciest
variety (a processing export made in a high-tech zone by a foreign firm) had a unit value only
47% that of the average G3-exported camera. In this example, the variety of video camera made
in China is unlikely to substitute closely for that of a wealthy country.


7
 This figure is taken from information in the UN COMTRADE database; we thank Mark
Gehlhar for providing this data.


                                                12
While these examples are illustrative, we must turn to a regression framework to summarize
patterns in the data more efficiently and systematically. Additionally, our regression framework
explicitly accounts for differences in income across regions, as well as other factors that could
account for the differences in unit value. Let ln(Unit_Valuerkt) denote the natural logarithm of the
unit value of city r’s export of product k in year t. Our specification relates this variable to city
by year fixed effects, product fixed effects, the share of export processing zones in a city’s export
of a given product, the share of high-tech zones in that city’s export of that product
(distinguished in regressions between processing and non-processing exports), the share of
processing trade in that city’s export of that product from outside any policy zones, and other
control variables.

        Ln(Unit _Value rkt ) = city_year_fixed + product_fixed
        +β 1 EPZ_sharerkt + β 2 High_tech_zone_Processing_Sharerkt
                                                                                               (6)
        +β 3 Processing_trade_outside_anyzonerkt
        +β 4 High_tech_zone_nonprocessing_sharerkt +other_controls + μ rkt

Note that city by year fixed effects are more general than either yearly fixed effects or city fixed
effects. Our regression results are reported in Table 11. Column 1 shows that both export
processing zones and high-tech zones are associated with higher unit values. Of the exports
originated from the high-tech zones, those produced by processing trade are linked to higher unit
values than those of non-processing trade. An increase of 10 percent in processing exports from a
high-tech zone as a share of a city’s total exports is associated with an increase of 5.9% in unit
value, whereas an increase of the same magnitude in the share of non-processing trade from
high-tech zones is associated with a 2.1% increase in unit value. An increase of 10 percent in the
export share of EPZs in a city’s total exports is associated with an increase of 2.1% in unit value.
With regards to unit value, there is no difference between exports from an export processing
zone and non-processing exports from a high-tech zone. In comparison, an increase of 10 percent
in the share of processing exports originating outside any policy zone is associated with a 1.2%
increase in unit value. Overall, processing trade appears to be associated with higher-quality
varieties than ordinary trade.

To show the role of foreign investment in upgrading the quality of products, column 2 of Table
11 includes the respective shares of wholly foreign-owned and joint-venture firms in a city’s
total exports (by HS-8) as additional regressors. Both new regressors have positive and
statistically significant coefficients. An increase of 10 percent in the share of exports made by
these two types of firms in a city’s total exports of a product tends to be associated with an
increase in the unit value of the given product by 2.0% and 2.2%, respectively. This suggests that
products from foreign-invested firms—assigned higher values—are generally of higher quality.

Interestingly, this adjustment renders the share of EPZs statistically insignificant. The
coefficients on the shares of processing and ordinary trade out of high-tech zones, and on the
share of processing trade outside policy zones, while still positive and statistically significant, are
now smaller in magnitude (by more than two standard deviations, in two out of the three cases).
This suggests that part of the higher-unit-value effect, previously attributed to processing trade
and high-tech zones, is in fact due to the presence of foreign-invested firms in these activities. As


                                                  13
noted above (Table 3b), during the sample period more than 95% of exports originating from
EPZs and from processing trade in high-tech zones were produced by foreign-invested firms.

Column 3 of Table 11 includes a regressor of the combined share of collective and private firms
in a city’s total exports, and one of the share of state-owned firms (this column excludes that of
shares held by foreign-invested firms). Column 4 of Table 11 includes the two types of foreign-
invested firms plus the combined share of the collective and domestic private firms (leaving out
that of state-owned firms). The shares of exports made by collective and domestic private firms,
and by state-owned firms, have negative and statistically significant coefficients, indicating that a
larger share of Chinese domestic firms in a city’s exports is associated with a lower unit value of
those exports. This confirms the intuition that, in a given HS-8 product line, foreign-invested
firms in China produce relatively higher-quality varieties than do Chinese domestic firms.

Taking these unit value results together, we conclude that processing trade (regardless of its
origin), high-tech zones, and foreign invested firms are all independently associated with higher
unit values, suggesting that they have each individually played a role in leading China to produce
and export higher-quality products that it otherwise would have.

4. Conclusion

Are China’s exports competing head to head with those of high-income countries? This paper
addresses this question by examining variations in export sophistication across different cities in
China. It looks at both the overlap in product structure between a city’s exports and those of the
advanced economies, and at the unit values of different products.

Estimation shows that China’s export structure as a whole has begun increasingly to resemble
that of the G3 advanced economies, and the unit values of its exports are also rising over time. If
these patterns are generated entirely by the rise of processing trade, then there may not be much
genuine increase in the sophistication of Chinese exports. If there has been increase in
sophistication, but one brought about solely by foreign investment in China, then the economic
profit associated with improved sophistication have accrued to foreign economies rather than to
China’s. Of course, increased sophistication can also come from a higher level of local human
capital, or from government policies set up expressly to promote the upgrading of industrial
infrastructure, such as government initiatives establishing high-tech policy zones. Regional
variations in the use of processing trade and high-tech zones, and the availability of skilled labor,
are assessed in this paper to determine the relative importance of these factors. Econometric
analysis conducted in this study helps to clarify this issue.

(1) Cross-city differences in human capital are linked to cross-city differences in the
sophistication of export structure. A higher level of human capital is associated with more
sophisticated export structures in Chinese cities.

(2) High-tech zones are associated both with more sophisticated export structures and with
higher unit values. This indicates that the policy zones (especially ETDZs and HTIDZs) set up
by central and local governments may have worked to induce firms to upgrade their product
ladder to a higher level than they would have otherwise done. In other words, these policy zones



                                                 14
not only promoted processing trade, but also promoted improvements in the sophistication of
China’s exports.

(3) The export processing zones (EPZs) contribute both to the rising sophistication of China’s
export structure and to the rising unit values of its exports. However, since only a tiny fraction of
Chinese cities have EPZs and since most of their exports come from foreign-invested firms,
EPZs do not contribute greatly to explaining cross-city differences in export sophistication.

(4) Processing trade is not generally a major factor in explaining the cross-city differences in
export structure sophistication. This can be seen in two ways. First, with regards to exports
originating outside policy zones (which took up the lion’s share of China’s total exports during
our sample period, about 42%), more processing trade is in fact associated with a lesser
resemblance to the export structure of advanced countries. Second, with regard to exports
originating inside of the high-tech zones, products associated with the processing trade do not
appear to overlap more with advanced countries’ exports than do those associated with non-
processing trade.

However, processing trade is significantly associated with higher unit values. How can our
findings on export structure and unit values be reconciled? If processing-export production
outside the policy zones is generally labor intensive, a higher share in a given city will increase
the dissimilarity of that city’s export structure to that of the G3 advanced economies. However,
processing exports could still be of higher quality (of greater sophistication) than normal trade
exports in the same product line, if higher-quality materials are used to manufacture the former.
In other words, processing trade moves China into the production and export of more
sophisticated varieties within a given product category, but not necessarily within those product
categories heavily exported by the G3 advanced economies.8

(5) The export share of foreign-invested firms in a Chinese city does not appear to play a major
role in explaining cross-city differences in the sophistication level of export structures. If
anything, joint-venture firms may create some divergence between a city’s export structure and
that of the advanced economies. However, after controlling for processing trade, both types of
foreign-invested firms are found to be strongly associated with higher export unit values.
Therefore, foreign investment has been conducive to greater same-product sophistication in
China.




8
  The higher unit values associated with processing exports may simply reflect the higher cost of
using imported inputs rather than domestically made inputs. This leaves open the question of
whether processing exports generate more value added than do normal exports that use more
local or domestic inputs.




                                                 15
Proof of the linear mapping between the similarity and dissimilarity indexes (equation (4)):

Consider two economies, A and B, each having K sectors. Define Ak and Bk to be the share of
sector k in each of the two economies’ exports. The sum of Ak (or Bk) over k equals 100. Without
a loss of generality, we can divide the K sectors into two subsets, N and M, where N+M = K. Let
N be indexed by i, and M by j. Assuming for i ∈ N, Ai > Bi, while for j ∈ M, Aj < Bj.

EDI = ∑ Ak −Bk = ∑ (Ai −Bi ) + ∑ (B j −A j ) = ∑ Ai − ∑ A j + ∑ B j − ∑ Bi
                                                                i       j   j   i
        k                    i          i

     = 200 − 2∑ A j − 2∑ Bi = 200 − 2(∑ A j − ∑ Bi ) = 200 − 2ESI
                   j             i                     j            i

   ∴    ∑   i
                Ai + ∑ A j = 100,
                         j
                                            ∑   j
                                                    B j + ∑ Bi = 100
                                                            i



                       200 − EDI
Therefore, ESI =                 = ∑ ( A j , Bi ) = ∑ Min( Ak , Bk )
                           2                        k




                                                           16
                                           References

Finger, J. Michael, and M. E. Kreinin, 1979, “A measure of ‘export similarity’ and its possible
uses,” Economic Journal, 89: 905-912.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik, 2005, “What you export matters,” NBER
working paper 11905. Forthcoming, Journal of Economic Growth.

Fisman, Raymond, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2004, “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from
‘Missing Trade’ in China,” Journal of Political Economy 112 (2): 471-496.

Fisman, Raymond, Peter Moustakerski, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2008, “Outsourcing Tariff Evasion:
A New Explanation for Entrepot Trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Fontagne, Lionel, Guillaume Gaulier, and Soledad Zignago, 2007, “Specialisation across
varieties within products and North-South competition,” CEPII Working Paper, No. 2007-06,
May.

Hale, Galina, and Cheryl Long, 2006, "What determines technological spillovers of foreign
direct investment: evidence from China," Working Paper Series 2006-13, Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco. Static URL: http://ideas.recpec.org/p/fip/fedfwp/2006-13.html.

Hallack, Juan Carlos, 2006, “Product quality and the direction of trade,” Journal of International
Economics 68(1): 238-265.

Hallack, Juan Carlos, and Peter Schott, 2005, “Estimating cross-country differences in product
quality,” working paper, Yale University.

Hummels, David, and Peter Klenow, 2005, “The variety and quality of a nation’s exports,”
American Economic Review, 95: 704-723.

Rodrik, Dani, 2006, “What’s so special about China’s exports?” NBER Working Paper 11947,
forthcoming in China & World Economy.

Schott, Peter, 2004, “Across-product versus within-product specialization in international trade,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2): 647-678.

Schott, Peter, 2006, “The relative sophistication of Chinese exports,” NBER working paper
12173.

Xu, Bin, 2007, “Measuring China’s export sophistication,” China Europe International Business
School.

Xu, Bin, and Jiangyong Lu, 2007, “The Impact of Foreign Firms on the Sophistication of
Chinese Exports,” working paper, China Europe International Business School and Tsinghua
University.



                                                17
Table 1. Increasing overlaps in the export structure: China relative to the US, the EU, and Japan
(1996-2005)
Year       No. of HS-6 digit            Also exported by       Fraction of the product       Export Dissimilarity Index
           Product Lines exported       China (at least US     lines exported by the G3      (EDI)
           by the High-income           $1 million)            but not by China
           Countries (G3 (at least
           US $1 million)
                      (1)                      (2)                  (3) = 1 – (2)/(3)
1996                4,126                     2,942                       28.7                            133.7
1997                 4,123                    3,042                       26.2                            132.5
1998                 4,121                    3,041                       26.2                            130.8
1999                 4,120                    3,024                       26.6                            129.2
2000                 4,116                    3,172                       22.9                            125.5
2001                 4,118                    3,184                       22.7                            124.8
2002                 4,184                    3,306                       21.0                            125.4
2003                 4,182                    3,408                       18.5                            126.1
2004                 4,186                    3,515                       16.0                            123.1
2005                 4,179                    3,609                       13.6                            121.5


Data source: Authors’ computation based on trade statistics from the China Customs Administration and
on G3 data downloaded from the UN COMTRADE database. The EDI is computed based on Equation
(2), explained in the text: smaller values indicate greater overlaps.

                             Yearly benchmark                                              2004 benchmark
Year      No. of              Export             Value share of       No. of              Export             Value share of
          Products            Dissimilarity      product that         Products            Dissimilarity      product that G3
                              Index (EDI)        G3 exports but                           Index              exports but China
                                                 China does not                                              does not as G3
                                                 as G3 total                                                 total exports
                                                 exports
1996           4143                  133.7              1.26               4213               141.6                5.68
1997           4143                  132.5              1.27               4213               140.4                5.65
1998           4143                  130.8              1.21               4213               138.9                5.73
1999           4143                  129.2              0.92               4213               136.9                5.63
2000           4143                  125.5              0.97               4213               133.0                5.95
2001           4143                  124.8              0.95               4213               130.9                5.77
2002           4213                  125.4              0.60               4213               128.7                0.60
2003           4213                  126.1              0.60               4213               127.8                0.60
2004           4213                  123.1              0.77               4213               123.1                0.77
2005           4212                  121.5              0.80               4213               119.5                0.80


Data source: Authors computation based on official trade statistics from the China Customs
Administration and G3 data downloaded from WITS.




                                                               18
Table 2: Breakdown of China’s Exports by firm ownership, 1995-2006 (%)
Year            SOE            Joint Venture     Wholly Foreign-   Collective    Private
                                                 owned
1995                  66.7           19.8              11.7             1.5            0.0
1996                  57.0           24.9              15.7             2.0            0.0
1997                  56.2           23.9              17.1             2.5            0.0
1998                  52.6           24.1              20.0             2.9            0.1
1999                  50.5           23.2              22.2             3.5            0.3
2000                  46.7           24.2              23.8             4.2            1.0
2001                  42.6           24.1              25.9             5.3            2.0
2002                  37.7           22.7              29.5             5.8            4.2
2003                  31.5           21.5              33.3             5.7            7.9
2004                  25.9           21.0              36.1             5.4           11.7
2005                  22.2           19.9              38.4             4.8           14.7
2006                  19.7           18.7              39.5             4.2           17.8
Average               39.8           22.7              27.8             4.7            4.9
1996-2004


Data source: Authors’ computation based on official trade statistics from the China Custom
Administration.




                                                  19
Table 3a: Share of processing trade and policy zones in China’s total exports, 1996-2005 (%)
Year          Special          Exports         Processing        Normal       Processing        Normal      All
              Economic         Processing      exports in        exports in   Exports           Exports     Other
              Zones            Zones           High-tech         High-tech    Outside Policy    Outside     Exports†
                                               Zones             Zones        Zones             Policy
                                                                                                Zones
    (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)           (6)               (7)      (8)
1995              10.6              0                3.2             2.1           39.8             42.1      2.2
1996              8.7               0                3.9             1.8           45.2             38.3      2.0
1997              8.8               0                4.6             1.7           43.9             39.0      1.9
1998              8.2               0                5.5             1.9           45.5             36.9      1.9
1999              7.0               0                6.4             2.2           45.5             37.0      1.9
2000              7.1               0                7.0             2.6           43.3             38.2      1.8
2001              6.8              0.1               7.4             2.8           43.0             38.0      1.9
2002              6.2              0.7               8.0             3.0           42.2             37.6      2.3
2003              5.3              2.4               9.5             3.4           39.6             37.1      2.7
2004              4.4              3.6              11.0             3.6           37.7             36.4      3.2
2005              4.3              4.6              11.8             3.6           35.6             36.8      3.5
1996-2004         6.3              1.3               8.0             2.8           41.7             37.4      2.4
average

Table 3b: Firm structure across trade and policy zones, 1996-2004 (%)
                  Special         Exports        Processing      Normal       Processing       Normal      All Other
                  Economic        Processing     exports in      exports in   Exports          Exports     Exports†
                  Zones           Zones          High-tech       High-tech    Outside          Outside
                                                 Zones           Zones        Policy           Policy
                                                                              Zones            Zones
                                                     1996-2004 average
 State Owned            23.7          0.0            4.8           58.3          28.3             62.5        44.3
 Joint Venture          34.3          3.4            33.4          16.9          29.2             13.1        13.0
 Wholly Foreign         36.3          96.0           61.5          16.3          38.0              6.6        24.0
 Collective             1.7           0.6            0.3            1.4           3.1              8.2         4.6
 Private                3.8           0.0            0.1            7.1           1.5              9.5        10.4
 Total                  99.9         100.0          100.0         100.0          100.0            100.0       96.3
                                                           1996
 State Owned            29.4                         15.6          79.7          40.5             85.7        63.0
 Joint Venture          39.5                         37.8          13.3          35.2              9.4        10.3
 Wholly Foreign         30.0                         46.2           6.2          22.4              2.2        11.3
 Collective             0.9                          0.4            0.9           1.9              2.6         3.4
 Private                0.0                          0.0            0.0           0.0              0.0         0.2
 Total                  99.8                        100.0         100.0          100.0            100.0       88.2
                                                           2004
 State Owned          20.5            0.0            2.5           44.0          18.3             41.8        30.3
 Joint Venture        30.5            3.0            27.2          16.4          26.3             15.0        15.5
 Wholly Foreign       37.9            96.5           69.8          23.2          47.9              9.4        29.8
 Collective           2.2             0.4            0.2            1.4           3.4             10.3         4.0
 Private              9.0             0.0            0.3           15.1           4.0             23.5        19.7
 Total               100.0           100.0          100.0         100.0          100.0            100.0       99.4


Data source: Authors computed based on official trade statistics from China Custom Administration.
†
  Including international aid, compensation trade, goods on consignment, border trade, goods for foreign
contracted projects, goods on lease, outward processing, barter trade, warehouse trade, and entrepôt trade
by bonded area.




                                                            20
Table 4a: Summary statistics for city-level variables
                                     N          Mean     Median   Std Dev   MIN      MAX
GMP per capita (in log)                  1981    8.97     8.89     0.63      7.23     11.48
GMP (in log)                             1981    14.74    14.71    0.96      11.16    18.13
Student Enrollment in Colleges and       1986    0.016    0.009    0.019     0.000    0.155
Universities as a Share of Non-
Agricultural Population




                                                   21
Table 4b: Summary statistics: other key variables in regression analysis
           Export           Share of processing    Share of processing   Share of non-        Share of Export
           Dissimilarity    exports outside        exports in high-      processing exports   Processing
           Index (logged)   policy zones           tech zones            in high-tech zones   Zones

                 (2)                (3)                       (4)                (5)                (6)
                                                  All Firms
N                1986              1986                   1986                  1986                1986
Mean             5.24              0.259                  0.0144               0.0068              0.0004
Median           5.26              0.196                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
Std Dev          0.07              0.233                  0.0594               0.0253              0.0057
MIN              4.84              0.000                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
MAX              5.30              0.996                  0.5940               0.4206              0.1534
                                             State-owned Firms
N                1981              1981                   1981                  1981                1981
Mean             5.24              0.168                  0.0016               0.0058              0.0000
Median           5.27              0.103                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
Std Dev          0.06              0.200                  0.0105               0.0327              0.0000
MIN              4.92              0.000                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
MAX              5.30              0.990                  0.1822               0.5102              0.0013
                                            Joint-Venture Firms
N                1835              1835                   1835                  1835                1835
Mean             5.27              0.430                  0.0263               0.0143              0.0004
Median           5.28              0.418                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
Std Dev          0.04              0.321                  0.0875               0.0663              0.0083
MIN              4.95              0.000                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
MAX              5.30              1.000                  0.6985               0.9543              0.3256
                                     Wholly Foreign-owned Firms
N                1552              1552                   1552                  1552                1552
Mean             5.27              0.417                  0.0448               0.0132              0.0019
Median           5.29              0.378                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
Std Dev          0.04              0.355                  0.1433               0.0481              0.0214
MIN              4.99              0.000                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
MAX              5.30              1.000                  0.9470               0.9898              0.5395
                                          Collectively-owned Firms
N                1640              1640                   1640                  1640                1640
Mean             5.28              0.117                  0.0021               0.0037              0.0010
Median           5.29              0.001                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
Std Dev          0.03              0.203                  0.0218               0.0228              0.0216
MIN              5.10              0.000                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
MAX              5.30              1.000                  0.5497               0.3115              0.5919
                                               Private Firms
N                1264              1264                   1264                  1264                1264
Mean             5.27              0.055                  0.0025               0.0143              0.0000
Median           5.29              0.000                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
Std Dev          0.04              0.141                  0.0378               0.0692              0.0002
MIN              4.96              0.000                  0.0000               0.0000              0.0000
MAX              5.30              1.000                  1.0000               1.0000              0.0051




                                                    22
          Table 5: What explains cross-city export structure? Export Structure Dissimilarity between
          Chinese cities (all firms) and the G3 countries
Explanatory Variables                                        Yearly benchmark                                     2004 benchmark
                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)                (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)            (8)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a Share of     -0.351***   -0.382***    -0.350***      -0.384***   -0.552***   -0.594***   -0.544***   -0.591***
Total City Exports                                (0.074)     (0.055)         (0.071)     (0.053)     (0.116)     (0.087)     (0.111)     (0.084)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones as a       -0.065***   -0.070***    -0.067***      -0.073***   -0.083***   -0.089***   -0.082***   -0.090***
Share of Total City Exports                       (0.018)     (0.020)         (0.018)     (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.023)     (0.020)     (0.023)
Non-processing exports in High-tech Zones as a    -0.087*    -0.108**         -0.093**   -0.115**     -0.087*     -0.116*     -0.092*    -0.122**
Share of Total City Exports                       (0.045)     (0.053)         (0.044)     (0.053)     (0.049)     (0.061)     (0.049)     (0.061)
Processing exports outside economic zones as a    0.005*       0.004           0.004       0.002      0.006*       0.004      0.005*       0.003
Share of Total City Exports                       (0.003)     (0.003)         (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of Higher     -0.225***                -0.229***                  -0.309***               -0.315***
Education as a Share of the City Non-             (0.066)                     (0.066)                 (0.073)                 (0.072)
Agricultural Population
GMP per capita                                               -0.006**                    -0.007***               -0.010***               -0.010***
                                                              (0.002)                     (0.003)                 (0.003)                 (0.003)
Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP)                 -0.003**    -0.003**         -0.003**   -0.003**     -0.003*     -0.003*    -0.003**    -0.003**
                                                  (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)
Foreign-invested firms’ share in city exports                                  0.001       0.004                              -0.004      -0.000
                                                                              (0.006)     (0.006)                             (0.006)     (0.007)
Joint venture firms’ share in city exports                                0.010***       0.010***                            0.009**     0.009**
                                                                           (0.004)        (0.004)                            (0.004)     (0.004)
City Fixed Effects                                  Y           Y             Y              Y          Y           Y           Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                                  Y           Y             Y              Y          Y           Y           Y           Y
Robust, Cluster(city)                               Y           Y             Y              Y          Y           Y           Y           Y
Observations                                       1981        1981         1981           1981        1981        1981        1981        1981
R-squared                                          0.98        0.98          0.98           0.98       0.98        0.97        0.98        0.97


          Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                         23
          Table 6: State-owned firms’ Export Structure Dissimilarity relative to the G3 countries
Explanatory Variables                                     Yearly benchmark                               2004 benchmark
                                                (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)           (8)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a         -11.88***   -13.21*** -12.16***   -13.49***   -18.84***   -20.83*** -18.97***     -20.96***
Share of Total City Exports                  (4.040)     (4.427)    (4.016)    (4.411)      (5.449)    (6.099)      (5.431)    (6.089)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones        -0.010       -0.023    -0.013      -0.027      -0.023      -0.044      -0.025      -0.045
as a Share of Total City Exports             (0.074)     (0.073)    (0.074)    (0.074)      (0.093)    (0.091)      (0.092)    (0.091)
Non-processing exports in High-tech         -0.123**    -0.136**   -0.124**   -0.138**     -0.151**   -0.171**     -0.150**   -0.170**
Zones as a Share of Total City Exports       (0.052)     (0.053)    (0.053)    (0.055)      (0.066)    (0.067)      (0.065)    (0.067)
Processing exports outside economic         0.007***     0.006**   0.007***    0.007**     0.007***    0.007**     0.008***    0.007**
zones as a Share of Total City Exports       (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of       -0.166**               -0.170**               -0.255***               -0.258***
Higher Education as a Share of the City      (0.069)                (0.068)                 (0.075)                 (0.074)
Non-Agricultural Population
GMP per capita                                          -0.005**              -0.005**                -0.008***               -0.008***
                                                         (0.002)               (0.002)                  (0.003)                 (0.003)
Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP)             -0.002*     -0.003*   -0.003*     -0.003*     -0.003*     -0.003*     -0.003*     -0.003*
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)
Foreign-invested firms share in city                                0.001       0.002                               -0.003      -0.002
exports                                                            (0.007)     (0.007)                             (0.007)      (0.007)
Joint venture firms share in city exports                           0.006       0.005                                0.004       0.003
                                                                   (0.005)     (0.005)                             (0.005)      (0.005)
                                             (0.023)     (0.035)   (0.023)     (0.036)     (0.023)     (0.043)     (0.023)      (0.044)
City Fixed Effects                              Y           Y         Y           Y           Y           Y            Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                              Y           Y         Y           Y           Y           Y            Y           Y
Robust (clustered by city)                      Y           Y         Y           Y           Y           Y            Y           Y
Observations                                  1976        1976      1976        1976        1976        1976         1976        1976
R-squared                                     0.97        0.97       0.97        0.97       0.97        0.97         0.97        0.97


          Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                     24
Table 7: Wholly foreign-owned firms’ Export Structure Dissimilarity Relative to the G3 countries
Explanatory Variables                      Yearly benchmarks     2004 benchmark
                                              (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a         -0.095    -0.097*   -0.112     -0.115
Share of Total City Exports                (0.059)    (0.057)   (0.073)   (0.071)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones as   -0.017     -0.016    -0.024*   -0.022
a Share of Total City Exports              (0.012)    (0.012)   (0.014)   (0.014)
Non-processing exports in High-tech        -0.013     -0.013     -0.019   -0.019
Zones as a Share of Total City Exports     (0.011)    (0.011)   (0.014)   (0.014)
Processing exports outside economic        -0.001     -0.001     -0.007   -0.007
zones as a Share of Total City Exports     (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.008)   (0.008)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of      -0.078                -0.080
Higher Education as a Share of the City    (0.063)              (0.074)
Non-Agricultural Population
GMP per capita                                       -0.012**             -0.012**
                                                      (0.005)              (0.006)
Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP)           -0.005*    -0.003    -0.005     -0.003
                                           (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.003)
City Fixed Effects                            Y          Y         Y          Y
Year Fixed Effects                            Y          Y         Y          Y
Robust (clustered by city)                    Y          Y         Y          Y
Observations                                1548       1548      1548       1548
R-squared                                    0.95       0.95      0.81       0.81


Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                          25
Table 8: Joint-ventures firms’ Exports Structure Dissimilarity relative to the G3 countries
Explanatory Variables                        Yearly benchmark      2004 benchmark
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a Share     0.013     -0.002     0.000     -0.016
of Total City Exports                         (0.027)   (0.030)    (0.033)   (0.036)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones as a    -0.005    -0.006     -0.014    -0.015*
Share of Total City Exports                   (0.010)   (0.009)    (0.009)   (0.009)
Non-processing exports in High-tech            0.001    -0.000      0.001     0.001
Zones as a Share of Total City Exports        (0.010)   (0.009)    (0.008)   (0.008)
Processing exports outside economic zones      0.001     0.000     0.003*     0.002
as a Share of Total City Exports              (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.002)   (0.001)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of        -0.094**             -0.104**
Higher Education as a Share of the City       (0.039)              (0.035)
Non-Agricultural Population
GMP per capita                                          -0.004*              -0.005**
                                                        (0.002)               (0.002)
Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP)             -0.001      -0.001   -0.001      -0.001
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)     (0.001)
City Fixed Effects                              Y          Y         Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                              Y          Y         Y           Y
Robust (clustered by city)                      Y          Y         Y           Y
Observations                                  1831        1831     1831        1831
R-squared                                      0.97       0.97      0.96        0.96


Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                           26
Table 9: Collectively-owned firms’ Export Structure Dissimilarity relative to the G3 countries
Explanatory Variables                                   Yearly benchmark                              2004 benchmark
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a           0.003     -0.005     0.002       -0.006     -0.003     -0.010     -0.004     -0.011
Share of Total City Exports                   (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.007)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones as     0.028**      0.020     0.028**     0.019     0.029**    0.020*     0.028**     0.020
a Share of Total City Exports                 (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.012)
Non-processing exports in High-tech          -0.070**   -0.089**   -0.071**   -0.089**   -0.066**   -0.084**   -0.066**   -0.084**
Zones as a Share of Total City Exports        (0.029)    (0.036)    (0.029)    (0.036)    (0.028)    (0.034)    (0.029)    (0.035)
Processing exports outside economic          0.009***    0.008**   0.009***    0.007**   0.010***   0.008***   0.009***   0.008***
zones as a Share of Total City Exports        (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of        -0.38***              -0.39***              -0.38***              -0.38***
Higher Education as a Share of the City       (0.075)               (0.075)               (0.078)               (0.078)
Non-Agricultural Population
Chinese GMP per capita                                  -0.016**              -0.016**              -0.016**              -0.016**
                                                         (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.005)
Chinese Gross Metropolitan Product           -0.004      -0.005*   -0.004      -0.005*   -0.004      -0.006*   -0.004      -0.006*
(GMP)                                        (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.003)     (0.003)
FIE firms’ share in city exports                                   -0.010       -0.011                         -0.013       -0.013
                                                                   (0.008)     (0.009)                         (0.008)     (0.009)
Joint venture firms’ share in city exports                          0.004       0.001                           0.003       -0.000
                                                                   (0.005)     (0.006)                         (0.005)     (0.006)
City Fixed Effects                             Y          Y           Y           Y        Y          Y           Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                             Y          Y           Y           Y        Y          Y           Y           Y
Robust (clustered by city)                     Y          Y           Y           Y        Y          Y           Y           Y
Observations                                  1636       1636       1636         1636     1636       1636       1636         1636
R-squared                                     0.89       0.87        0.89        0.88     0.87       0.86        0.87        0.86


Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                            27
         Table 10: Private firms’ Export Structure Dissimilarity relative to the G3 countries
Explanatory Variables                                  Yearly benchmark                                2004 benchmark
                                             (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)         (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a      -14.28***   -15.86*** -14.02***    -15.51***   -14.97***   -16.68*** -14.44***    -16.00***
Share of Total City Exports                (3.640)    (3.825)    (3.589)     (3.896)     (3.778)     (4.016)    (3.782)     (4.224)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones      -0.006     -0.012      -0.003     -0.009       -0.005     -0.010      0.002      -0.003
as a Share of Total City Exports           (0.014)    (0.015)    (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.016)    (0.016)     (0.016)
Non-processing exports in High-tech        -0.100     -0.109      -0.094     -0.103       -0.096     -0.105      -0.085     -0.093
Zones as a Share of Total City Exports     (0.072)    (0.070)    (0.066)     (0.064)     (0.072)     (0.070)    (0.061)     (0.059)
Processing exports outside economic         0.007      0.008       0.008      0.008       0.010       0.010      0.010      0.010*
zones as a Share of Total City Exports     (0.008)    (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.006)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of    -0.655***              -0.645***               -0.660***              -0.639***
Higher Education as a Share of the         (0.181)               (0.170)                 (0.186)                (0.166)
City Non-Agricultural Population
GMP per capita                                       -0.048**               -0.050***               -0.040**               -0.043**
                                                      (0.020)                 (0.019)                (0.020)                (0.018)
Gross Metropolitan Product                -0.019     -0.024**     -0.021     -0.025**    -0.014      -0.020*    -0.017     -0.022**
                                          (0.015)     (0.010)    (0.015)      (0.010)    (0.014)     (0.011)    (0.013)     (0.010)
FIE firm export share                                           -0.086***   -0.091***                          -0.179**    -0.184**
                                                                 (0.031)      (0.030)                           (0.086)     (0.087)
Joint venture firm exports share                                  -0.003      -0.009                            -0.009      -0.015
                                                                 (0.015)      (0.015)                           (0.018)     (0.018)
City Fixed Effects                          Y           Y           Y            Y         Y           Y           Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                          Y           Y           Y            Y         Y           Y           Y           Y
Robust (clustered by city)                  Y           Y           Y            Y         Y           Y           Y           Y
Observations                               1262        1262        1262        1262       1262        1262       1262        1262
R-squared                                  0.75        0.74        0.76         0.76      0.63        0.62        0.68       0.67


         Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                   28
Table 11: What explains the cross-city difference in the unit values of exports?
Explanatory Variables                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a Share of Total City          0.209**      0.068       0.050         0.064
Exports                                                         (0.058)      (0.058)     (0.058)       (0.058)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones as a Share of              0.589**      0.429**     0.428**       0.434**
Total City Exports                                              (0.012)      (0.013)     (0.013)       (0.013)
Non-processing exports in High-tech Zones as a Share             0.206**      0.171**     0.172**       0.173**
of Total City Exports                                           (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.008)
Processing exports outside economic zones as a Share of          0.119**      0.117**     0.117**       0.119**
Total City Exports                                              (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)
FIE firm export share                                                         0.198**                   0.179**
                                                                             (0.005)                   (0.005)
Joint venture firm exports share                                              0.222**                   0.207**
                                                                             (0.004)                   (0.004)
Collective and Private firm export share                                                  -0.290**     -0.094**
                                                                                          (0.005)      (0.004)
SOE firm export share                                                                     -0.196**
                                                                                          (0.004)
Product Fixed Effects                                              Y           Y            Y            Y
City_Year Fixed Effects                                            Y           Y            Y            Y
Number of Unique Cities                                           238         238          238          238
Number of Unique products                                        6,473       6,473        6,473        6,473
Observations                                                   1,256,999   1,256,999    1,256,999    1,256,999
Adjusted R-squared                                               0.794       0.794        0.794        0.794

Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the Unit Value of HS 6-digit products, from 1996 to 2004.
The regressions include city by year fixed effects and product fixed effects. Standard errors are given in
parentheses. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.




                                                          29
Appendix Table 1: Definition of key variables and their data sources
Dependent variables                     Description                                  Data Sources

 EDI rft = (∑ abs ( sirft −siref
                              ,t ))
                                        Absolute export structure dissimilarity      Calculated by the authors from
               i
                                        index                                        the HS 6-digit level. Chinese City
                                                                                     exports based on official China
                                                                                     Customs Statistics. Data on US,
                                                                                     EU15 and Japanese exports
                                                                                     downloaded from WITS
Explanatory variables
GMP                                     Gross Metropolitan Product (10,000 yuan)     China City data, China Data
                                                                                     Online
GMPpcrt = 100 GMPr / POPr               Chinese GMP per capita (yuan)                China City data, China Data
                                                                                     Online
SKILLrt = 100 (No. of College           Student Enrollment in Institutions of        China City data, China Data
Students)rt /(non-agricultural          Higher Education as a Share of the City      Online
population)rt                           Non-Agricultural Population
EPZ_sharerft                            Export Processing Zone Exports as a          China Customs Statistics
                                        Share of Total City Exports
High_tech_zone_processing_sharerft      Processing exports in the two High-tech      China Customs Statistics
                                        Zones as a Share of Total City Exports
High_tech_zone_nonprocessing_sharerft   Non-processing exports in the two High-      China Customs Statistics
                                        tech Zones as a Share of Total City
                                        Exports
Processing_outside_anyzone_sharerft     Processing exports outside policy zones as   China Customs Statistics
                                        a Share of Total City Exports
Expfieshrft                             FIE firm exports as share of Total City      China Customs Statistics
                                        Exports
Expjonshrft                             Joint venture firm exports as Share of       China Customs Statistics
                                        Total City Exports
expothshrft                             Collective and Private firm exports as       China Customs Statistics
                                        Share of Total City Exports
expsoeshrft                             SOE firm exports as Share of Total City      China Customs Statistics
                                        Exports




                                                    30
Appendix Table 2: Years of establishment of economic zones, by incentive type
City Code     City Name    Special    Economic & Technological   Hi-Technology Industry   Export
                           Economic   Development Area           Development Area         Processing
                           Zone                                                           Zone
    1100    Beijing CY                         1996                       1996                 2001
    1200    Tianjin CY                         1996                       1996                 2001
    1301    Shijiazhuang                                                  1996
    1303    Qinhuangdao                        1996                                            2005
    1306    Baoding                                                       1996
    1401    Taiyuan                            2003                       1996
    1502    Baotou                                                        1997
    2101    Shenyang                           1996                       1996
    2102    Dalian                             1996                       1996                 2001
    2103    Anshan                                                        1996
    2201    Changchun                          1996                       1996
    2202    Jilin                                                         1996
    2301    Harbin                             1996                       1996
    2306    Daqing                                                        1996
    3100    Shanghai CY                        1996                       1996                 2001
    3201    Nanjing                                                       1996                 2004
    3202    Wuxi                                                          1997                 2003
    3204    Changzhou                                                     1997
    3205    Suzhou                             1996                       1997                 2001
    3206    Nantong                            1996                                            2003
    3207    Lianyungang                        1996                                            2004
    3211    Zhenjiang                                                                          2004
    3301    Hangzhou                           1996                       1996                 2001
    3302    Ningbo                             1996                                            2004
    3303    Wenzhou                            1996
    3401    Hefei                              2005                       1996
    3402    Wuhu                               1996                                            2003
    3501    Fuzhou                             1996                       1996
    3502    Xiamen             1995                                       1996                 2002
    3601    Nanchang                                                      1996
    3701    Jinan                                                         1996
    3702    Qingdao                            1996                       1997                 2004
    3703    Zibo                                                          1999
    3706    Yantai                             1996                                            2001
    3707    Weifang                                                       1996
    3710    Weihai                                                        1996                 2001
    4101    Zhengzhou                                                     1996                 2005
    4103    Luoyang                                                       1997
    4201    Wuhan                              1996                       1996                 2001




                                                31
    4206   Xiangfan                                                      1997
    4301   Changsha                                                      1996
    4302   Zhuzhou                                                       2000
    4401   Guangzhou                            1996                     1996          2001
    4403   Shenzhen         1995                                         1996          2002
    4404   Zhuhai           1995                                         1996
    4405   Shantou          1995
    4406   Foshan                                                        1998
    4408   Zhanjiang                            1996
    4413   Huizhou                                                       1996
    4420   Zhongshan                                                     1996
    4501   Nanning                                                       1996
    4503   Guilin                                                        1996
    4505   Beihai                                                                      2005
    4601   Haikou           1995                                         1996
    4602   Sanya            1995
    5000   Chongqing                            2002                     2002          2002
    5101   Chengdu                              2001                     1996          2001
    5107   Mianyan                                                       1996
    5201   Guiyang                                                       1996
    5301   Kunming                                                       1996
    6101   Xi'an                                                         1996          2004
    6103   Baoji                                                         1997
    6104   Xianyang                                                      2002
    6201   Lanzhou                                                       1996
    6301   Xining                               2005
    6501   Urumqi                               1996                     1997


Note: Cities that did not have any policy zone between 1996 and 2005 are not listed.




                                                 32
Appendix Table 3: Chinese cities included in the sample used in regressions (238 in total)
Code   City Name      Province            Code    City Name    Province   Code     City Name     Province
1100   Beijing        Beijing              3404   Huainan      Anhui        4313   Huaihua       Hunan
1200   Tianjin        Tianjin              3405   Maanshang    Anhui        4401   Guangzhou     Guangdong
1301   Shijiazhuang   Hebei                3406   Huaibei      Anhui        4402   Shaoguan      Guangdong
1302   Tangshan       Hebei                3407   Tongling     Anhui        4403   Shenzhen      Guangdong
1303   Qinhuangdao    Hebei                3408   Anqing       Anhui        4404   Zhuhai        Guangdong
1304   Handan         Hebei                3409   Huangshan    Anhui        4405   Shantou       Guangdong
1305   Xingtai        Hebei                3410   Fuyang       Anhui        4406   Foshan        Guangdong
1306   Baoding        Hebei                3411   Suxian       Anhui        4407   Jiangmen      Guangdong
1307   Zhangjiakou    Hebei                3412   Chuxian      Anhui        4408   Zhanjiang     Guangdong
1308   Chongde        Hebei                3413   Liuan        Anhui        4409   Maoming       Guangdong
1309   Changzhou      Hebei                3414   Xuancheng    Anhui        4412   Zhaoqing      Guangdong
1310   Langfang       Hebei                3415   Chaohu       Anhui        4413   Huizhou       Guangdong
1401   Taiyuan        Shanxi               3416   Chizhou      Anhui        4414   Meizhou       Guangdong
1402   Datong         Shanxi               3502   Xiamen       Fujian       4415   Shanwei       Guangdong
1403   Yangquan       Shanxi               3503   Putian       Fujian       4416   Heyuan        Guangdong
1404   Changzhi       Shanxi               3504   Sanming      Fujian       4417   Yangjiang     Guangdong
1405   Jincheng       Shanxi               3505   Quanzhou     Fujian       4418   Qingyuan      Guangdong
1406   Suozhou        Shanxi               3506   Zhangzhou    Fujian       4419   Dongguan      Guangdong
1410   Jinzhong       Shanxi               3507   Nanpin       Fujian       4420   Zhongshan     Guangdong
1501   Hohhot         Inner Mongolia AR    3509   Longyian     Fujian       4421   Chaozhou      Guangdong
1502   Baotou         Inner Mongolia AR    3601   Nanchang     Jiangxi      4424   Jieyang       Guangdong
1503   Wuhai          Inner Mongolia AR    3602   Jingdezhen   Jiangxi      4501   Nanning       Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
1504   Chifeng        Inner Mongolia AR    3603   Pingxiang    Jiangxi      4502   Liuzhou       Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
1507   Holunbeir      Inner Mongolia AR    3604   Jiujiang     Jiangxi      4503   Guilin        Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
2101   Shenyang       Liaoning             3605   Xingyu       Jiangxi      4504   Wuzhou        Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
2102   Dalian         Liaoning             3606   Yingtan      Jiangxi      4505   Beihai        Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
2103   Anshan         Liaoning             3607   Ganzhou      Jiangxi      4507   Baise         Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
2104   Fushen         Liaoning             3611   Fuzhou       Jiangxi      4508   Hechi         Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
2105   Benxi          Liaoning             3701   Jinan        Shandong     4509   Qinzhou       Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
2106   Dandong        Liaoning             3702   Qingdao      Shandong     4516   Hezhou Area   Guangxi Zhuan
                                                                                                 AR
2107   Jinzhou        Liaoning             3703   Zibo         Shandong     4601   Haikou        Hainan
2108   Yingkou        Liaoning             3704   Zaozhuang    Shandong     4602   Sanya         Hainan
2109   Fuxin          Liaoning             3705   Dongying     Shandong     5000   Chongqing     Chongqing
2110   Liaoyang       Liaoning             3706   Yantai       Shandong     5101   Chengdu       Sichuan
2111   Panjin         Liaoning             3707   Weifang      Shandong     5103   Zigong        Sichuan
2112   Tieling        Liaoning             3708   Jining       Shandong     5104   Panzhihua     Sichuan
2113   Chaoyang       Liaoning             3709   Taian        Shandong     5105   Luzhou        Sichuan
2201   Changchun      JiIin                3710   Weihai       Shandong     5106   Deyang        Sichuan
2202   Jilin          JiIin                3711   Rizhao       Shandong     5107   Mianyan       Sichuan
2203   Sipin          JiIin                3713   Dezhou       Shandong     5108   Guangyuan     Sichuan
2204   Liaoyuan       JiIin                3714   Liaochen     Shandong     5109   Suining       Sichuan




                                                         33
2205   Tonghua        JiIin         3715   Linyi        Shandong   5110   Neijiang     Sichuan
2209   Baicheng       JiIin         3720   Laiwu        Shandong   5111   Leshan       Sichuan
2301   Harbin         Heilongjing   4101   Zhengzhou    Henan      5114   Yibin        Sichuan
2302   Qiqihar        Heilongjing   4102   Kaifeng      Henan      5115   Nanchong     Sichuan
2303   Jixi           Heilongjing   4103   Luoyang      Henan      5116   Daxian       Sichuan
2304   Hegang         Heilongjing   4104   Pindinshan   Henan      5201   Guiyang      Guizhou
2305   Shuangyashan   Heilongjing   4105   Anyang       Henan      5202   Liupanshan   Guizhou
2306   Daqing         Heilongjing   4106   Hebi         Henan      5203   Zunyi        Guizhou
2307   Yichun         Heilongjing   4107   Xinxiang     Henan      5301   Kunming      Yunnan
2308   Jiamusi        Heilongjing   4108   Jiaozhuo     Henan      5303   Zhaotong     Yunnan
2309   Qitaiher       Heilongjing   4109   Puyang       Henan      5304   Qujing       Yunnan
2310   Mudanjiang     Heilongjing   4110   Xuchang      Henan      5306   Yuxi         Yunnan
2311   Heihe          Heilongjing   4111   Luohe        Henan      5314   Lijiang      Yunnan
3100   ShanghaiCY     Shanghai CY   4112   Sanmenxia    Henan      6101   Xi'an        Shanxi
3201   Nanjing        Jiangsu       4113   Shangqiu     Henan      6102   Tongzhou     Shanxi
3202   Wuxi           Jiangsu       4116   Nanyang      Henan      6103   Baoji        Shanxi
3203   Xuzhou         Jiangsu       4117   Xinyang      Henan      6104   Xianyang     Shanxi
3204   Changzhou      Jiangsu       4201   Wuhan        Hubei      6105   Weinan       Shanxi
3206   Nantong        Jiangsu       4202   Huangshi     Hubei      6106   Hanzhong     Shanxi
3207   Lianyungang    Jiangsu       4203   Shiyan       Hubei      6108   Shangluo     Shanxi
3208   Huaiyin        Jiangsu       4205   Yichang      Hubei      6109   Yanan        Shanxi
3209   Yancheng       Jiangsu       4206   Xiangfan     Hubei      6110   Yulin        Shanxi
3210   Yangzhou       Jiangsu       4207   Ezhou        Hubei      6201   Lanzhou      Gansu
3211   Zhenjiang      Jiangsu       4208   Jingmen      Hubei      6202   Jiayuguan    Gansu
3217   Suqian         Jiangsu       4209   Huanggang    Hubei      6203   Jinchang     Gansu
3301   Hangzhou       Zhejiang      4210   Xiaogan      Hubei      6204   Baiyin       Gansu
3302   Ningbo         Zhejiang      4211   Xianning     Hubei      6205   Tianshiu     Gansu
3303   Wenzhou        Zhejiang      4212   Jingzhou     Hubei      6206   Jiuquan      Gansu
3304   Jiaxing        Zhejiang      4301   Changsha     Hunan      6207   Zhangye      Gansu
3305   Huzhou         Zhejiang      4302   Zhuzhou      Hunan      6208   Wuwei        Gansu
3306   Shaoxing       Zhejiang      4303   Xiangtan     Hunan      6211   Pinliang     Gansu
3307   Jinhua         Zhejiang      4304   Hengyang     Hunan      6212   Qingyang     Gansu
3308   Quzhou         Zhejiang      4305   Shaoyang     Hunan      6301   Xining       Qinghai
3309   Zhoushan       Zhejiang      4306   Yueyang      Hunan      6401   Yinchuan     Ningxia Hui AR
3311   Taizhou        Zhejiang      4307   Changde      Hunan      6402   Shizuishan   Ningxia Hui AR
3401   Hefei          Anhui         4309   Yiyang       Hunan      6501   Urumqi       Xinjiang AR
3402   Wuhu           Anhui         4310   Loudi        Hunan      6502   Kelamayi     Xinjiang AR
3403   Bangbu         Anhui         4311   Chenzhou     Hunan




                                                  34
Appendix Table 4: HS products excluded from export data
HS Code   Description                                HS Code   Description
01-24     Agricultural products                      25-27     Mineral products
4103      Other raw hides and skins (fresh, o        8002      Tin waste and scrap.
4104      Tanned or crust hides and skins of         8101      Tungsten (wolfram) and articles the
4105      Tanned or crust skins of sheep or l        8102      Molybdenum and articles thereof, in
4106      Tanned or crust hides and skins of         8103      Tantalum and articles thereof, incl
4402      Wood charcoal (including shell or n        8104      Magnesium and articles thereof, inc
4403      Wood in the rough, whether or not s        8105      Cobalt mattes and other intermediate
7201      Pig iron and spiegeleisen in pigs,         8106      Bismuth and articles thereof, inclu
7202      Ferro-alloys.                              8107      Cadmium and articles thereof, inclu
7204      Ferrous waste and scrap; remelting         8108      Titanium and articles thereof, incl
7404      Copper waste and scrap.                    8109      Zirconium and articles thereof, inc
7501      Nickel mattes, nickel oxide sinters        8110      Antimony and articles thereof, incl
7502      Unwrought nickel.                          8111      Manganese and articles thereof, inc
7503      Nickel waste and scrap.                    8112      Beryllium, chromium, germanium, van
7601      Unwrought aluminium.                       8113      Cermets and articles thereof, inclu
7602      Aluminium waste and scrap.                 9701      Paintings, drawings and pastels, ex
7801      Unwrought lead.                            9702      Original engravings, prints and lit
7802      Lead waste and scrap.                      9703      Original sculptures and statuary, i
7901      Unwrought zinc.                            9704      Postage or revenue stamps, stamp-po
7902      Zinc waste and scrap.                      9705      Collections and collectors' pieces
8001      Unwrought tin.                             9706      Antiques of an age exceeding one hundred years
530521    Coconut, abaca (Manila hemp or Musa        811252    Beryllium, chromium, germanium, van




                                                35
Appendix Table 5: correlation matrix for key variables (all firms)
                                             Export          GMP per    GMP (in   Share of   Share of   Student         Share of       Share of     Share of non-    Share of
                                             Dissimilarity   capita     logged)   joint      FIE firm   Enrollment in   processing     processing   processing       Export
                                             Index           (logged)             venture    exports    Colleges and    exports        exports in   exports in the   Processing
                                             logged)                              firm                  Universities    outside        the two      two High-        Zone
                                                                                  exports               as a Share of   policy zones   High-tech    tech Zones
                                                                                                        Non-                           Zones
                                                                                                        Agricultural
                                                                                                        Population
Export Dissimilarity Index (in log)             1.00
GMP per capita (logged)                         -0.61          1.00
GMP (logged)                                    -0.72          0.62       1.00
Share of joint venture firm exports             -0.13          0.09       0.12      1.00
Share of FIE firm exports                       -0.35          0.26       0.23      0.05        1.00
Student Enrollment in Colleges and              -0.47          0.41       0.49      -0.06       0.03        1.00
Universities as a Share of Non-
Agricultural Population

Share of processing exports outside policy      -0.20          0.08       0.05       0.40       0.33        -0.12           1.00
zones
Share of processing exports in the two          -0.47          0.32       0.34       0.09       0.43        0.19            0.03          1.00
High-tech Zones
Share of non-processing exports in the two      -0.40          0.30       0.35       0.05       0.14        0.30           -0.03          0.42          1.00
High-tech Zones
Share of Export Processing Zone                 -0.27          0.18       0.19       0.02       0.14        0.16            0.00          0.19          0.27            1.00




                                                                                        36
Appendix Table 6. Correlation matrix for key variables, unit value (all firms)
                                       Unit Value      Share of       Share of FIE    Share of       Share of       Share of non-    Share of       Share of       Share of
                                       of City         Joint          firm exports    processing     processing     processing       Export         SOE exports    Collective
                                       Exports (in     Venture firm                   exports        exports in     exports in the   Processing                    and Private
                                       log)            exports                        outside        the two        two High-        Zone                          firm exports
                                                                                      policy zones   High-tech      tech Zones
                                                                                                     Zones
Unit Value of City Exports (in log)            1.00
Share of Joint Venture firm exports            0.03            1.00
Share of FIE firm exports                      0.01           -0.07           1.00
Share of processing exports outside            0.01            0.29           0.30            1.00
policy zones
Share of processing exports in the             0.05            0.10           0.19           -0.01          1.00
two High-tech Zones
Share of non-processing exports in             0.05            0.04           0.05           -0.06          0.02             1.00
the two High-tech Zones
Share of Export Processing Zone                 0.01           0.00           0.06            0.00           0.00             0.00           1.00
Share of SOE exports                           -0.01          -0.52          -0.43           -0.30          -0.14            -0.05          -0.03          1.00
Share of Collective and Private firm           -0.03          -0.13          -0.11           -0.10          -0.04            -0.01           0.00          -0.57           1.00
exports




                                                                                     37
          Appendix Table 7: What explains cross-city export structure?
          EDI and ESI in levels as dependent variables
Explanatory Variables                                 Export Dissimilarity Index (EDI)                       Exports Similarity Index (ESI)
                                                (1)             (2)          (3)       (4)             (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a Share    -45.89***       -50.98***       -46.02***   -51.63***   22.94***     25.49***    23.01***   25.81***
of Total City Exports
                                              (9.01)           (6.62)         (8.58)      (6.54)      (4.50)        (3.31)     (4.29)      (3.27)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones as a   -10.73***       -11.49***       -11.22***   -12.16***   5.36***       5.75***    5.61***     6.08***
Share of Total City Exports
                                              (2.88)           (3.34)         (2.82)      (3.27)      (1.44)        (1.67)     (1.41)      (1.64)
Non-processing exports in High-tech Zones    -14.70**        -18.24**        -15.88**    -19.47**     7.35**       9.12**      7.94**     9.73**
as a Share of Total City Exports
                                              (7.37)           (8.72)         (7.35)      (8.65)      (3.68)        (4.36)     (3.68)      (4.33)
Processing exports outside economic zones     0.956*           0.725           0.722       0.445     -0.478*       -0.363      -0.361     -0.222
as a Share of Total City Exports
                                              (0.533)         (0.533)         (0.523)     (0.524)    (0.266)       (0.267)     (0.261)    (0.262)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of        -36.93***                       -37.60***               18.46***                 18.80***
Higher Education as a Share of the City
Non-Agricultural Population                   (11.40)                         (11.35)                 (5.70)                   (5.67)
GMP per capita                                                -1.04**                    -1.15***                  0.520**               0.575***
                                                              (0.425)                     (0.436)                  (0.213)                (0.218)
Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP)              -0.443*        -0.467**        -0.495**    -0.520**     0.222*       0.234**    0.248**     0.260**
                                              (0.233)         (0.236)         (0.242)     (0.243)    (0.117)       (0.118)     (0.121)    (0.122)
Foreign-invested firms’ share in city                                          0.465       0.839                               -0.233     -0.419
exports
                                                                              (0.989)     (1.018)                              (0.494)    (0.509)
Joint venture firms’ share in city exports                                   1.91***     1.95***                             -0.953***   -0.976***
                                                                              (0.68)      (0.69)                               (0.34)     (0.345)
City Fixed Effects                              Y               Y               Y           Y          Y             Y          Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                              Y               Y               Y           Y          Y             Y          Y           Y
Robust (clustered by city)                      Y               Y               Y           Y          Y             Y          Y           Y
Observations                                   1981            1981            1981        1981       1981          1981       1981        1981
R-squared                                      0.98            0.98            0.98        0.98       0.98          0.98       0.98        0.98


          Note: Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                        38
          Appendix Table 8: What explains cross-city export structure, excluding city fixed
          effects? (log(EDI) as the dependent variable)
Explanatory Variables                                        Yearly benchmark                                   2004 benchmark
                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)            (8)
Export Processing Zone Exports as a Share of     -1.139***   -1.101***     -1.049***   -1.044***   -1.208***   -1.175***   -1.120***   -1.119***
Total City Exports
                                                  (0.271)     (0.261)       (0.26)      (0.256)     (0.269)     (0.253)     (0.258)     (0.247)
Processing exports in High-tech Zones as a       -0.234***   -0.200***     -0.179***   -0.165***   -0.215***   -0.182***   -0.160***   -0.148***
Share of Total City Exports
                                                  (0.055)     (0.059)       (0.055)     (0.059)     (0.051)     (0.055)     (0.051)     (0.054)
Non-processing exports in High-tech Zones as a     -0.15      -0.198        -0.169      -0.216      -0.143      -0.192      -0.161      -0.209
Share of Total City Exports
                                                  (0.191)     (0.185)       (0.193)     (0.186)     (0.17)      (0.168)     (0.172)     (0.169)
Processing exports outside economic zones as a   -0.047***   -0.036***     -0.037***   -0.032***   -0.044***   -0.032***   -0.034***   -0.029***
Share of Total City Exports
                                                  (0.012)     (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.01)      (0.011)     (0.01)
Student Enrollment in Institutions of Higher     -0.741***                 -0.787***               -0.733***               -0.779***
Education as a Share of the City Non-
Agricultural Population                           (0.149)                   (0.151)                 (0.138)                 (0.14)
GMP per capita                                               -0.027***                 -0.027***               -0.026***               -0.025***
                                                              (0.006)                   (0.006)                 (0.006)                 (0.006)
Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP)                 -0.039***   -0.035***     -0.038***   -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.034***   -0.036***   -0.034***
                                                  (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
Foreign-invested firms’ share in city exports                              -0.066***   -0.043**                            -0.064***   -0.043**
                                                                            (0.019)     (0.019)                             (0.018)     (0.018)
Joint venture firms’ share in city exports                                   0.007       0.015                               0.006       0.013
                                                                            (0.011)     (0.01)                              (0.01)      (0.01)
City Fixed Effects                                  N           N             N           N           N           N           N           N
Year Fixed Effects                                  Y           Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
Robust (clustered by city)                          Y           Y             Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
Observations                                       1981        1981          1981        1981        1981        1981        1981        1981
R-squared                                          0.66        0.67          0.67        0.67        0.67        0.67        0.68        0.68


          Note: Standard errors given in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
          at 1%.




                                                                      39
