                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ELECTRICITY PRICING TO U.S. MANUFACTURING PLANTS, 1963-2000

                                             Steven J. Davis
                                              Cheryl Grim
                                            John Haltiwanger
                                            Mary Streitwieser

                                          Working Paper 13778
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13778


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2008


University of Chicago, NBER and American Enterprise Institute; Bureau of the Census; University
of Maryland, Bureau of the Census and NBER; and Bureau of Economic Analysis, respectively. The
analysis and results in this paper are attributable to the authors and do not necessarily reflect concurrence
by the U.S. Bureau of the Census, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the U.S. Department of Commerce,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This work is unofficial and has not undergone the review
accorded to official Census Bureau publications. All results were reviewed to ensure confidentiality.
We thank Wayne Gray, Eddie Lazear, Catherine Wolfram, colleagues at the Berkeley Energy Group,
Center for Economic Studies at the Census Bureau, Penn State, Tokyo University, University of Chicago,
the July 2004 NBER Conference on Research in Income and Wealth and the 2005 Western Economic
Association International Conference for many helpful comments. We are especially grateful to Rodney
Dunn for comments and assistance with the EIA-861 data files. Davis and Haltiwanger gratefully acknowledge
research support from the U.S. National Science Foundation under grant number SBR-9730667. Davis
also acknowledges research support from the Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the
State at the University of Chicago.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Steven J. Davis, Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger, and Mary Streitwieser. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Electricity Pricing to U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-2000
Steven J. Davis, Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger, and Mary Streitwieser
NBER Working Paper No. 13778
February 2008
JEL No. L60,L94,Q40

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a large customer-level database to study electricity pricing to U.S. manufacturing plants
from 1963 to 2000. We document tremendous dispersion in price per kWh, trace that dispersion to
quantity discounts and spatial differentials, estimate the role of cost factors in quantity discounts, and
test whether marginal price schedules conform to marginal cost and Ramsey pricing conditions. Our
cost analysis and pricing tests rely on a novel empirical approach that exploits utility-level differences
in the customer size distribution to estimate how supply costs vary with purchase quantity.

The results reveal that annual supply costs per kWh fall by more than half in moving from smaller
to bigger purchasers, providing a clear cost-based rationale for quantity discounts. Before the mid
1970s, marginal price and marginal cost schedules are nearly identical, in line with efficient pricing.
In later years, marginal supply costs exceed marginal prices for smaller manufacturing customers by
10% or more. In contrast to a clear role for cost factors, our evidence provides no support for a standard
Ramsey-pricing interpretation of quantity discounts. Spatial dispersion in retail electricity prices among
states, counties and utility service territories is large and rises over time for smaller purchasers.


Steven J. Davis                                     John Haltiwanger
Graduate School of Business                         Department of Economics
The University of Chicago                           University of Maryland
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                          College Park, MD 20742
Chicago, IL 60637                                   and NBER
and NBER                                            haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu
                                                    Mary Streitwieser
Cheryl Grim                                         Industry Benchmark Division
US Census Bureau                                    Bureau of Economic Analysis
Center for Economic Studies                         1441 L Street, N.W.
4600 Silver Hill Road                               Mail Stop 51
Washington, DC 20233                                Washington, DC 20230
Cheryl.Ann.Grim@census.gov                          mary.streitwieser@bea.gov
1. Introduction

         Longstanding concerns and recent developments have combined to intensify

interest in the performance of the U.S. electric power industry. These include persistent

regional disparities in retail prices, growth in wholesale power markets, a wave of

restructuring and deregulation initiatives in the 1990s, difficulties in the transition to a

more competitive electricity sector, and, perhaps most spectacularly, the California

electricity crisis of 2000-2001.1 Despite these concerns and developments, we lack broad

empirical studies of electricity prices paid by end users, and there are major gaps in our

knowledge of retail pricing patterns and their evolution over time. These gaps hamper

efforts to place recent developments in historical perspective, to evaluate the impact of

regulatory changes on electricity users, and to assess theories of public utility pricing.

         To help address these issues, we construct a rich micro database – Prices and

Quantities of Electricity in Manufacturing (PQEM) – and use it to study electricity

pricing to U.S. manufacturing plants from 1963 to 2000. The PQEM includes data on

electricity expenditures, purchases (watt-hours) and other variables for more than 48,000

manufacturing plants per year, linked to additional data on the utilities that supply

electricity. Our customer-level data are limited to manufacturers, but they are informative

about pricing practices for a broader class that includes other industrial customers and

large and mid-size commercial customers.2


1
  Hirsh (1999), EIA (2000), Besanko et al. (2001), Borenstein (2002), and Joskow (2005), among others,
describe and analyze these matters. Joskow and Schmalensee (1983) anticipate many of the pitfalls and
challenges that have confronted reform efforts in the electricity sector.
2
  We inspected electricity tariffs for several utilities and found that they offered the same menu of
electricity pricing terms to manufacturers, other industrial customers, and large and mid-size commercial
customers. In addition, average electricity prices for the manufacturing sector behave similarly to average
prices for the industrial sector as a whole, as we show below. Industrial purchasers account for 45% of
retail electricity sales (watt-hours) in 1963 and 31% in 2000 (EIA, 2003a, Table 8.5). In turn,
manufacturing plants account for the lion’s share of electricity purchases by the industrial sector.


                                                     1
         Figure 1 displays several measures of dispersion in the distribution of log

electricity prices from 1963 to 2000.3 The price measure is the ratio of the plant’s annual

expenditures on purchased electricity to its annual purchases (watt-hours). The figure

shows purchase-weighted and shipments-weighted price distributions, where the former

weights each plant-level observation by watt-hours of electricity purchases, and the latter

weights by output as measured by shipments.4 As seen in Figure 1, there is tremendous

dispersion in the electricity prices paid by manufacturing plants. The purchase-weighted

standard deviation exceeds 38% in all years and reaches 55% in some years. By way of

comparison, the hours-weighted standard deviation of log hourly production worker

wages among manufacturing plants in the PQEM ranges from 39% to 43% between 1975

and 1993.5 In other words, the dispersion in electricity prices among manufacturing

plants is at least as great as the dispersion in their average hourly wages.

         Figure 1 also reveals that the log price distribution underwent a great compression

from 1967 to the late 1970s.6 The between-plant standard deviation fell from 55% in

1967 to 44% in 1979 on a purchase-weighted basis and from 47% to 35% on a

shipments-weighted basis. Over the same time frame, the 90-10 price differential shrank

by about 37 log points under both weighting methods. The 90-10 differential later


3
  The natural log transformation is convenient for characterizing the magnitude of price differences and
price dispersion. In addition, electricity transmission over power lines and the process of transforming
voltage levels involve costs in the form of electrical energy dissipated as heat energy. The dissipation of
electrical energy rises with transmission distance, other things equal, so that spatial price differentials are
aptly described in log terms. For these reasons, we often consider log price differentials in this paper, but
we also consider prices measured in natural units.
4
  These weighting methods mirror the use of input-weighted and output-weighted distributions in studies
that quantify between-plant and within-plant components of productivity growth. Examples include Foster
et al. (2001) and van Biesebroeck (2004).
5
  The PQEM lacks clean measures of hourly wages before 1975 or after 1993. See Davis and Haltiwanger
(1991) for a detailed study of between-plant wage dispersion in the U.S. manufacturing sector.
6
  The temporary widening of dispersion in the mid 1970s reflects the 1973-74 oil price shock and
differences among state public utility commissions in how rapidly they moved to approve higher electricity
tariffs. In later years, automatic fuel price adjustment clauses came into widespread use in tariff schedules.


                                                       2
widened but never returned to the peaks of the 1960s. To the best of our knowledge, we

are the first to quantify the remarkable extent of electricity price dispersion for a major

end-user group and the first to document the great compression that played out by the late

1970s.

         We show below that the great compression episode reflects a sharp erosion of

quantity discounts. On a purchase-weighted basis, the average elasticity of price with

respect to a plant’s annual purchase quantity shrank from -22% in 1967 to about -9% in

the late 1970s, partially recovering after the mid 1980s. Because the range of electricity

purchases among manufacturers is enormous, these elasticities translate into very large

price differentials. For example, prices for the biggest purchasers were two-thirds below

the median price in the 1960s. Plant-level differences in purchase amounts account for

75% of overall price dispersion among manufacturers in 1963 but only 30% by 1978.

         Quantity discounts in the form of declining-block tariffs are a well-known feature

of retail electricity pricing for industrial and commercial customers and a sometimes

contentious topic in ratemaking proceedings and legislative hearings.7 They are also the

object of careful analysis in theoretical treatments of nonlinear pricing (e.g., Wilson,

1993) and public utility pricing in particular (e.g., Brown and Sibley, 1986). Insofar as

the cost of supplying electric power declines with a customer’s purchase quantity, an

efficient two-part tariff or other marginal-cost pricing scheme requires quantity discounts.

If demand is also more elastic at higher purchase levels, Ramsey pricing by a revenue-




7
 Cudahy and Malko (1976) discuss quantity discounts and other aspects of rate design from the perspective
of public utility regulators in a prominent case involving the Madison Gas & Electric Company. Hirsh
(1999) recounts the political struggles over federal legislative efforts to reform rate-making practices,
efforts that culminated in the Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act (PURPA) of 1978, a major
component of President Carter’s National Energy Plan.


                                                   3
constrained public utility entails lower markups for bigger customers and, hence, is

another potential explanation for quantity discounts.

        These cost and demand determinants of quantity discounts are well understood as

a matter of theory, but their importance in practice is unclear. Brown and Sibley (1986)

and Borenstein and Holland (2003), for example, argue that the approach to rate setting

by electric utilities and their regulators, and the resulting tariff schedules, do not seem

well designed to achieve efficient pricing. Moreover, previous research offers no

quantitative, theoretically grounded explanation for the sharp erosion in quantity

discounts. To address these matters, we propose and implement a novel method for

estimating the contribution of cost factors and price markups to quantity discounts. In

particular, we exploit the considerable variation across electric utilities in the size

distribution of customer purchases to estimate how supply costs per watt-hour vary with

customer purchase quantities. The results reveal that supply costs fall by more than half

in moving from smaller to bigger purchasers. This pattern holds throughout the past four

decades, providing a clear cost-based rationale for quantity discounts.

        We use the estimated price and supply cost schedules to construct marginal prices

and marginal costs with respect to customer purchase quantity. Comparing the marginal

schedules, we find no support for the Ramsey-pricing view that quantity discounts reflect

smaller markups for more elastic demanders. However, the evidence is highly consistent

with marginal cost pricing in the early years of our sample. Indeed, marginal price

schedules are nearly identical to marginal cost schedules before the mid 1970s. In the

upper half of the customer purchase distribution, they are nearly identical from 1967 to

2000. Among smaller manufacturing customers, however, the pricing structure begins to




                                               4
deviate from efficiency after 1973. From 1981 onwards, marginal supply costs for

smaller manufacturing customers exceed marginal prices by 10% or more.

       We also consider the dispersion in average electricity prices among states,

counties and utility service territories. We show that spatial price differentials are large,

and that they display three interesting and somewhat surprising time-series patterns. First,

in the lower deciles of the purchases distribution, spatial price dispersion widened over

time. Second, and in glaring contrast, spatial price dispersion in the top deciles of the

purchases distribution fell sharply from the 1960s to the late 1980s. Third, in the 1990s –

when wholesale power markets grew rapidly – spatial price dispersion at the retail level

did not diminish and even rose modestly over much of the purchases distribution.

       The next section describes the PQEM database. Section 3 quantifies the

dispersion of electricity prices between and within industries, states, counties, utilities,

and purchase size classes. Section 4 discusses cost and demand influences on electricity

pricing, describes key features of electricity tariffs, and develops evidence on electricity

price-quantity schedules. Section 5 considers behavioral responses by customers that

contribute to a negative relationship between electricity price and purchase quantity.

Section 6 estimates supply costs as a function of customer purchase levels, then applies

the supply schedules to evaluate whether cost factors can explain quantity discounts and

their evolution over time. Section 7 investigates whether marginal price schedules

comport with efficient pricing and Ramsey pricing. Section 8 summarizes our main

findings and identifies directions for future research.




                                               5
2. The PQEM Database

         The PQEM database derives principally from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Annual

Survey of Manufactures (ASM) and various files produced by the Energy Information

Administration (EIA). We draw our data on electricity prices and quantities and other

variables for individual manufacturing plants from ASM micro files for 1963, 1967, and

1972-2000. The ASM is a series of nationally representative, five-year panels refreshed

by births as a panel ages. Large manufacturing plants with at least 250 employees are

sampled with certainty, and smaller plants with at least 5 employees are sampled

randomly with probabilities that increase with the number of employees.8 ASM plants

account for about one-sixth of all manufacturing plants and about three-quarters of

manufacturing employment. Our statistics make use of ASM sample weights, so that our

results are nationally representative.

         ASM plants report expenditures for purchased electricity during the calendar year

and annual purchases (kWh). As mentioned above, we calculate the plant-level price as

expenditures on purchased electricity divided by quantity purchased. The ASM also

contains county and state codes that help to assign manufacturing plants to electricity

suppliers. As described in a companion paper (Davis et al., 2007b), we identified and

resolved several issues with ASM electricity price and quantity measures in the course of

preparing this study. We also cross-checked the ASM data against the Manufacturing

Energy Consumption Survey, another plant-level data source at the U.S. Bureau of the

Census that relies on a different survey.


8
  The number of employees required to be a certainty case is lower in 1963 and 1967. In 1963, all plants in
a multi-plant firm with 100 or more employees were sampled with certainty. The same was true in 1967
except for plants in apparel (SIC 23) and printing and publishing (SIC 27), which had certainty thresholds
of 250 employees.


                                                     6
         We merged ASM plants to their electricity suppliers using a variety of sources,

The Annual Electric Utility Reports, also known as the EIA-861 files, include each

utility’s revenue from sales to industrial customers (by state) and a list of the counties in

which the utility has industrial customers. The EIA-861 files provide an immediate match

to the utility for plants in counties served by a single utility. For many states, we are able

to supplement the EIA-861 files with Geographic Information System (GIS) maps, a list

of zip codes served by each utility or printed maps showing utility service territories.

These supplemental sources of information enable us to construct accurate matches for

counties served by more than one utility. We have some form of supplemental

information for 18 states, accounting for 49% of electricity purchases and 54% of

manufacturing shipments. For plants in states without this supplemental information, we

created a “best match” utility indicator using the method described in Appendix A.

         We also exploit publicly available information on the identity of those plants that

purchase electricity directly from the six largest public power authorities.9 Direct

purchasers from public power authorities typically consume large quantities of electricity,

and they often accept high-voltage power, operate their own transformers, and obtain

electric power at heavily discounted rates. While few in number, these direct purchasers

account for a large fraction of electricity purchases in some counties, and they constitute

a distinct segment of the retail electricity market. We identified between 56 and 93 direct

purchasers from public power authorities per year.




9
 They are the Tennessee Valley Authority, Bonneville Power Administration, Santee Cooper, New York
Power Authority, Grand River Dam Authority, and Colorado River Commission of Nevada. Fourteen
public power authorities supplied electricity directly to industrial customers in 2000, but the six largest
accounted for nearly 98% of the revenues from direct sales to industrial customers (EIA-861 file).


                                                      7
        Finally, we incorporated the State Energy Data 2000 files into the PQEM.10 These

files include annual data on fuel sources used for electricity generation by state from

1960 to 2000. We construct annual state-level fuel shares in electric power generation for

the following five categories: coal, petroleum and natural gas, hydropower, nuclear

power, and other (includes geothermal, wind, wood and waste, photovoltaic, and solar).

        Table 1 reports selected characteristics of the PQEM. The database contains more

than 1.8 million plant-level observations over the period from 1963 to 2000. There are

3,031 counties with manufacturing plants and 697 utilities, counting multi-state utilities

once for each state in which they sell to industrial customers. The table shows that

electricity purchases and cost shares vary enormously across manufacturing plants. For

example, the 90th quantile of the purchases distribution is 381 times the 10th quantile on a

shipments-weighted basis and 739 times on a purchase-weighted basis. The median ratio

of electricity costs to labor costs is 4.7% on a shipments-weighted basis and 17.2% on a

purchase-weighted basis. While electricity costs are a modest percentage of labor costs

for most plants, the top quartile (decile) of purchasers have labor costs that exceed 62%

(201%) of labor costs. In other words, a large fraction of electricity is purchased by plants

for which electric power is a primary or major cost of production.


3. Electricity Price Dispersion

        After trending down for nearly a century, real electricity prices began to rise after

1973. They continued to rise for about ten years, before resuming the historical pattern

of steady declines. See Figure 2, which shows that these broad trends held for all major



10
  This data is from the State Energy Data System (SEDS) on the Energy Information Administration
Internet site, http://www.eia.doe.gov.


                                                  8
end-user groups.11 We discuss the market, technological, regulatory and other factors

behind these broad trends in an earlier working paper version of this study (Davis et al.,

2007a). Here, we focus on price dispersion among manufacturing customers.

            To decompose the variance of log electricity prices into within-group and

between-group components (industry, region, etc.), write the overall variance as

                              V = ∑ s e ( p e − p ) = ∑∑ s e ( p e − p )
                                                    2                        2

                                     e                      g e∈g

                                         ⎛                    2⎞
                              V = ∑ s g ⎜⎜ ∑ s e ( p e − p g ) ⎟⎟ + ∑ s g ( p g − p )
                                                                                     2
                                                                                                            (1)
                                  g      ⎝ e∈g                  ⎠ g
                              V = ∑ s gV gW + V B = V W + V B
                                     g



where pe is the log price of electricity for plant e, se is the weight for plant e, p is the

overall weighted mean log price, p g is the weighted mean log price for group g,

sg = ∑ se is the sum of weights for plants in group g, VgW is the weighted variance within
      e∈g



group g, and V B is the between-group variance. Table 2 reports the shipments-weighted

version of (1) and its components for selected years, with se set to the product of the

plant’s ASM sample weight and its shipments value. Table 3 reports analogous purchase-

weighted statistics.

            According to Table 2, the shipments-weighted standard deviation of log

electricity prices across manufacturing plants stood at 47% in 1967, fell sharply to 37%

by 1977, and then changed little over the next 23 years. Price dispersion also fell sharply


11
  The electricity price series in Figure 2 for the residential, commercial and industrial sectors are from the
Energy Information Administration (EIA), and the two series for the manufacturing sector are constructed
from the PQEM. The EIA data rely on reports from electric utilities, and the PQEM data rely on reports
from electricity customers (manufacturing plants). EIA prices are calculated as revenue from retail
electricity sales divided by kilowatt hours delivered to retail customers. Real prices are calculated using the
BEA implicit price deflator for GDP (1996 = 100). In the EIA data, the industrial sector encompasses
manufacturing, mining, construction and agriculture.


                                                        9
on a purchase-weighted basis (Table 3), from 55% in 1967 to 43% in 1977 and then

further in the 1990s to stand at 38% in 2000. Following a similar path, the between-

industry dispersion of electricity prices fell rapidly through 1982 and to even lower levels

in the 1990s on a purchase-weighted basis. All told, the purchase-weighted dispersion of

industry prices fell by almost half over the past four decades.

         Tables 2 and 3 also document several other facts. First, spatial price differentials

are large. County effects, for example, never account for less than 65% of the overall

price variance on a purchase-weighted basis. Second, customer groups defined by

electricity purchase quantities also account for a high percentage of overall price

dispersion, especially in the 1960s.12 Price dispersion among purchase-level groups fell

by nearly half during our sample period, mostly between 1967 and 1977. Third, purchase

level and utility jointly account for a high percentage of price dispersion throughout the

past four decades. Groups defined by utility crossed with purchase deciles account for 71-

90% of the overall purchase-weighted basis price variance.

         Spatial price dispersion declined sharply over time on a purchase-weighted basis

but rose on a shipments-weighted basis. Focusing on counties, the purchase-weighted

standard deviation fell by nearly one-third from 1963 to 2000, while the analogous

shipments-weighted measure rose by one-fifth. Closer examination of the data reveals

that spatial price dispersion fell dramatically in the top decile of the purchases

distribution (more heavily weighted in Table 3), but it rose in the bottom five deciles

(more heavily weighted in Table 2). We highlight this pattern in Figure 3, which shows

the evolution of spatial price dispersion for three selected deciles. To control for purchase


12
   We group plants by where they fit into the distribution of electricity purchases in the indicated year,
allowing the decile and centile boundaries to vary over time.


                                                      10
quantity differences within deciles, we construct Figure 3 using residuals from annual

customer-level regressions of log price on a polynomial in log purchases. As seen in

Figure 3, there is an enormous decline from the late 1960 to the late 1980s in spatial price

dispersion within Decile 10 (comprising the biggest purchasers). A similar, but more

muted, pattern holds for Decile 9. The middle deciles exhibit little trend change in spatial

price dispersion, as illustrated by Decile 6. The lower deciles exhibit trend increases in

spatial dispersion, as illustrated by Decile 1. Another noteworthy pattern highlighted by

Figure 3 is the lack of a downward trend in spatial price dispersion during the 1990s,

when wholesale power markets grew rapidly. Sales of electricity for resale rose from

41% of generated power in 1991 to 61% in 2000 (EIA, 2003b, Tables ES and 6.2).

       We summarize the empirical findings to this point in three statements. One, there

is tremendous dispersion among manufacturing plants in price per kWh of electricity.

Two, the plant-level distribution of electricity prices underwent a great compression

through the late 1970s. Three, readily observed plant characteristics such as utility and

customer purchase quantity capture most of the cross-sectional variation in electricity

prices. The rest of the paper more fully explores the role of utility characteristics and

purchase quantity in electricity pricing and supply costs.

4. Electricity Price-Quantity Schedules

4.1 Cost and Demand Influences on Electricity Pricing

       Supply costs per kWh of electricity tend to be lower for larger industrial and

commercial customers for several reasons. Large purchasers are more likely to locate

near generating facilities to minimize transmission losses. High-voltage transmission

lines can lead all the way to the customer’s doorstep, further reducing transmission costs.




                                             11
A large power user is also more likely to operate equipment at high voltage levels,

circumventing or reducing the need for step-down transformers and complex distribution

networks. Large power users may operate and maintain their own step-down transformers

as well, relieving the utility of this task and associated costs. Larger electricity customers

also have stronger incentives to respond to pricing structures that discourage volatile

consumption patterns and peak-period consumption. In turn, these incentive responses

economize on generating and transmission facilities and mute the effect of system-wide

demand fluctuations on marginal generating costs. Similarly, larger customers have

stronger incentives to consider provisions for interruptible and curtailable power as a

means of lowering electricity costs. These customer supply characteristics provide a cost

basis for quantity discounts in electricity pricing.

        Customer demand characteristics also lead to quantity discounts under plausible

conditions. Consider a utility that prices electricity to maximize consumer surplus subject

to the constraint that its revenues equal its costs. As shown by Goldman et al. (1984),

Brown and Sibley (1986) and Wilson (1993), among others, the optimal nonlinear pricing

schedule for successive increments of electrical power satisfies the Ramsey pricing rule:

                               M ( q ) − C ( q; Q )         −α
                                                    =                                         (2)
                                    M (q)             η ⎡⎣ M ( q ) , q ⎤⎦

where M (q ) is the marginal price for the customer’s qth unit of electricity, C (q; Q ) is the

marginal cost of the qth unit when the utility’s total quantity supplied is Q, η [M (q ), q ] is

the elasticity of demand for the qth unit with respect to the marginal price, and the

Ramsey number α ∈ [0,1] is chosen to satisfy the revenue constraint. Note that




                                                  12
α = 0 corresponds to marginal cost pricing, and α = 1 corresponds to the standard inverse

elasticity rule for a profit-maximizing multi-product monopolist.13

         According to the Ramsey pricing condition (2), the markup of price over marginal

cost declines with the purchase level provided that demand becomes more price elastic

for successive units. Under this condition, Ramsey pricing leads to quantity discounts

even when marginal costs are invariant with respect to purchase amount. If marginal

costs also decline with purchases, then Ramsey pricing implies that the marginal price

schedule declines more steeply than the marginal cost schedule. We test this implication

below. We also test the efficient pricing condition, M (q) = C (q; Q) for all q.

4.2 Electricity Tariffs for Industrial Customers

         Electricity tariffs for industrial customers usually include separate energy and

“demand” charges.14 The energy charge depends on total kilowatt-hours of consumption

during the billing period, and the demand charge depends on the highest consumption

over 15- or 30-minute intervals within the billing period or longer time period. Roughly

speaking, the demand charge reflects the customer’s maximal requirements for power. By

discouraging uneven and erratic patterns of power consumption, the separate demand

charge economizes on the need for generating, transmission and transformer facilities.

Eligibility for the most favorable tariff schedules is usually limited to large customers



13
   The revenue constraint does not preclude marginal cost pricing, even for a utility with declining costs
over the relevant range. For example, consider a two-part tariff with a fixed access fee for each customer
and marginal price set to marginal cost. Set the access fees so that total revenues cover total costs. Then,
provided that the access fees are not so high as to deter participation by any consumer who values (some)
electricity at more than its marginal cost, this type of two-part tariff is fully efficient (Brown and Sibley,
1986). In this case, α = 0 and the Ramsey-pricing condition (2) reduces to a form of marginal cost pricing.
When efficient pricing is infeasible, the Ramsey pricing rule (2) minimizes the allocative distortions
induced by pricing above marginal cost.
14
   See Cowern (2001) for a concise introduction to electricity tariffs for industrial customers. Caywood
(1972) provides a detailed description of electricity tariffs and rate-setting practices.


                                                      13
who make long term commitments to minimum contract demand levels that place a high

floor on monthly charges.

         Traditionally, electric utilities have offered declining-block rate schedules,

whereby the marginal price per kWh of energy and the marginal price per kW of demand

decline as step functions (Caywood, 1972). For bigger purchasers, in particular,

electricity tariffs also depend on other factors such as voltage level and willingness to

accept power interruptions or curtailments. Differential rates by time of day and other

applications of peak-load pricing principles came into wider use after the mid 1970s

(ELR, 1975, and Cudahy and Malko, 1976). Moves toward more finely differentiated

tariff schedules for industrial customers continued through at least the late 1980s

(Wilson, 1993, pages 36-38). The California Electricity Crisis of 2000-2001 intensified

interest in retail pricing structures (Borenstein and Holland, 2003).

         As an illustration of current and past practice, Table 4 summarizes the menu of

electricity tariff schedules offered to industrial customers by Santee Cooper Power.15 The

tariffs contain three main charges: a monthly customer charge, monthly demand charges,

and monthly energy charges. Larger customers face smaller energy charges per kWh and

smaller demand charges per kW but higher monthly minimum charges. For example, the

Medium General Service schedule offers an energy charge of 2.6¢ per kWh, a demand

charge of $11.85 per kW, and a minimum monthly payment of $29. The Large Power and

Light schedule offers a lower energy charge of 2.19¢ per kWh and a lower demand




15
  Santee Cooper is also known as the South Carolina Public Service Authority. Among utilities with
positive industrial revenue, Santee Cooper is close to average size with industrial sales of $238 million in
2000. The Santee Cooper schedules reflected in Table 4 are in effect as of July 2004 and date back to 1996.
They are available for download at http://www.santeecooper.com/.


                                                    14
charge of $10.76 per kW, but a much higher minimum monthly payment of $11,960.16

Large Santee Cooper customers who locate near transmission lines and provide their own

transformers receive discounts of roughly 4% on demand charges. Optional riders to the

Large Power and Light schedule offer big discounts on demand charges for off-peak

power and power subject to curtailment or interruption. The Large Power and Light

schedule and its optional riders require a five-year customer commitment to a contract

demand level of at least 1,000 kW and the implied demand charges. These basic features

of the Santee Cooper tariff schedules are similar to the tariff menu offered to industrial

customers by Pacific Gas & Electric in 1988, as described in Wilson (1993), and to the

illustrative tariff schedule for industrial customers reported by Caywood in the 1956 and

1972 editions of Electric Utility Rate Economics.

        Recall that the PQEM contains the average price per kWh paid by a plant during

the calendar year, so it does not capture the full complexity of the underlying electricity

tariff schedules. In this respect, the PQEM is analogous to household and establishment-

level data sets that report workers’ average hourly or annual wages but not the details of

the underlying compensation arrangements. To be sure, the lack of data on the underlying

tariff schedules (or compensation terms) is a limitation, but it does not preclude an

informative analysis. Despite the complexity of real-world compensation arrangements,

there is a vast body of informative research on wage structure and labor demand that

fruitfully exploits simple data on wage rates for individual workers and employers. Our

empirical analysis of the retail pricing structure for electricity proceeds in the same spirit.




16
 This monthly minimum holds for a customer who contracts for at least 1,000 kW of firm power. Lower
minimum charges are available to customers who accept interruptible or curtailable power.


                                                 15
4.3 Empirical Price-Quantity Schedules

         We now present evidence on empirical price-quantity schedules for electricity,

and changes in these schedules over time. When a plant operates for only part of the

calendar year, the PQEM measure of annual kWh does not accurately indicate where the

plant fits into the purchases distribution. For this reason, we henceforth exclude part-year

observations.17 We also exclude observations that display extreme seasonality or

variation in production activity within the year, because customers with highly variable

loads typically face special tariff schedules with higher charges.18

         Figure 4 shows the mean log real price of electricity by purchase decile from 1963

to 2000. The purchase deciles are almost perfectly rank ordered by price during the past

four decades. Price differentials peak in 1967, when the gap in mean price between the

top and bottom deciles exceeds 100 log points. Purchase-level price differentials shrink

dramatically from 1967 through the first half of the 1970s, and they continue to shrink

through the end of the decade. The gap between mean prices in the top and bottom

deciles of the purchase distribution remains large throughout the past four decades,

amounting to about 50 log points in 2000.

         Figure 5 presents a more detailed empirical price-quantity schedule for selected

years. It shows the fit from plant-level regressions of log price on a fifth-order

polynomial in the log of annual purchases.19 We run the regressions separately by year,


17
   We define part-year observations as those for which the number of production workers in any single
quarter is less than 5 percent of the annual average number of production workers. These part-year
observations represent less than 2 percent of shipments and electricity purchases in each year.
18
   For example, Santee Cooper tariff schedule TP for temporary service (e.g., ballpark lighting) specifies a
flat rate of 7.23¢ per kWh. Schedule GV for Seasonal General Service specifies energy charges of 2.34¢
per kWh and demand charges of $14.35 per kW.
19
   We also considered nonparametric regression fits for the price-quantity schedule using the SAS GAM
procedure (spline option, 100 degrees of freedom). Except at the extreme upper end of the purchase
distribution, accounting for less than one percent of shipments, the nonparametric fits are highly similar to


                                                     16
weighting each observation by its shipments value and ASM sample weight. The

regression fits show a dramatic flattening of the price-quantity schedule between 1967

and 1978. According to Figure 5, the price differential between the 25th and 75th quantiles

of the purchase distribution shrinks from 46 log points in 1967 to 26 log points in 1978,

and the gap between the 5th and 95th purchase quantiles shrinks from 103 to 51 log

points.20 In short, there was a remarkable erosion of quantity discounts between 1967 and

the late 1970s. We turn next to potential explanations for these strikingly large quantity

discounts and their evolution over time.

5. Behavioral Responses by Customers as a Source of Quantity Discounts

5.1 Spatial Sorting of Production Activity

         If bigger purchasers locate in areas with cheaper electricity, the pooled data will

show a negative relationship between price and purchase level even if all utilities offer

flat price-quantity schedules. More generally, any tendency by bigger purchasers to buy

from utilities with cheaper electricity contributes to a negative price-quantity relationship.

This type of spatial sorting potentially explains much of the pricing structure seen in

Figures 4 and 5. To evaluate this explanation, we fit two plant-level regressions of log

price on a fifth-order polynomial in log purchases for each year. One regression

specification includes utility fixed effects to control for the identity of the plant’s

electricity supplier, and the other specification omits utility effects. We then use the fitted

regressions to calculate the average elasticity of electricity price with respect to




the fifth-order polynomial fits. Given this similarity and the much longer run times for the nonparametric
fits, especially when we add covariates, we focus on polynomial fits throughout the paper.
20
   We also created analogs to Figure 5 for the five utilities with the largest number of customer-level
observations (several hundred per year). All five utilities show the same basic pattern as in Figure 5.


                                                    17
customers’ annual purchase levels. To isolate the role of spatial sorting, we compare the

elasticity values calculated from regressions with and without utility fixed effects.

        Figure 6 shows the results. It confirms a dramatic flattening of price-quantity

schedules through the late 1970s, and it conveniently summarizes the magnitude of

quantity discounts. In the 1960s, the average price-quantity elasticity is -22% on a

purchase-weighted basis, and it ranges from -12% to -14% on a shipments-weighted

basis. Bigger values for purchase-weighted elasticities reflect the steeper slopes of the

price-quantity schedules at the upper end of the purchase distribution (Figure 5).

        The inclusion of utility fixed effects has only a modest impact on the elasticity

values prior to 1974. That is, in the early part of our sample period the huge purchase-

level price differentials in Figures 4 and 5 reflect within-utility price variation, not spatial

sorting of manufacturing customers. Spatial sorting plays a bigger role after 1973,

especially on a purchase-weighted basis. Evidently, the onset of rising real electricity

prices in 1973 (Figure 2) encouraged the migration of electricity-intensive manufacturing

activity to areas served by utilities with cheaper electricity. The bigger role for spatial

sorting on a purchase-weighted basis suggests that bigger purchasers are more sensitive

to spatial price differences in their choice of location.

5.2 Other Behavioral Responses to Electricity Tariffs

        In addition to location choice, several other behavioral responses by customers

influence the empirical price-quantity schedule. Bigger purchasers have greater

opportunity and incentive to reduce price per kWh by managing load factors (ratio of

average to peak demand), taking high-voltage power, responding to peak-load pricing

incentives, and accepting curtailable or interruptible power. To help assess the




                                              18
importance of these behaviors for the observed quantity discounts, we compare the

empirical price-quantity schedule in the PQEM data to the schedule for “firm” power

implied by the Santee Cooper tariff summarized in Table 4. In calculating the implied

price-quantity schedule for firm power, we fix the load factor at 50% and exclude

discounts for off-peak or high-voltage power.21 These assumptions serve to foreclose

quantity discounts that arise from behavioral responses to pricing incentives, isolating a

mechanical customer size effect. In contrast, the empirical price-quantity schedule

reflects the mechanical size effect and the behavioral responses by electricity customers.

        Figure 7 plots the implied Santee Cooper price-quantity schedule and the within-

utility price-quantity schedule in the 2000 PQEM data. (We do not have enough customer

observations to estimate an empirical price-quantity schedule for Santee Cooper alone.)

As in Figure 5, the fitted empirical schedule is based on a fifth-order polynomial

specification, but we now include utility fixed effects in the plant-level regression to

isolate within-utility price variation.

        Figure 7 delivers three results. First, the Santee Cooper and empirical schedules

are both rather flat in the lower quartile of the purchase distribution, except at the extreme

bottom end. Second, over the middle part of the distribution that roughly spans the

interquartile range of purchases by manufacturing customers, the price per kWh declines

with annual purchase quantity by 30 to 40 log points. Over this range, quantity discounts

are essentially “built into” the tariff schedule according to the evidence in Figure 7.22



21
   Mechanically, we compute the lower envelope of the price-quantity schedules implied by the General
Service, Medium General Service, Large General Service, and Large Power and Light schedules. Recall
that the tariff schedules described in Table 4 do not include taxes or adjustments specified by the Fuel
Adjustment Clause and the Demand Sales Adjustment Clause.
22
   The implied schedule declines more rapidly than the empirical schedule over this range, which indicates
that the Santee Cooper tariff menu involves bigger “built in” quantity discounts than the average utility.


                                                    19
Third, the large quantity discounts in the upper quartile of the distribution reflect

behavioral responses to pricing incentives. “Built in” quantity discounts do not underlie

the negative price-quantity relationship in this segment of the purchase distribution.

Instead, the story is one of customer responses to pricing incentives.

5.3 Summary

       This section establishes that the negative price-quantity relation evident in Figures

4 and 5 reflects a combination of customer responses to pricing incentives and

mechanical discounts built into electricity tariff schedules. Both aspects are important,

but they are relevant for different segments of the purchase distribution. Mechanical

discounts are important in the middle of the distribution, and behavioral responses to

pricing incentives are important in the upper quartile. Both the responses to pricing

incentives reflected in Figure 7 and the spatial sorting response documented in Figure 6

are concentrated among larger purchasers. This evidence reinforces the view – often

expressed in the public utility and Ramsey-pricing literatures – that demand is more price

elastic at higher purchase levels.

6. Customer Purchase Quantity and Electricity Supply Costs

6.1 A Method for Estimating Supply Costs as a Function of Purchase Amount

       We now develop a method for estimating supply costs as a function of customer

purchase amount. The method exploits the cross-sectional richness of the PQEM and, to

the best of our knowledge, offers a novel approach to estimating customer-level supply

cost schedules. The method involves three main steps. Step one uses customer-level data

on purchase quantities to calculate utility-level statistics for the location and shape of the

purchase distribution. Step two exploits the utility’s revenue constraint, which states that




                                              20
average cost per kWh equals average price per kWh. Step three exploits cross-utility

variation in the purchase distribution to estimate how costs per kWh of delivered

electricity vary with customers’ annual purchases. We carry out step three using

regression methods to control for other factors that affect supply costs. We now develop

the method in detail.

        A portion of a utility’s costs are common to all customers, and the remaining

portion can be allocated to particular customers. Let θ g be the common cost per kWh at

utility g. Write the allocable portion of costs per kWh for customer e that purchases qe

as Cg ( qe ) + ke , where the first term captures cost differences that vary systematically by

purchase level and the second term captures idiosyncratic supply cost differences

unrelated to purchase level. By construction,       ∑s k  e e   = 0, where se is the share of

purchases from utility g by plant e. Thus, letting TC denote total cost, we can write the

average cost per kWh at utility g as

                                        TCg
                                ACg ≡             = θ g + ∑ seCg (qe )                          (3)
                                        ∑q
                                        e∈g
                                              e           e∈g




        The revenue constraint implies that a utility’s average cost per kWh equals its

average price per kWh. Imposing this requirement in (3) yields

                                       Pg = θ g + ∑ seCg (qe ) + vgP                            (4)
                                                    e∈g



where Pg is the purchase-weighted mean price per kWh at utility g, and vgP is an error

term introduced by sampling variation in Pg. We do not directly observe the utility’s

average price per kWh in the PQEM, but we can estimate it using price and quantity

observations on the utility’s manufacturing customers.


                                                  21
        To obtain an estimable specification from (4), we adopt three assumptions. First,

we postulate that the C g (q ) functions are the same for all g up to an additive term; i.e.,

C g (q ) = C (q ) + α g . Second, we approximate C (q ) as a polynomial in log (q). Third, we

model the sum of the utility’s additive and common cost components as a linear function

of observable utility characteristics X; namely, α g + θ g = X g b + u g Applying these

assumptions to (4) yields an estimating equation with four error components:

                                  N
                    Pg = X g b + ∑ γ n ∑ se ⎡⎣log ( qe ) ⎤⎦ + u g + vgP + vgq + ξ g
                                                           n
                                                                                                       (5)
                                  n =1   e∈g




                                                                  ∑ s [log(q )]
                                                                                      n
where N is the order of approximation to the C function,                 e      e         is the nth
                                                                   e∈g



uncentered sample moment of the log purchase distribution at g, and the γ 's are the key

parameters of interest for the supply cost schedule. The error component vgq arises from

sampling variation in the moments of the purchase distribution, and ξ g arises from the

polynomial approximation to C. Though not our main focus, the b parameters are also

interesting, because they provide estimates of how average costs vary with utility

characteristics when we control for the size distribution of customer purchases.

        We estimate (5) by weighted ordinary least squares (WLS) and instrumental

variables (IV) regression. We then use the γ estimates to trace out the supply cost

schedule as a function of customer purchase quantity. Before turning to the results, three

econometric issues require some discussion.

        First, consider the error term u g in (5) that arises from unobserved determinants of

the additive and common costs. If these unobserved cost determinants vary systematically

with the size distribution of customer purchases, they give rise to an omitted variables


                                                  22
problem that biases the estimates of γ . As a case in point, municipal and cooperatively

owned utilities tend to serve smaller manufacturing customers.23 If these same utilities

also have lower supply costs conditional on customer size, then the regression (5)

understates the extent to which costs per kWh decline with purchase amount, unless we

control for utility type. Hence, we include the utility’s organizational form in the X

vector, distinguishing among cooperative and municipal utilities, state and federal power

authorities, and private investor-owned utilities. For similar reasons, we include controls

for the size of the utility and for the shares of electric power generated from hydro,

nuclear, coal, and petroleum and natural gas. A potential omitted variables problem also

arises in connection with non-sampling components of the error term vgP in (4) and (5). In

particular, the revenue constraint might fail for manufacturing customers as a group

because of cross-subsidization between classes of customers within the utility. To control

for this possibility, we include in the X vector the fraction of the utility’s revenues

derived from sales to industrial customers.

        Second, the error term vgq that arises from sampling variation in the moments of

the purchase distribution creates a standard errors-in-variables problem. To address this

potential source of bias, we exploit the fact that consecutive ASM panels are

independently drawn from the universe of manufacturing plants. It follows that the

sampling error in the purchase distribution statistics for utility g at time t is uncorrelated

with the sampling error at t + k , provided that a new ASM panel has commenced

between t and t + k . Thus, we instrument the moments of the utility’s log (q) distribution

23
  Davis et al. (2007) display the distribution of mean log purchases by manufacturing customers for private
investor owned utilities and the analogous distribution for municipal and cooperatively owned utilities. A




                                                    23
with the corresponding statistics for the same utility calculated from a nearby year that

draws on a different ASM sample.24

        Third, the number of annual customer-level observations per utility in the PQEM

ranges widely from a small handful to hundreds. Hence, the sampling error components

in (5) have a heteroscedastic structure. To improve the efficiency of our estimates, we

weight each observation in the regression (5) by the square root of the number of

manufacturing plants used to calculate the utility-level quantities. As a side benefit, this

weighting method mitigates the errors-in-variable problem under least squares.

6.2 Supply Cost Schedule Estimation Results

        Table 5 reports the WLS regressions of the form (5) on the utility-level data. We

approximate the supply cost schedule C (q ) as a third-order polynomial in log (q). We

normalize the purchase-weighted mean price per kWh to 100 in each year, so that slope

coefficients on the indicator variables reflect percentage differences from the omitted

category. We report results for selected years to economize on space, but our discussion

below draws on results for all years.

        Municipal and cooperative utilities have lower estimated supply costs in the

1960s and early 1970s, after controlling for other factors, and the cost advantage over

private investor-owned utilities re-emerges in the 1990s. Relative to coal-powered

electricity generation, greater reliance on nuclear power yields higher supply costs; hydro

power yields lower supply costs until the 1990s; and petroleum and natural gas yield

higher supply costs after the 1970s. The estimated effects of power source are sizable.


comparison of these distributions confirms that average customer size tends to be considerably smaller at
municipal and cooperatively owned utilities.
24
   For k=1, we can construct instruments across ASM panels for 12 years. For k=5, we can construct
instruments across ASM panels for all years. We tried both approaches.


                                                    24
For example, the 1967 estimates imply that shifting 10% of power generation from coal

to hydro involves a 3.6% reduction in cost per kWh. The estimates also imply that bigger

utilities have lower supply costs in the 1960s, but the effects are small.

         Turning to our main focus, the moments of the customer purchase distribution are

jointly significant at the 0.1% level in all years, strongly confirming the statistical

significance of purchase quantity as a determinant of supply costs. Table 6 and Figure 8

report the estimated supply cost schedules. Figure 8 also shows a scatter plot of mean log

customer purchases for each utility, lq1g , against the sum of the corresponding fitted cost


            ⎝         ⎠
                                        ( )
value Pg = ⎛⎜ X g bˆ ⎞⎟ + γˆ1 lq1g + γˆ 2 lq1g
      ~                                          2
                                                          ( )
                                                     + γˆ3 lq1g
                                                                  3
                                                                      and the utility’s regression residual. As


seen in Figure 8 and Table 6, supply costs per kWh fall by a factor of 2 or 3 over the

range of purchases spanned by the utilities in our sample. This pattern holds in all years

from 1963 to 2000. In unreported results, we re-estimated the supply cost regressions by

IV using the approach described above, and obtained essentially the same findings. These

results provide strong evidence of powerful, cost-based reasons for large quantity

discounts in electricity pricing to industrial customers.

         We also computed the average supply-cost elasticity with respect to customer

purchase quantity for each year and compared it to the average price elasticity with

respect to purchase quantity (Figure 6). The comparison yields two interesting results.

First, the average cost elasticity is consistently somewhat larger in magnitude than the

average price elasticity, indicating that (average) supply costs fall more rapidly with

purchase quantity than (average) price per kWh. Second, longer term swings in the

average cost elasticity closely mirror the swings in the average price elasticity in Figure




                                                           25
6. This time-series pattern reinforces the inference derived from the cross-sectional

evidence that cost factors drive large quantity discounts in electricity pricing.

7.       Evaluating the Pricing Structure

7.1 Is Pricing Efficient on the Purchase Quantity Margin?

         Pricing efficiency requires that marginal prices for successive increments of

electrical power equal marginal supply costs at all points on the customer purchase

distribution. This is a demanding requirement in our context, because the range of

purchases is enormous. We now test whether this condition holds in the data. Earlier

empirical studies also consider retail pricing efficiency in the electric power industry.

Examples include Meyer and Leland (1980), Hayashi, Sevier and Trapani (1985) and

Nelson, Roberts and Tromp (1987). However, these studies evaluate pricing differences

across classes of customers – residential, industrial and commercial – from the vantage

point of efficiency, Ramsey pricing, and rate of return regulation. They do not consider

pricing efficiency on the purchase quantity margin. Indeed, we are unaware of any

previous study that tests marginal cost and Ramsey pricing conditions on the purchase

quantity margin, even though the issue receives much attention in theoretical works.25

See Brown and Sibley (1986) and Wilson (1993) and references therein. Our empirical

assessment of pricing on the purchase quantity margin complements the well-developed

theoretical literature on the topic.

         For purposes of comparing the marginal curves, we first re-estimate the price-

quantity schedules by regressing price per unit (not logged) on a third-order polynomial

in log customer purchases. We include utility fixed effects to isolate within-utility price


25
  Peltzman (1971) considers electricity pricing on the purchase quantity margin, but he lacks the cost data
needed for an assessment of pricing efficiency.


                                                    26
variation. In re-estimating the price schedules, we omit plants with annual purchases

outside the range of mean log purchases in the utility-level data. These modifications to

the specification and samples used in Sections 4 and 5 provide for an apples-to-apples

comparison of the marginal cost and marginal price curves.

        Given a fitted price-quantity schedule, it is easy to calculate the corresponding

marginal price schedule. Let T (q ) = qP(q ) be the total electricity tariff paid by a plant

that purchases q kWh, where P (q ) is the average price per kWh. We compute the

marginal price schedule as

                    Mˆ (q) = Pˆ (q) + (q / ε ) ⎡⎣ Pˆ ( q + (ε / 2) ) − Pˆ ( q − (ε / 2) ) ⎤⎦   (6)


where Pˆ (q ) is the fitted value of the price-quantity schedule at q, and ε is a small positive

number. We follow the same approach in calculating marginal cost schedules from

estimated supply cost schedules of the type displayed in Figure 8.

        Recall that each ASM panel is an independently drawn random sample. To

exploit this sample design feature, we pool customer-level observations over year-pairs

that straddle ASM panel changeovers before we construct the utility-level data. This

pooling method yields more customer-level observations per utility and a larger number

of usable utility-level observations, thereby improving estimation efficiency in the supply

cost regressions. We estimate these regressions using the same specification and

weighted least squares method as before except for the addition of a year control.

        Figure 9 displays the marginal schedules for selected years, along with

bootstrapped standard error bands for the marginal cost schedules. (Standard errors for

marginal prices are extremely small, and we ignore them in the discussion that follows.)

The marginal price and cost schedules are remarkably similar in both 1967 and 1973/74,


                                                      27
strongly confirming the central implication of pricing efficiency on the purchase quantity

margin. After 1973/74, however, a gap opens between marginal cost and marginal price

in the lower deciles of the purchases distribution. The gap is sizable, with marginal cost

exceeding marginal price by 10% or more for smaller purchasers.

       To construct a more powerful formal test for the null hypothesis of pricing

efficiency, we now pool the data over several years. We evaluate pricing efficiency in the

“early years” 1963, 1967, 1973 and 1974 and the “recent years” 1988, 1993, 1998 and

1999. The early years predate the departures from pricing efficiency suggested by Figure

9, and the recent years postdate them. We selected these particular years because they

involve eight independently drawn random samples of manufacturing plants. In pooling

the data over years, we introduce year controls that allow for marginal costs to shift over

time in a manner that is uniform with respect to purchase quantity.

       Table 7 reports the pooled-sample estimates and bootstrapped standard errors for

early and late years. The upper panel extends our previous pooling method for calculating

utility-level statistics from customer-level observations. This method results in many

customer-level observations per utility but only one observation per utility in the supply

cost regression. Hence, this method exploits only between-utility variation to estimate the

cost schedules. The lower panel calculates utility-level statistics from customer-level

data first and then pools over years. This method results in fewer customer-level

observations per utility but up to four observations per utility in the supply cost

regression. Under this method, we assume that utility-level error terms in the supply cost

regression are uncorrelated over time. This second method exploits between- and within-

utility variation to estimate the cost schedules.




                                              28
         The two pooling methods yield a similar pattern of point estimates that shows

sizable departures from pricing efficiency in the later years for smaller customers.

Marginal prices are roughly 10% below marginal costs at the 20th percentile of the

purchase quantity distribution in the later years. The second pooling method also yields

evidence against marginal cost pricing for smaller customers in the early years, but the

deviation from pricing efficiency is much smaller, amounting to less than 5% of marginal

cost. In line with Figure 9, Table 7 yields no evidence of departures from pricing

efficiency in the middle and upper portions of the purchase quantity distribution.

         A potential issue with Figure 9 and Table 7 is that the test results may be affected

by inaccuracies in the assignment of customers to utilities. To address this issue, we

created a sample that restricts attention to utilities and customers with highly accurate

assignments. When a county is served by a single utility, we know the correct

assignment of customer to utility from the EIA-861 files. We also know the correct

assignment with near certainty in those states with detailed GIS data on utility service

territories. We used the detailed GIS information available for certain states to estimate

how the cruder information available in other states affects the probability of an accurate

assignment. Our method, detailed in Davis et al. (2007b), yields a probability of an

accurate assignment for each customer and an estimated accuracy rate for each utility.

         In the full sample that underlies Table 7 and Figure 9, we estimate that 67% of

customers are assigned to the correct utility.26 To construct a restricted sample, we

discarded customers with low probabilities of an accurate assignment and discarded


26
  The estimated accuracy rate is calculated in a shipments-weighted manner. The actual accuracy rate is
probably somewhat higher, because the 67% figure does not account for the hand-adjusted assignments that
we made based on visual inspections of utility service territory maps in nine states. The same point applies
to the 88% accuracy rate for the restricted sample.


                                                    29
utilities with low accuracy rates. (See Appendix A for details.) The resulting limited

sample has an estimated match accuracy rate of 88 percent. The number of utility-level

observations available for the Table 7 analysis using the limited sample is about 70%

smaller than before for Panel A and about 45% smaller for Panel B.

       The restricted sample results are very similar to the full sample results, except that

the smaller number of utility-level observations produces bigger standard errors. There is

no evidence in the restricted sample of departures from marginal cost pricing in the

middle or upper parts of the purchase quantity distribution. The point estimate for

marginal cost minus marginal price at the 20th percentile is somewhat larger in the limited

sample, but we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no difference under the pooling

method of Panel A. The discrepancy between marginal price and marginal cost at the

20th percentile is statistically significant at the 10% level under the pooling method of

Panel B. In short, the restricted sample results are consistent with the full sample results,

but the statistical evidence for departures from marginal cost pricing is weaker.

7.2 Does Ramsey Pricing Play a Role?

       Figure 9 and Table 7 provide no support for the standard Ramsey-pricing

explanation of quantity discounts. According to this explanation, the markup of marginal

price over marginal cost is positive, and it declines with the elasticity of demand. By all

accounts, and consistent with our evidence in Section 5, demand is more price sensitive

in the upper segments of the purchases distribution. Hence, the standard Ramsey-pricing

perspective predicts that marginal price exceeds marginal cost, and that the markup

shrinks with purchase level. The pattern we have seen is more nearly the opposite.




                                             30
       That the data do not conform perfectly to Ramsey pricing is no surprise.

However, we are struck by the utter failure of the standard Ramsey-pricing view to

account for any portion of the large quantity discounts in electricity pricing. Evidently,

cost differences and not markup differences are the predominant reason for quantity

discounts. When the pricing structure deviates from efficiency, it does so in the opposite

direction from the prediction of the standard Ramsey-pricing view.

       It is worth remarking, however, that the data can be reconciled with Ramsey

pricing under the unusual premise that marginal cost pricing raises too much revenue; i.e.,

that efficient pricing raises more revenue than required to cover costs and a normal return

on equity. In this circumstance, Ramsey-pricing logic implies that the second-best pricing

structure involves bigger markdowns of marginal prices relative to marginal costs in the

less elastic portion of the purchases distribution. That is essentially the marginal pricing

structure that emerges after 1973. The premise that yields this rationalization is greatly at

odds with the traditional view that electric utilities operate with declining costs. However,

it resonates with evidence that changes in the regulatory environment over the course of

the 1970s led to tighter capacity constraints and higher costs of expanding capacity.

8. Concluding Remarks

   In this study, we documented tremendous dispersion in the price per kWh that

manufacturers pay for electricity. Spatial price differentials and quantity discounts

account for all but a small fraction of the dispersion in prices. We also developed and

implemented a new method for estimating how supply costs vary with customer purchase

quantity. The estimation reveals that annual supply costs per kWh fall by more than half




                                             31
in moving from smaller to bigger purchasers, providing a clear cost-based rationale for

quantity discounts.

   We applied our estimated cost and price schedules to test for pricing efficiency on the

annual purchase quantity margin and to evaluate a traditional Ramsey-pricing

interpretation of quantity discounts. Somewhat to our surprise, the data are remarkably

consistent with marginal cost pricing. The exception is pricing to smaller manufacturing

customers after the mid 1970s. The marginal cost of incremental purchases for these

customers exceeds the marginal price by more than 10% in the 1980s and 1990s. This

deviation from marginal cost pricing is inconsistent with a standard Ramsey-pricing

story, which predicts that marginal cost lies below marginal price, and more so for

smaller purchasers. Our tests for marginal cost pricing and Ramsey pricing on the

purchase quantity margin complement a well-developed theoretical literature on the

topic.

   What caused the departure from pricing efficiency for smaller customers after the mid

1970s? An answer to that question is beyond the scope of this paper, but we suggest two

avenues for future investigation. First, sizable deviations from marginal cost pricing

began to emerge at the same time as real electricity prices began to rise (Figure 2). As

mentioned in Section 3, the rise in real electricity prices from 1973 to 1983 reversed a

decades-long trend. Perhaps utility companies or their regulators sought to insulate

smaller industrial customers from the full impact of rising energy costs. A difficulty with

this story is its failure to explain the persistence of deviations from marginal cost pricing

after real electricity prices resumed a downward trend. Another difficulty is that, under

two-part tariffs, subsidies need not involve departures from marginal cost pricing.




                                             32
       Second, during the 1970s public utility commissions began to focus greater effort

on the review and design of electricity tariff schedules, as discussed by Cudahy and

Malko (1976) in their treatment of the landmark Madison Gas and Electric case. The

Madison case, initiated in 1972, stimulated similar reviews in other states. “By 1977, 12

state commissions had held generic hearings on retail electric rate structure reform.”

(Joskow, 1979, page 794) Ironically, these moves toward more aggressive intervention in

rate design were often promoted as efforts to implement marginal-cost pricing principles.

Our evidence shows that greater involvement in the design of rate structures by public

utility commissions coincided with significant steps away from efficient pricing on the

margin we measure. A careful study of whether intervention by public utility

commissions caused the deviations from efficient pricing merits investigation.

   Our results also identify some noteworthy aspects of spatial price differentials.

Spatial price dispersion declined sharply from the late 1960s to the late 1980s for the

largest purchasers, but it rose over time in the lower half of the purchases distribution

(Figure 3). The expansion of wholesale power markets in the 1990s had no apparent

effect on spatial price dispersion at the retail level for manufacturing customers. It strikes

us as something of a puzzle that rapid expansion of wholesale power markets in the

1990s had so little impact on spatial price dispersion at the retail level.




                                              33
Appendix A. Assigning Manufacturing Plants to Electric Utilities

         This appendix provides an overview of our methods for assigning manufacturing

plants to electric utilities. See Davis et al. (2007b) for a more detailed discussion and an

evaluation of assignment accuracy.

         The EIA-861 data do not determine a unique, unambiguous assignment in

counties served by more than one electric utility.27 We addressed this issue using several

approaches, depending on available information. First, we created a “best-match” utility

indicator for each county. Given a list of utilities with industrial customers in the county,

the indicator identifies the utility with the largest statewide revenues from sales to

industrial customers. Based on each manufacturing plant’s county of operation, our

default assignment method (in the absence of better information described below) is to

assign the plant to the utility selected by the best-match indicator. We introduce a

separate utility code for each state in which a utility operates, because state laws and

state-level public utility commissions govern rate setting.

         Second, we use Geographic Information System (GIS) maps of electric utility

service areas for Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Minnesota, Ohio and Wisconsin.28 These six

states account for 13.4% of plants, 14.2% of employment, 14.8% of payroll, 17.3% of

electricity purchases, 15.3% of electricity expenditures and 15.1% of shipments in the

PQEM. We use street address to assign latitude and longitude to manufacturing plants

and then overlay the GIS service area map to determine the electric utility that serves the



27
   459 counties are served by a single utility, 776 are served by 2 utilities, 791 are served by 3 utilities, 535
are served by 4 utilities, 441 are served by 5-7 utilities, and the remaining 29 counties are served by 8-12
utilities. To the best of our knowledge, data on the list of counties served by each electric utility are not
available prior to 1999. Hence, we apply each utility’s county list for 2000 to all years.
28
   The Minnesota GIS map we obtained is an unofficial version.


                                                       34
plant. Using this approach, we can construct highly accurate matches for most plants in

states with GIS maps of utility service areas.

         Third, for California, New York and Rhode Island, we obtained a list of utilities

that operate in each zip code. These three states account for 18.2% of plants, 16.6% of

employment, 17.5% of payroll, 9.8% of electricity purchases, 13.3% of electricity

expenditures and 14.7% of shipments in the PQEM. Because zip codes cover much

smaller areas than counties, the zip code data enables us to construct a unique match in

most cases. When more than one utility serves a given zip code, we assigned plants

based on the same type of “best match” approach as described above for counties.

         Fourth, we adjusted our county-based assignments in some cases based on visual

inspections of maps showing utility service territories in Florida, Illinois, Louisiana,

Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, Pennsylvania, South Dakota and Wyoming. These states

account for 23.3% of plants, 23.7% of employment, 24.1% of payroll, 21.4% of

electricity purchases, 23.2% of electricity expenditures and 24.3% of shipments in the

PQEM. We inspected the utility service territories for each county, and if one utility

clearly covers most of the county, we assign that utility to all plants in the county. If the

county is not covered primarily by a single utility, we retained the county-based utility

match.

   As noted in the main text, we exploit publicly available information on the identity of

plants that purchase electricity directly from the six largest public power authorities. In

all other cases, our assignment procedures rely on the assumption that a plant’s location

determines its electricity supplier. This assumption works for the period of time covered

by our data, because electric utilities were monopolies at the retail distribution level.




                                              35
According to Joskow (2005), the “first retail competition programs began operating in

Massachusetts, Rhode Island and California in early 1998 and spread to about a dozen

states by the end of 2000.” These developments on the retail side occur at the very end of

the period covered by our data.




                                           36
                                         References
Besanko, David, Julia D’Souza and S. Ramu Thiagarajan. 2001. “The Effect of Wholesale
      Market Deregulation on Shareholder Wealth in the Electric Power Industry.” Journal of
      Law and Economics, 44(1): 65-88.

Borenstein, Severin. 2002. “The Trouble with Electricity Markets: Understanding California’s
       Restructuring Disaster.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(1): 191-211.

Borenstein, Severin and Stephen P. Holland. 2005. “On the Efficiency of Competitive Electricity
       Markets with Time-Invariant Retail Prices.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 36(3):
       469-93.

Brown, Stephen J. and David S. Sibley. 1986. The Theory of Public Utility Pricing. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press.

Caywood, Russell E. 1972. Electric Utility Rate Economics. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
     Company.

Cowern, Edward H. 2001. “Power and Energy: Factors that Determine Industrial Electric Bills.”
      The Cowern Papers presented by Motors and Drives, LLC.
      http://www.motorsanddrives.com/.

Cudahy, Richard D. and J. Robert Malko. 1976. “Electric Peak-Load Pricing: Madison Gas and
      Beyond.” Wisconsin Law Review, 47: 47-78.

Davis, Steven J., Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger and Mary Streitwieser. 2007a. “Electricity
       Pricing to U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-2000.” U.S. Census Bureau, Center for
       Economic Studies, Working Paper No. CES 07-28, October. Available at
       http://ssrn.com/abstract=1028529.

Davis, Steven J., Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger and Mary Streitwieser. 2007b. “Prices and
       Quantities of Electricity in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector: A Plant-Level Database and
       Public-Release Statistics, 1963-2000.” November. Available at
       http://www.econ.umd.edu/~haltiwan/pqem.pdf.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger. 1991. “Wage Dispersion Between and Within U.S.
       Manufacturing Plants, 1963-1986.” In Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
       Microeconomics, ed. Martin Neil Baily and Clifford Winston, 115-200. Washington,
       D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

EIA [Energy Information Administration]. 2000. “The Changing Structure of the Electric Power
      Industry 2000: An Update.” Energy Information Administration, U.S. Department of
      Energy: No. DOE/EIA-0562(00).

EIA [Energy Information Administration]. 2003a. “Annual Energy Review 2002.” Energy
      Information Administration, U.S. Department of Energy: No. DOE/EIA-0384(2002).



                                              37
EIA [Energy Information Administration]. 2003b. “Electric Power Annual 2002.” Energy
      Information Administration, U.S. Department of Energy: No. DOE/EIA-0348(2002).

ELR [Environmental Law Reporter]. 1975. “Electric Utility Rate Design: The Move Toward
      Peak-Load Pricing.” Environmental Law Reporter, 5(ELR 10084).

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and C. J. Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate Productivity Growth:
        Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence.” In New Directions in Productivity Analysis, ed.
        Edward Dean, Michael Harper and Charles Hulten, 373-414. Chicago: The University of
        Chicago Press.

Goldman, M. Barry, Hayne E. Leland, and David S. Sibley. 1984. “Optimal Nonuniform Prices.”
      Review of Economic Studies, 51(2): 305-19.

Hayashi, Paul M., Melanie Sevier and John M. Trapani. 1985. “Pricing Efficiency under Rate-of-
      Return Regulation: Some Empirical Evidence for the Electric Utility Industry.” Southern
      Economic Journal, 51(3): 776-92.

Hirsh, Richard F. 1999. Power Loss: The Origins of Deregulation and Restructuring in the
       American Electric Utility System. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

Joskow, Paul L. 1979. “Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978: Electric Utility Rate
      Reform.” Natural Resources Journal, 19(October): 787-809.

Joskow, Paul L. 2005. “The Difficult Transition to Competitive Electricity Markets in the United
      States.” In Electricity Deregulation: Choices and Challenges, ed. J. Griffin and S. Puller,
      31-97. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Joskow, Paul L. and Richard Schmalensee. 1983. Markets for Power: An Analysis of Electric
      Utility Deregulation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

Meyer, Robert A. and Hayne E. Leland. 1980. “The Effectiveness of Price Regulation.” Review
       of Economics and Statistics, 62(4): 555-66.

Nelson, Jon P., Mark J. Roberts and Emsley P. Tromp. 1987. “An Analysis of Ramsey Pricing in
       Electric Utilities.” In Regulating Utilities in an Era of Deregulation, ed. Michael Crew,
       85-110. New York: Macmillan.

Peltzman, Sam. 1971. “Pricing in Public and Private Enterprises: Electric Utilities in the United
       States.” Journal of Law and Economics, 14(April): 109-47.

Van Biesebroeck, Johannes. 2004. “Robustness of Productivity Estimates.” National Bureau of
      Economic Research, Inc., NBER Working Papers: No. 10303.

Wilson, Robert B. 1993. Nonlinear Pricing. New York: Oxford University Press.




                                                38
                   Table 1. Selected Characteristics of the PQEM Database

  Years covered                                                         1963, 1967, 1972-2000

  Number of plant-level observations per year                           48,164 to 72,128

  Total number of annual plant-level observationsa                      1,816,720

  Number of counties with manufacturing plants                          3,031

  Number of 4-digit SIC industries (1972 / 1987)b                       447 / 458

  Number of best-match utilitiesc                                       697

  Mean annual electricity purchases, Gigawatt hours (GWh)d              99.7       (860.4)

  Standard deviation of annual electricity purchases (GWh)d             334.0 (2,400.0)

                               Quantiles of Annual Electricity Purchases, Gigawatt-hourse

  Weighting Method      1       5     10      25        50    75      90         95           99

  Shipments            .07     .30    .70    3.22       16.4 89.2    267        444          1,500

  Purchases            .20 1.08 2.84 13.58 85.9               452    2,100      4,185        14,241

  Weighting Method           Quantiles of Electricity Costs as a Percent of Total Labor Costse

  Shipments            0.4     1.1    1.5    2.5        4.7   10.2   25.7       46.3         197.2

  Purchases            1.1     2.1    3.0    6.1        17.2 61.7 201.0         305.3        3,461

Notes:
a
  The initial sample contains 1,945,813 records. We drop 107 records because of invalid
geography codes and 128,058 (6.6%) because of missing values for electricity price, total
employment, value added or shipments. We also trim the bottom 0.05% of the electricity price
distribution in each year (928 observations over all years).
b
  We use 1972 SIC codes in 1963, 1967, and 1972-1986 and 1987 SIC codes in 1987-2000. See
Davis et al. (2007) for additional information.
c
  There are 684 best-match utilities not counting public power authorities: Tennessee Valley
Authority, Bonneville Power Administration, New York Power Authority, Santee Cooper, Grand
River Dam Authority, and the Colorado River Commission of Nevada. By construction, a best-
match utility does not cross state lines.
d
  Weighted by shipments (electricity purchases).
e
  For disclosure reasons, the quantiles shown above are averages of plant-level observations in
three quantiles, the quantile shown and the two surrounding quantiles (e.g., quantile 50 as shown
is the average of observations in quantiles 49, 50, and 51).



                                                   39
Table 2. The Shipments-Weighted Distribution of Log Electricity Prices Paid by U.S.
         Manufacturing Plants, Dispersion and Variance Decompositions
                                 1963 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2000
    Overall Standard Deviation .409 .468 .429 .369 .359 .347 .373 .388 .360
                             Price Dispersion Between Industries
4-Digit SIC Industries (447/458)+
Between Variance as % of Total 36.6 36.3 28.0 20.6 19.4 23.1 26.4 25.1                        23.8
Between Standard Deviation       .248 .282 .227 .167 .158 .167 .192 .194                      .175
                         Price Dispersion Between Geographic Areas
NERC Regions (12)
Between Variance as % of Total 9.0      9.7 12.7 13.2 17.9 15.1 22.2 20.9                     21.3
Between Standard Deviation       .123 .146 .153 .134 .152 .135 .175 .177                      .166
States (51)
Between Variance as % of Total 11.9 13.6 17.3 34.8 46.5 36.7 42.7 39.4                        38.0
Between Standard Deviation       .141 .173 .179 .218 .245 .210 .243 .244                      .222
Utilities (697)
Between Variance as % of Total 20.4 22.1 23.5 44.3 58.3 45.7 52.9 48.9                        47.3
Between Standard Deviation       .185 .220 .208 .246 .274 .234 .271 .272                      .247
Counties (3,031)
Between Variance as % of Total 31.4 32.0 32.2 53.0 67.2 54.3 61.6 57.6                        56.3
Between Standard Deviation       .230 .265 .244 .269 .294 .256 .292 .295                      .270
          Price Dispersion Between Groups Defined by Annual Electricity Purchases
Purchase Deciles (10)
Between Variance as % of Total 57.2 54.2 33.2 16.4 19.3 26.2 29.0 30.6                        25.6
Between Standard Deviation       .310 .345 .247 .150 .158 .177 .201 .215                      .182
Purchase Centiles (100)
Between Variance as % of Total 61.1 57.2 35.8 18.6 21.6 28.7 31.9 32.7                        29.0
Between Standard Deviation       .320 .354 .257 .159 .167 .186 .210 .222                      .194
           Price Dispersion Between Groups Defined by Utility and Purchase Level
Utility x Purchase Decile (4,252)
Between Variance as % of Total 74.8 70.4 56.6 60.9 74.0 67.6 75.4 72.5                        70.3
Between Standard Deviation       .354 .393 .323 .288 .309 .285 .324 .331                      .302
Utility x Purchase Centile (32,142)
Between Variance as % of Total 84.1 79.6 67.7 71.5 83.1 78.5 85.1 83.8                        81.9
Between Standard Deviation       .375 .418 .353 .312 .327 .307 .344 .356                      .325
+
    Years prior to 1987 are classified using the 1977 SIC system (447 4-digit industries).
    Years 1987 and later are classified using the 1987 SIC system (458 4-digit industries).
Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data.




                                                  40
Table 3. The Purchases-Weighted Distribution of Log Electricity Prices Paid by U.S.
         Manufacturing Plants, Dispersion and Variance Decompositions
                                 1963 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2000
    Overall Standard Deviation .524 .552 .478 .433 .439 .429 .477 .437 .383
                             Price Dispersion Between Industries
4-Digit SIC Industries (447/458)+
Between Variance as % of Total 71.3 61.4 48.8 40.9 37.9 46.8 59.0 44.5                        37.5
Between Standard Deviation       .443 .432 .334 .277 .270 .293 .366 .292                      .234
                         Price Dispersion Between Geographic Areas
NERC Regions (12)
Between Variance as % of Total 22.1 18.9 19.5 9.2 10.2 8.4 10.3 9.8                           13.5
Between Standard Deviation       .247 .240 .211 .132 .140 .124 .153 .137                      .141
States (51)
Between Variance as % of Total 43.8 40.5 37.5 40.0 45.7 38.3 39.3 37.5                        39.5
Between Standard Deviation       .347 .351 .293 .274 .297 .265 .299 .268                      .240
Utilities (697)
Between Variance as % of Total 67.2 58.4 52.3 60.0 65.2 56.8 59.1 55.0                        52.7
Between Standard Deviation       .430 .422 .346 .335 .354 .323 .366 .324                      .278
Counties (3,031)
Between Variance as % of Total 77.9 69.6 64.9 73.5 78.6 74.9 77.5 69.9                        65.4
Between Standard Deviation       .462 .460 .385 .371 .389 .371 .419 .365                      .310
          Price Dispersion Between Groups Defined by Annual Electricity Purchases
Purchase Deciles (10)
Between Variance as % of Total 62.8 56.3 36.2 27.4 24.7 38.0 49.5 41.3                        38.1
Between Standard Deviation       .415 .414 .288 .227 .218 .264 .335 .281                      .236
Purchase Centiles (100)
Between Variance as % of Total 74.7 65.5 41.5 33.8 31.8 45.0 60.8 45.9                        43.4
Between Standard Deviation       .453 .446 .308 .252 .247 .288 .372 .296                      .252
           Price Dispersion Between Groups Defined by Utility and Purchase Level
Utility x Purchase Decile (4,252)
Between Variance as % of Total 89.7 83.2 71.2 74.8 79.2 78.3 82.9 76.2                        74.3
Between Standard Deviation       .496 .503 .404 .374 .391 .379 .434 .382                      .330
Utility x Purchase Centile (32,142)
Between Variance as % of Total 94.7 91.1 81.6 84.5 88.4 88.3 91.7 87.5                        86.3
Between Standard Deviation       .510 .527 .432 .398 .413 .403 .456 .409                      .356
+
    Years prior to 1987 are classified using the 1977 SIC system (447 4-digit industries).
    Years 1987 and later are classified using the 1987 SIC system (458 4-digit industries).
Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data.




                                                  41
           Table 4. Menu of Electricity Tariff Schedules Offered to Industrial Customers by Santee Cooper Power as of July 2004
                              Energy        Monthly           Minimum           Own
                              Charge        Demand            Monthly          Trans-        Monthly
      Service Type              Per         Charge            Demand           Former       Customer
      and Schedule             kWh          Per kW             Charge         Discount?      Charge          Customer Profile
General Service, GN-96        6.56¢    None                 None             No              $6.85   Less than 90 MWh per year
Medium General Service,       2.60¢    $11.85               $11.85           No             $16.15   Greater than 90 MWh and less
GS-96                                                                                                than 1,080 MWh per year
Large General Service,        2.32¢    $13.20                $3,960            Yes, $0.50   $24.00   Greater than 1,080 MWh per
GL-96 (Optional                        ($8.57 for                              per kW                year, and delivery points near
provision for interruptible            interruptible                                                 transmission line
power)                                 portion)
General Service Time of     2.32¢      $13.20 peak,                            No            $24.00        Greater than 90 MWh per year
Use, GT-96                             $3.87 off-peak
Large Power and Light,      2.19¢      $10.76                $10,760           Yes, $0.50    $1,200        Demand greater than 1,000 kW
L-96 (Requires 5-year                  (extra $6.00 per kW (for 1,000 kW per kW                            and delivery points near
contract with high floor               in excess of          of Firm                                       transmission lines; minimum 5-
on demand charges)                     contract level)       Power)                                        year commitment.
                                           Optional Riders to Large Power and Light Schedule
Curtailable Supplemental         Different energy charges and a discount of 72% on demand charges for supplemental power that is subject
Power, L-97                      to temporary or permanent curtailment or interruption with six months notice.
Interruptible Power, L-02-I      Discount of 36% on demand charges for power subject to curtailment or interruption on short notice (2.5
                                 hours); limitations on frequency and duration of curtailments and interruptions; one-year advance notice
                                 required by customer to reduce interruptible portion of demand.
Off-Peak Service, L-96-OP        Discount of 80% on demand charges for off-peak power in excess of contracted levels for Firm,
                                 Supplemental and Interruptible Demands; subject to curtailment or interruption on short notice.
Economy Power, L-02-EP           Discounted energy charges offered, at Santee Cooper’s sole discretion, to customers with Contract
                                 Demand greater than 2,000 kW. Available on short notice during specified clock hours.
Standby Power, L-96-SB           Available at Santee Cooper’s discretion to customers with alternative non-emergency power sources.




                                                                   42
Notes:
   1. The charges listed above exclude South Carolina Sales Tax and other taxes and fees levied by governmental authorities.
   2. Electricity is metered and billed separately for each delivery point and voltage level, so that the Monthly Customer Charge and
       Minimum Monthly Demand Charge apply per delivery point and voltage level.
   3. All service types are subject to a Fuel Adjustment Clause (FAC-96) whereby the energy charge per kWh is adjusted by an additive
       factor that depends on Santee Cooper’s fuel costs in the preceding three months, an allowance for its capital improvements and
       distribution losses, and other considerations. The energy charge adjustment per kWh is similar for all service types, but the
       adjustment is less sensitive to capital improvements and distribution losses under the Large Power and Light schedule. Under all
       schedules, standard “firm-requirements” service is also subject to a Demand Sales Adjustment Clause (DSC-96) that credits Santee
       Cooper customers with specified shares of its demand-related and capacity-related revenues. The Demand Sales Adjustment can be
       positive or negative. It is applied as a proportional adjustment to the monthly demand charge under the Large Power and Light
       schedule and as a proportional adjustment to the monthly energy charge under the General Service schedules.
   4. The kW level used to calculate the Monthly Demand Charge can be greater than “Measured Demand” during the billing period,
       defined as “the maximum 30-minute integrated kW demand recorded by suitable measuring device during each billing period.” For
       example, the Medium General Service schedule states that the “monthly Billing Demand shall be the greater of (i) the Measured
       Demand for the current billing period or (ii) fifty percent (50%) of the greatest Firm Billing Demand computed for the preceding
       eleven months.” The Large General Service schedule specifies a 70% figure.
   5. The discounted Demand Charge under the General Service Time-of-Use Schedule applies to the difference between the customer’s
       Off-Peak Measured Demand and the customer’s On-Peak Measured Demand.
   6. The transformer discount requires that the customer take delivery at available transmission voltage (69kV or greater).
   7. Customers that opt for curtailable or interruptible power forfeit all discounts previously received during the calendar year for such
       power in the event they fail to meet a request for power curtailment or interruption. In addition, future discounts for curtailable and
       interruptible power can be withdrawn.
   8. Under the Large Power and Light schedule, the customer must commit to a Firm Contract Demand level for a five-year period. The
       Firm Contract Level places a floor on the demand level used to compute the Monthly Demand Charge. Lower minimum monthly
       demand charges are available under certain conditions. The Large Light and Power Schedule also includes an Excess Demand
       Charge of $6.00 per kW for Measured Demand in excess of the Firm Contract Demand, a charge of $0.44 per kVAr of Excess
       Reactive Demand, and a Monthly Facilities Charge equal to 1.4% of the original installed cost of any facilities that Santee Cooper
       provides in addition to the facilities it normally provides to its customers.
Source: Santee Cooper tariff schedules for commercial and industrial customers at http://www.santeecooper.com/ (20 July 2004).




                                                                      43
          Table 5. Regression Results for Electricity Supply Costs, Selected Years
Dependent Variable: Purchase-weighted mean price per kWh for the utility’s
manufacturing customers
                                                              1967    1973    1978    2000
Public Ownership                                              27**    19*      13     11
                                                               (9)     (9)    (13)    (11)
Private Ownership                                             34**    19**    12**     8*
                                                               (4)     (3)     (3)    (3)
Fraction of Utility Total Revenue from Industrial Customers     5     -22*    -33**    -5
                                                               (9)     (9)    (12)    (10)
Share of Power From Hydro                                     -36**   -47**   -57**   17*
                                                               (5)     (5)     (6)    (8)
Share of Power From Nuclear                                   408**   50**     13     46**
                                                              (81)    (13)     (7)    (8)
Share of Power From Oil and Natural Gas                        -4      -6      7      43**
                                                               (3)     (4)     (5)    (8)
Adjusted R-Square                                             0.76    0.65    0.61    0.63
Test: Utility Size Measures = 0                               0.00    0.44    0.30    0.60
Test: Customer Size Measures = 0                              0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00
Test: Ownership Measures = 0                                  0.00    0.00    0.00    0.06
N                                                             253     272     298     290
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01
Notes:
   1. Regressions are on utility-level data by weighted least squares. Weights are
       proportional to the square root of the number of customer observations used to
       calculate the utility-level statistics. The sample is limited to utilities for which
       there are at least 8 customer-level observations. The dependent variable is
       normalized so that the purchase-weighted mean price over utilities equals 100.
   2. In addition to the variables shown in the table, the regression also includes the
       first three uncentered moments of the utility’s log customer size distribution and a
       quadratic polynomial in the log of the utility’s electricity sales to industrial
       customers.
   3. The ownership variables and the fraction of total revenue from industrial
       customers are from the 2000 EIA-861 file. Public and private ownership variables
       are dummy variables, and the omitted category is cooperative and municipal
       ownership. Fuel share variables are state-level data from the State Energy Data
       2000 files. Both coal and “other” (includes geothermal, wind, wood and waste,
       photovoltaic, and solar) are omitted since “other” is always very small. Moments
       of the customer size distribution are constructed from the PQEM.

Source: Authors’ calculations on data from the PQEM, EIA-861 files, and State Energy
Data 2000.



                                                   44
Table 6. Estimated Electricity Supply-Cost Schedules as a Function of Customer
         Purchase Quantity, Selected Years

                       Percentile of          Supply Cost per kWh in 1996 Cents
Annual Purchase         Purchases
Amount (GWh)           Distribution         1967        1973         1978        2000
       0.53                 10              8.09        6.32         9.54        10.37
       2.43                 25              5.72        4.90         7.44        7.43
       13.1                 50              4.23        3.87         6.07        5.41
       73.9                 75              3.45        3.22         5.34        4.30
        229                 90              3.09        2.91         5.04         3.90
        422                 95              2.88        2.75         4.89         3.74
       1,130                99              2.43        2.48         4.60        3.50

Notes:
   1. The supply-cost schedules are derived from the regressions reported in Table 5
       and described in Section 6.1. The schedules are evaluated at sample mean values
       of the other regression covariates.
   2. The percentiles of the purchases distribution are the simple average of the
       percentiles of the shipments-weighted purchase distribution in 1967, 1973, 1978,
       and 2000.
   3. We do not report supply costs for the bottom tail of the purchases distribution,
       because small purchase values are outside the range we used to fit the utility-level
       regressions in Table 5.

Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data.




                                            45
              Table 7. Tests of Pricing Efficiency with Alternative Pooling Methods


     A. Customer-Level Data Pooled over Years before Calculating Utility-Level Statistics

                                                         Standard
                                                          Error of                   Difference:
                       Marginal Price Marginal Cost    Marginal Cost                  MP - MC
                       (1996 ¢ / kWh) (1996 ¢ / kWh) (1996 ¢ / kWh)                (1996 ¢ / kWh)
1963, 1967, 1973, 1974                             N = 432
 20th                       4.62           4.89             0.16                        -0.27
 50th                       3.66           3.78             0.16                        -0.12
 80th                       3.20           3.02             0.16                         0.18
1988, 1993, 1998, 1999                             N = 495
   th
 20                         6.25           7.01             0.35                        -0.76
   th
 50                         5.06           5.13             0.35                        -0.07
   th
 80                         4.20           3.93             0.35                         0.27



     B. Utility-Level Statistics Calculated from Customer-Level Data before Pooling

                                                         Standard
                                                     Error of Marginal               Difference:
                       Marginal Price Marginal Cost         Cost                      MP - MC
                       (1996 ¢ / kWh) (1996 ¢ / kWh) (1996 ¢ / kWh)                (1996 ¢ / kWh)
1963, 1967, 1973, 1974                            N = 1,038
   th
 20                         4.67           4.84             0.09                        -0.17
   th
 50                         3.68           3.72             0.09                        -0.04
   th
 80                         3.19           3.17             0.09                         0.02
1988, 1993, 1998, 1999                            N = 1,180
   th
 20                         6.29           6.88             0.23                        -0.59
   th
 50                         5.09           4.93             0.23                         0.17
   th
 80                         4.26           4.25             0.22                         0.01


     Notes: See text for a description of the underlying specifications and estimation methods.




                                                46
    Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data.

Figure 1. Electricity Price Dispersion Among U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-2000




                                       47
Source: Energy Information Administration for Residential, Commercial and
        Industrial series; authors’ calculations on PQEM data for Manufacturing.

     Figure 2. Real Electricity Prices by End-Use Sector, 1960-2000




                                   48
       Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data with part-year observations
               excluded.
       Note: The between-county standard deviations are calculated in a purchase-
             weighted manner using residuals from annual customer-level regressions
             of log price on a fifth-order polynomial in log purchases.

Figure 3. Spatial Price Dispersion by Selected Deciles of the Purchases Distribution,
          1963-2000




                                           49
  Source: Authors’ calculations on shipments-weighted PQEM data with part-year
          observations excluded.

Figure 4. Mean of Log Real Electricity Prices by Purchase Deciles, 1963-2000




                                    50
       Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data with part-year observations
               excluded.
       Note: Vertical lines depict the simple average of the 1st, 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 95th
             and 99th percentiles of the shipments-weighted distribution of annual
             purchases for 1967, 1973, 1978, and 2000.

Figure 5. Log Electricity Price Fit to Fifth-Order Polynomials in Log Purchases,
          Selected Years




                                              51
      Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data with part-year observations
              excluded.
      Note: Elasticity values are calculated from shipments-weighted regressions of the
            log price on a fifth-order polynomial in log purchases.

Figure 6. Average Elasticity of Price with Respect to Purchase Quantity, 1963-2000




                                          52
Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data and Santee Cooper tariff schedules.
Notes: The regression fit on the PQEM data controls for utility fixed effects. Vertical
       lines depict the simple average of the 1st, 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 95th and 99th
       percentiles of the shipments-weighted distribution of annual purchases for
       1967, 1973, 1978, and 2000.

Figure 7. Comparison of Empirical and Implied Price-Quantity Schedules, 2000




                                        53
Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data with part-year observations excluded.
Notes: Each curve shows the fitted relationship between supply costs per kWh and annual customer purchases, evaluated at
       sample means of other covariates in the regression. The vertical coordinate for each plotted point is the sum of the
       fitted supply cost and the regression residual for a particular utility in the sample, as described in the text.

    Figure 8. Electricity Supply Costs per kWh as a Function of Annual Customer Purchase Level, Selected Years

                                                          54
Source: Authors’ calculations on PQEM data with part-year observations excluded.
Note: Vertical lines depict the simple average of the 1st, 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 95th and 99th percentiles of the shipments-weighted
      distribution of annual purchases for 1967, 1973, 1978, and 2000. Dashed curves show bootstrapped (unit) standard error
      bands.

                   Figure 9. Marginal Cost and Marginal Price Schedules Compared, Selected Years


                                                             55
