NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN PAY REGULATION KILL? PANEL DATA EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECT
OF LABOR MARKETS ON HOSPITAL PERFORMANCE
Emma Hall
Carol Propper
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 13776
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13776

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

We would like to thank Josh Angrist, David Autor, Tim Besley, Ernie Berndt, Simon Burgess, David
Cutler, Bob Elliott, Alan Garber, Amanda Gosling, Larry Katz, Alex Mas, Andrew Oswald, Paul Grout,
Doug Staiger and participants in seminars at Bergen, Berkeley, Boston University, CEPR Labor seminar,
CHERE UTS, Harvard, Melbourne, NBER Health and Labor Studies Programs, UK Department of
Health and Warwick University, for helpful comments. We thank South West Observatory for access
to HES data, and Davidson Ho, Andrew Jackson, Rowena Jacobs, Mike Damiani and Katharina Janke
for their help with data. Financial support is from the ESRC through the Centre for Economic Performance
and CMPO Research Centers. Errors in use of these data are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Emma Hall, Carol Propper, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Can pay regulation kill? Panel data evidence on the effect of labor markets on hospital performance
Emma Hall, Carol Propper, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 13776
February 2008
JEL No. I18,J31,J45
ABSTRACT
Labor market regulation can have harmful unintended consequences. In many markets, especially
for public sector workers, pay is regulated to be the same for individuals across heterogeneous geographical
labor markets. We would predict that this will mean labor supply problems and potential falls in the
quality of service provision in areas with stronger labor markets. In this paper we exploit panel data
from the population of English acute hospitals where pay for medical staff is almost flat across the
country. We predict that areas with higher outside wages should suffer from problems of recruiting,
retaining and motivating high quality workers and this should harm hospital performance. We construct
hospital-level panel data on both quality - as measured by death rates (within hospital deaths within
thirty days of emergency admission for acute myocardial infarction, AMI) - and productivity. We
present evidence that stronger local labor markets significantly worsen hospital outcomes in terms
of quality and productivity. A 10% increase in the outside wage is associated with a 4% to 8% increase
in AMI death rates. We find that an important part of this effect operates through hospitals in high
outside wage areas having to rely more on temporary "agency staff" as they are unable to increase
(regulated) wages in order to attract permanent employees. By contrast, we find no systematic role
for an effect of outside wages of performance when we run placebo experiments in 42 other service
sectors (including nursing homes) where pay is unregulated.

Emma Hall
CMPO
University of Bristol
Bristol, BS8 1TN
United Kingdom
Emma.P.Hall@dh.gsi.gov.uk
Carol Propper
Department of Economics
University of Bristol
Bristol BS8 1TN
United Kingdom
carol.propper@bristol.ac.uk

John Van Reenen
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk

Economists have long warned of the unintended consequences of labor market
regulation (e.g. Botero et al, 2004). Many rules rationalized by equity considerations
can be harmful both to those that they are meant to help and to consumers. There are
many studies of labor quantity restrictions (e.g. hiring and firing costs) and labor price
floors (e.g. minimum wages). One common but under-studied form of regulation is
centralized wage setting, where pay is mandated to be almost flat over a large
geographical area which includes very heterogeneous local labor markets. In the US
the pay of postal workers, Federal government employees and some unionized
employees are set in this way and this extends to physicians, nurses, high school
teachers, etc. in many other countries.

We would expect such regulations for nominal wage equality to have unintended
effects on both labor supply and the quality of service provision in areas with strong
local labor markets. When the outside wage is high the regulated wage acts as a pay
ceiling and we would expect this to cause difficulties in recruitment and retention.
Over and above the effects of reduced labor supply of permanent workers, large pay
gaps may lead to lower motivation and/or lower quality workers, which in turn should
lead to a lower quality of service provision. The main contribution of this paper is to
confirm this simple economic intuition and to show that centralized pay regulation has
exactly this negative impact on consumers in a very stark setting. Our design uses the
centralized pay setting of over a quarter of a million nurses in the UK National Health
Service (NHS). Nurses account for over half of the clinical staff in hospitals and their
number and quality have been argued to be key inputs into the production of patient
care, for example motivating California to mandate nurse to patient ratios in all
Californian hospitals from January 2004. We find evidence that the regulation of
nurses’ pay leads to higher fatality rates after admissions for heart attacks and lower
productivity in areas with strong labor markets.

In general, testing the impact of wages on organizational performance is challenging,
because in a competitive market wages are equalized for workers of the same skill.
Where pay is set by regulation, however, there is a wedge between wages inside and
outside the regulated sector, which in principle allows the econometrician to identify
the impact of fluctuation in external labor markets on firm outcomes.

2

One advantage of our setting is that there is a very rigid national pay setting structure
for medical staff and well-measured outcomes of hospital quality. Pay for nurses and
physicians in NHS hospitals, which provide almost all hospital care in the UK, is set
by a central review body that sets pay scales in which there is limited regional
variation. The variation that exists does not fully reflect the wages differentials in the
external labor markets in which the staff are employed. Regional pay differences are
considerable in the UK (e.g. Bulman, 2002). For example, female white-collar wages
in North East England are about 60% lower than in Inner London and these persist
after controlling for human capital characteristics and other factors1. We would
therefore expect to see differences between inside and outside wages reflected in
staffing difficulties that manifest themselves in the lower performance of hospitals
operating in high outside wage labor markets2.

A second advantage of our design is that patient selection (the concern that observed
hospital death rates may partially reflect unobserved patient attributes) is less likely to
affect our study than if we used US data. The institutional setting is one where there is
almost no choice of hospitals by patients and minimal incentives for hospitals to select
patients. Medical care is free at the point of use in the UK. In the period we study
neither patients nor their family physicians chose hospitals for the emergency
treatment of heart attacks: even for non-emergency care patients had little say over
where they went for treatment. Hospitals also had, in contrast to US hospitals, little
incentive to select low risk and low cost patients. UK hospitals were not required to
publish outcome data (for example their mortality rates) and nor were the costs of an
individual patient easily identified as full public insurance meant hospital financial
systems were not designed to record costs at the patient level. Nevertheless, we
carefully assess the evidence for possible selectivity biases through the use of hospital
fixed effects, co-morbidity measures and analysis of business cycle influences.

The data we use is from a panel of all acute hospitals in England. To measure
performance we examine one measure of hospital quality - the death rate within thirty

1

As in the United States (e.g. Borjas, 2002) the cross sectional dispersion of UK public sector pay is
much lower than in the private sector (e.g. Disney and Gosling, 1998).
2
There is other evidence that falling UK public sector wages relative to the private sector have led to a
decline in the quality of the public sector workforce (Nickell and Quintini, 2002).

3

days of emergency admission for acute myocardial infarction (AMI)3 – and one of
productivity (total output per clinical worker). We find evidence that the impact of
pay regulation is to generate lower hospital quality and productivity in the areas where
labor markets are strong, as measured by higher wages in the outside labor market
relative to the wage inside the hospital. This effect is not simply due to fewer staff as
the effect of outside wages is present even after controlling for standard labor inputs.
Nor is the effect the result of general UK labor market conditions. We run many
placebo experiments demonstrating that this “outside wage” effect on performance
does not occur in similar sectors that are not subject to centralized pay setting (for
example, nursing homes for senior citizens). We also show that hospitals in high
outside wage areas have to rely disproportionately on temporary agency staff and this
intensive use of agency staff is associated with worse health outcomes. Finally,
consistent with basic production theory we find that hospitals with a richer mix of
skills (e.g. more physicians and more nurses) also have better hospital outcomes.

Our paper is connected to several other literatures in addition to that on the economic
impact of pay regulation. First, as mentioned, labor economists have long been
interested in the impact of labor market changes on firm performance. Theories of
“efficiency wages”, for example, suggest that improvements in the labor market
outside the firm’s boundaries could lead to decreased productivity within a firm
because there may be more shirking (Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984), a loss of high
quality workers (Weiss, 1980) or perceptions of inequity (e.g. Akerlof, 1982; Mas,
2006). It is difficult to test these ideas in an unregulated labor market. Where pay is
set by regulation, however, there is a wedge between inside and outside wages that
enables identification of the impact of external labor markets on firm outcomes. So
we can effectively use regulation to generate exogenous variation in factor prices4.

3

Examples of the use of AMI death rates to proxy hospital quality include Kessler and McClellan
(2002), Gaynor (2004) and, for the UK, Propper et al (2004 and forthcoming). The advantages of this
measure are discussed below.
4
Cawley et al (2006) find that higher outside wages are associated with worse health outcomes in US
nursing homes. In their paper, the mechanism is that stronger external labor markets lead to higher
inside wages and therefore a substitution away from nursing care towards labor saving medical
interventions. In our paper, by contrast, we hold inside wages fixed and still identify a negative effect of
outside wages. In the US where wages are not regulated, increasing factor prices move hospitals up the
labor demand curve rather than the labor supply curve. The positive marginal effects of inside wages
we find here are consistent with our interpretation that NHS wages are generally set on the labor supply
curve.

4

Second, our findings on the use of temporary agency staff relates to an emerging line
of literature on the causes and consequences of the use of temporary workers5. Third,
we connect to a large literature in industrial organization on productivity dispersion.
We document large differences in performance across hospitals, just as has been
observed for firms in other sectors (e.g. Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson, 2005). We
argue that one reason for this heterogeneity in the English context is the effect of
regulated wages on outcomes. Fourth, our study relates to the literature on the impact
of local economic conditions on health. Such studies focus on how economic
conditions affect the demand for health by changing people’s wealth or stress levels.
For example, in recent work, Ruhm (2006) argues that there are a greater number of
heart attacks during upturns in the business cycle6. Our paper suggests an alternative
mechanism that operates through the supply side.

In our model labor market

conditions, combined with rigid national pay setting, affect the supply of a key
clinical input that, in turn, affects health. Finally, our study relates to the literature that
examines the relationship between skills and productivity in the context of hospital
production (discussed in Appendix A).
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section I we discuss the institutional
background and the nature of the research design. In Section II we sketch the
econometric model that we are estimating and issues surrounding the approach. In
Section III we discuss the data and in Section IV offer a preliminary data description.
Section V presents the main econometric results and some robustness tests are
discussed in Section VI. Finally, Section VII offers concluding comments.

I. Institutional background and the research design
In the UK health care is free at the point of use and is provided through the NHS, a
state monopoly provider7. Just over 1.2 million workers are employed in the NHS and
the wages and conditions of clinical staff are strictly regulated. Since our study
examines clinical care in acute hospitals we focus on three main occupational groups:
physicians, qualified nurses and health care assistants (essentially unqualified clinical
5

For example see Autor and Houseman (2005) or Houseman et al (2003).
We explore the implications of any association between cyclical upturns and community health
below.
7
There is a small privately funded sector, which specializes in the provision of elective services for
which there are long NHS waiting lists.
6

5

staff). Exact definitions are given in the data section, but broadly clinical staff account
for three-quarters of all hospital employees. In our sample 15% of clinical staff are
physicians, 60% are nurses and 25% are health care assistants (see Table 1).

Physicians and nurses’ pay is regulated to a precise national scale that has little
differentiation over the country, despite a wide variation in regional labor markets.
Since 1984 these pay scales have been set by two “National Pay Review Bodies”
(NPRBs) known as the Review Body for Nursing Staff, Midwives and Professions
Allied to Medicine, and the Review Body for Doctors and Dentists. Each year, the
Review Bodies take evidence from the Department of Health, the main labor unions
and other interested parties before making a recommendation on changes to the level
and structure of pay. The government makes the final decision about whether or not to
implement their recommendations (it generally implements them in full). For the
health care assistants group there is no Pay Review Body and employers have more
discretion over setting pay in response to local conditions.

Under these national scales the same terms and conditions apply across the UK and
they allow only minor differences in pay between different areas. Additional
allowances are paid to those who work in London and contiguous areas, but these are
small relative to the differences in the external labor market. These allowances are up
to 11% higher in the highest cost area of Inner London compared to the low cost
areas. The outside wage differential is closer to 60% (see Appendix B). Beyond these
regional allowances hospitals have little scope for aligning the pay of qualified staff to
conditions in local labor market conditions. Pay scales are short and offer very little
scope for either appointing new hires at different points on the scale, or accelerating
workers up to higher grades. The centralized pay setting arrangements do not allow
pay to be easily adjusted to address staff shortages in local markets.

From an econometric perspective, this institutional setting is attractive because it
enables an examination of the impact of different local wages on hospital outcomes.
In most labor markets, changes in equilibrium wages will be the outcome of demand
and supply shocks, so identifying their impact on hospital outcomes is difficult as the
labor price is endogenous to the unobserved shocks. In the UK case the wage inside
the hospital (which we will call the “inside wage”) is held broadly fixed as outside
6

shocks change skill prices (which we will call the “outside wage”) in the local labor
market. There is therefore a wedge between the worker’s inside wage and the outside
wage. Consequently, variation in the outside wage can be used to analyze the effects
of labor markets on performance.

Figure 1 illustrates the case for two local labor markets, “North” and “South” where
outside wages are much higher in the South than in the North (generating a shift to the
left in the labor supply curve). Given an equal pay rate across geographic areas this
will mean a lower level of employment in the South compared to the North.

In principle, the regulated wage could be set above the competitive wage so it acts as
a minimum wage and thus employers shed staff. However, in the period studied here
there were chronic shortages of nurses and clinical unemployment has been close to
zero (e.g. Finlayson et al, 2002). Therefore, it is more likely that the wage is being set
below the competitive wage generating excess demand8. It is possible, however, that
wages are set above the competitive wage in some low outside wage areas in the
North and workers in these areas are earning rents (we look at this issue in Section
VI).

[Figures 1 and 2 about here]

We consider the consequences of regulating wages for health workers in this way,
first analyzing employer responses then worker responses. Turning first to the firm
side, employers will try to overcome the regulatory constraint in several ways. First,
they could over-promote identical workers to higher grades even if they do not have
the requisite skills (so-called “grade drift”). This will help them achieve the desired
labor quantity, but at the cost of the lower quality of the over-promoted staff.
Empirically, after controlling for grading structure we would still expect to see worse
quality in the high outside wage areas. Second, employers could offer various nonpecuniary benefits such as better working conditions in the high wage areas. These

8

In the absence of pay regulation, large local hospitals may have monopsony power so the equilibrium
wage will not be at the intersection of the labor demand and supply curve. But so long as the regulated
wage lies below the monopsony wage, the constraint will still be binding on some employers and the
mechanism we identify will operate.

7

strategies are limited by clinical unions’ power in pushing for homogeneous national
conditions and governments have been reluctant to challenge this9.

Third, assuming the regulated wage is binding, cost-minimizing employers will try to
adjust by substituting towards other factors of production. Consequently, other types
of staff whose pay is less constrained by regulated pay will increase and non-labor
factors will be in higher demand. Because of the specific skills required for different
medical interventions, however, substitution to much less skilled workers (health care
assistants and non-clinical NHS staff) will be limited. One key group of workers
where substitution is easier is temporary “agency” staff. There are a large number of
nurses (and other staff) employed in hospitals on temporary contracts. Private sector
firms supply temporary agency nurses to the NHS and these workers do not have their
pay regulated by the state. Consequently, the availability of agency staff will enable
NHS employers to bring their employment closer to their desired levels.

This is illustrated in Figure 2 where we consider a high outside wage labor market
(“South”). The regulated wage determines the number of “permanent” staff that the
hospital can employ. If the supply of agency nurses is competitive then the wage paid
to agency nurses will be bid up to the point that labor demand intersects with labor
supply at the competitive wage10.

Turning to the employee side, in local areas where outside opportunities are better
nurses will supply less labor as shown in Figure 1. In a static sense, this may lead to
lower participation rates, as fewer qualified staff will offer themselves for work. In a
dynamic search setting this will lead to higher rates of vacancies and turnover in the
high outside wage areas.
9
The desire for nominal wage equality across workers in different geographical areas has long been a
mainstay of union activity. It is not obvious why this should be the case, as real wages within the NHS
are made more unequal since the cost of living varies by area. However, if unions represent the view of
the median worker, as in the model of Grossman (1983), this worker may be better off with a more
compressed wage policy.
10
This raises the question of why nurses want to work in the public sector instead of simply becoming
agency nurses and earning more. Permanent employees have other non-pecuniary benefits such as
greater job security, better promotion prospects and enhanced pensions and heterogeneous preferences
over these elements of the job package. Furthermore, there may be stigma attached to being an agency
nurse rather than a full-time employee as many nurses are “motivated agents” in the sense of Besley
and Ghatak (2005). Nurses could also work in the private sector. However, the demand for nurses in
the private sector is limited by the small size of this sector in England and nurses in this sector have
less opportunity for promotion and training.

8

Our focus in this paper is whether there are effects of wage regulation on hospital
outcomes over and above the pure effects of reduced labor supply of permanent
workers. We focus on nurses as the labor market for physicians is basically a national
one, as the NHS operates a career track for physicians that ends with a lifetime
appointment to a single NHS hospital, but is preceded by movement between
hospitals and regions in a national context, which reflects the national provision of
training facilities for physicians.

From the framework above, a stronger local labor market generates substitution
towards temporary agency nurses. The reliance on temporary agency workers in the
high outside wage areas may reduce hospital performance for several reasons. First,
agency nurses may have lower human capital than permanent nurses. Some studies
show that they tend to be younger, less experienced and have less training (e.g. Audit
Commission, 2001). Second, even for ex ante identical nurses, being a temporary
worker may lead to lower productivity in hospitals because of lower job specific
human capital11. Thirdly, they may also be less committed to the public service
“mission” of the NHS (e.g. Besley and Ghatak, 2005). On top of the use of agency
staff, there may also be effects of the outside wage on the effort of workers through
various efficiency wage channels such as lower motivation and greater shirking.

If mobility were costless and there existed a single national labor market then using
local outside wages as a signal of labor market pressure makes little sense. However,
mobility in Britain is far less than in the US (for example, less than 1% of adults move
between the UK regions in a given year, compared to 7% across the much larger US
states). Nurses are predominantly female, often with childcare responsibilities and
need to be geographically close to hospitals, as they are required to work shifts
(Shields, 2004). It is likely, therefore, that mobility is not perfectly responsive to
wage differentials. We show some evidence for this below - if mobility was costless it

11

The Audit Commission (2001) finds that agency nurses have little notice before working their shifts
and that they are often employed to provide cover at weekends and at night when direct supervision is
less likely to be available. As a result, induction and handover may be inadequate, agency nurses may
have little time to get accustomed to the workings of the hospital, may be unfamiliar with the patients
under their care or with local procedures, practices and equipment, with their surroundings and their
colleagues. The Commission argues all these factors increase the chances of poorer quality care.

9

is unlikely that geographic differentials of the magnitude we observe could be
sustained.

II. Empirical strategy
A. Modeling Approach
To motivate our empirical work, assume that we can characterize the output of a
representative hospital by a Cobb–Douglas production function12

Y = ALα K β

(1)

where Y is quality constant output, L is effective labor input allowing for quality and
quantity dimensions, K is a vector of non-labor inputs (which for expositional
simplicity we will treat as scalar) and A is a Hicks neutral efficiency parameter. We
~

~

denote L as the product of “effort” (E) and labor quantity ( L ), so L = L E . Effort is a
catch all term for the other factors that transforms labor into efficiency units.

We consider disaggregating the labor quantity into different types of heterogeneous
workers so that the labor quantity index can be written as:
~

L=∑

γ

k

k

(2)

Nk

where Nk is labor of skill type k with relative marginal productivity

γ

k

( > 1) and we

normalize γ = 1 for k = 0, the lowest skill type13. Taking logs of equation (1) and
substituting in equation (2) and the definition of L, we obtain:

ln Y = ln E + ln A + α ln N + β ln K + α ln{1 +

∑ (γ

k ,k ≠ 0

k

− 1) S k }

where N is the sum of employees and the share of workers of skill class k is S k =

(3)

Nk
.
N

We model the effort function as14:

12

This should be viewed as a first-order approximation to a more flexible functional form. It is
straightforward to generalize this to more complex functional forms such as translog and we discuss
some experiments in the results section.
13
See inter alia Hellerstein, Neumark and Troske (1999).
14
See Machin and Manning (1992) for an example of this approach in the efficiency wage literature.

10

E = e(W,WO,Z)

(4)

Where W is the “inside” wage (i.e. the wage paid inside the hospital), WO is the
“outside” wage and Z are other factors affecting effort/quality of workers. We expect
effort to be rising in the inside wage and falling in the outside wage other things
equal. Using a first order log linear approximation for the effort function, e(.) in
equation (4) and substituting this into equation (3) gives:
ln Y = ln A + α ln N + β ln K + α ln{1 +

∑ (γ

k ,k ≠ 0

k

− 1) S k } + δ ln W + ϕ ln W O + ln Z 'θ

(5)
An alternative to estimating (5) directly by nonlinear least squares is by using the
approximation ln(1+x) ≈ x which gives us:
ln Y = ln A + α ln N + β ln K + α

∑ (γ

k ,k ≠ 0

k

− 1) S k + δ ln W + ϕ ln W O + ln Z 'θ

(6)

Theoretically, the object of the left hand side of equation (6), Y, is quality-adjusted
output. However, we do not observe this directly. Instead, use two proxies, one of
quality and one of total output, as measures of performance. The precise data
definitions are discussed below.

B. Interpreting the wage effects
The wage effects in equation (6) reflect any impact wages may have on (average)
worker effort or worker quality. We expect ϕ < 0 because conditional on a given
inside wage (W) an increase in the outside wage ( W O ) should reduce effort, E.
Similarly, holding labor inputs fixed, an increase in the inside wage should increase
output ( δ > 0). The various mechanisms have been extensively discussed in the
efficiency wage literature discussed in the introduction such as shirking, turnover,
worker quality and fairness. In the context of the publicly run NHS this may be
reflected in a greater reliance on agency nurses, who are contracted on a temporary
basis to NHS hospitals. We explicitly examine this and other mechanisms in the
results section.

11

As discussed above, wages can also have an effect on hospital performance through
the quantity of employees of different skill types. Conditioning the production
function on labor inputs in equation (6) abstracts away from these effects so we can
focus on whether there is an impact of the labor markets through the E(.) function15.
We will therefore be underestimating the importance of wages on hospital production
and show specifications where we relax this.

C. Econometric models
We estimate the “production function” for hospital i at time t as:
ln(Y / N ) it = ln Ait + μ ln N it + β 1 S itPHYS + β 2 S itNURSES + δ ln Wit + ϕ ln WitO + ln Z it' θ

(7)

Y is total output (essentially admissions), SitPHYS is the share of physicians in total
clinical staff and SitNURSES is the share of qualified nurses (precise definition of all the
variables are in Section IV below.) Compared to equation (6) we have used three
main skill groups, physicians, qualified nurses and the base category of health care
assistants which includes the unqualified nursing staff. Physicians receive the largest
amount of training16, nurses the second highest amount and health care assistants the
least. So in terms of the model we expect β1 > β 2 > 0 . Note that we have transformed

the dependent variable from output into “productivity” so μ = α − 1 is a scale
parameter that will be equal to zero under constant returns. Our baseline regressions
include employment as a control for hospital size, but we also show the robustness to
imposing constant returns to avoid an obvious division bias (employment being on the
left hand side and right hand side of the regression). We have absorbed the non-labor
inputs into the Z-vector. Another important set of controls in Z are casemix terms to
allow for patients of different severity of illness.

15
Because we observe a discrete number of skill groups one concern is that we are grouping over
heterogeneous skill groups within these categories. The interpretation of the inside wage becomes
ambiguous because it may simply reflect unobserved labor quality. The coefficient on the outside
wage, however, should be robust to this problem of interpretation as the theory implies that it should
take a negative value. If outside wages simply proxied for the measurement error in human capital
inside the hospital we would expect the coefficient on outside wages to be positive.
16
Physicians in the UK follow a five year undergraduate Batchelor’s program and then spend a further
four to eleven years in training, depending on their specialty. Nurses follow a three year undergraduate
Batchelor’s program to become a registered nurse. Specialist nurses then train for a further year (or
more).

12

Since we have panel data we decompose the unobserved total factor productivity term
into its variance components: ln Ait = η i + τ t + ν it where η i is a hospital effect, τ t are
a set of time dummies and ν it is a stochastic error term whose properties we discuss
below.
ln(Y / N ) it = ln Ait + μ ln N it + β1 S itPHYS + β 2 S itNURSES + δ ln Wit + ϕ ln WitO + ln Z it' θ + η i + τ t + ν it
(8)
We present results treating η i as a fixed effect (e.g. long-differenced results or
Blundell and Bond’s (1998) system GMM method described below) and also results
treating η i as uncorrelated with the right hand side variables (i.e. standard OLS). We
use various proxies for the outside wage ( ln WitO ) based on average wages in the local
labor market around the hospital. We primarily use measures at a disaggregated level
(we have seventy-eight distinct “travel to work” areas in our data), but experiment
with a relatively aggregate level (the ten regions of England). We focus on female
non-manual wages as this is the most likely comparator group for nurses but we also
consider other comparison groups for the outside wage (e.g. male wages). The nature
of the NHS means physicians essentially operate in a national labor market: the time
dummies will capture their outside wages. Since hospitals are a small part of the local
labor market we treat the outside wage as exogenous, although we lag the variable by
a year to avoid any immediate feedback effects from transient area level shocks
(permanent shocks are picked up by hospital fixed effects).
Identification of the coefficient on the inside wage, δ , is more challenging. We
observe the hospital inside wage, but higher wages may reflect a better skill mix such
as a superior grading structure, which we do not perfectly observe. Thus, finding a
positive coefficient on the average inside wage could simply reflect the better
performance of hospitals with higher average human capital. Note, however, that if
the outside wage partly reflects higher wages/skills inside the hospital, this will bias
the coefficient on the outside wage towards zero, making it harder to reject the null
hypothesis. Consequently, we present a first set of results that do not condition on
inside wage information under the assumption that the inside wage is truly national.

13

We then consider alternative methods of including the inside wage. Our main method
is to include the inside wage and use the system GMM approach discussed below to
allow for endogeneity.

Identifying the coefficients on the factor inputs in production functions is an old
problem in econometrics (see Ackerberg et al, 2007, for a recent survey). In equation
(8) the endogenous factor inputs are the numbers of employees of different skill types.
Our preferred method draws on a recent contribution by Bond and Söderbom (2005)
which examines the estimation of a model of a Cobb Douglas production function
when inputs with differential adjustment costs are optimally chosen. In our context we
make the plausible assumption that the hospital faces larger adjustment costs from
changing the number of physicians relative to adjusting the number of nurses. Under
reasonable parameterizations of the adjustment cost process lags of the endogenous
variables will be correlated with current values and this can be used to justify the
moment conditions underlying the Blundell and Bond (1998) estimator as applied in
the production function context (e.g. Blundell and Bond, 2000). Essentially this
estimator builds on the traditional moment conditions that lagged levels of the
endogenous variables can be used to instrument the first differenced endogenous
variables (Arellano and Bond, 1991). By (testable) assumptions on the initial
conditions the system GMM approach also allows lagged differences to be used as
instruments for the equation in levels. The approach allows the current employment of
all skill groups to be affected by shocks to productivity (i.e. endogenous in the
production function). We compare the GMM approach to alternative methods of
estimating equation (8) by long differences and by OLS in levels.

The hospital quality equation is estimated in a symmetric way to the production
function. Our measure of quality is death rates following admission for emergency
heart attacks (AMI) by individuals 55 years and over (the reasons for the choice of
this variable is discussed below). All the coefficients are allowed to differ as indicated
by the “D” superscript:

ln Dit = μ D ln N it + β1D S itPHYS + β 2D S itNURSES + δ D ln Wit + ϕ D ln WitO + ln Z it' θ D + η iD + τ tD +ν itD
(9)
The Z vector includes AMI specific controls for case-mix.
14

D. Placebo experiments on other industries
A concern with interpreting the coefficient on the outside wage as the effects of
regulation is that there may be other unobservables correlated with both hospital
performance and the outside wage. A test of this is to conduct a placebo experiment
and estimate the model in other industries where pay is not regulated. If the outside
wage also had a significant effect on firm performance in these sectors we would
conclude that regulation was not generating our results in the hospital sector.

We conduct one placebo experiment on nursing homes for elderly people. This sector
employs many nurses whose wages are not regulated by the Pay Review Bodies, so it
seems a good comparator. We also estimated firm panel models of productivity
separately for 42 separate service industries, most of which have a large proportion of
female workers. These were all the three-digit 1987 US Standard Industrial
Classification codes 53 through 60 and 71 through 81 (we excluded only the public
sector and the predominantly male construction sector).

E. Selection Issues
A concern with equation (9) is that there may be unobservable patient characteristics
correlated with the outside wage that make it more likely for AMI death rates to be
higher. Although this could in principle be a problem, we argue that our research
design and robustness tests indicate that selection is not contaminating our results.

(i) Research Design
We argued in the Introduction that our research design makes selection much less than
it would in a study on US data. The key outcome is in-hospital death rates from
emergency admissions. Incentives for patients to select hospitals were minimal or
non-existent in the time period we study. Treatment is free at the point of use so
quality is the only dimension patients would make a choice on. But there was almost
no public information on hospital quality until after 200117, so during the period we
study patients (and their doctors and buyers of health care) had almost no quality
information on which to choose hospitals. Further, patient choice was not encouraged.
17

There were no published indicators of quality available until 1999, when six were published. More
were made available from 2001.

15

There is no private sector hospital care for emergency AMI in the UK. Finally,
patients having heart attacks are not in a position to make a choice of hospital (Volpp
et al 2003).

Any incentives to select will therefore come from the hospital side. But during this
period, incentives for hospitals to choose patients were also weak. As there was no
data on quality, hospitals were not monitored on their clinical performance. So on
performance grounds they had little incentive to refuse potentially sicker patients.
Hospitals were not paid per patient, but received a block budget for emergency care.
So in theory they had greater financial incentives to turn away high cost patients than
in a system where reimbursement rates are (at least to some extent) adjusted for
severity (for example the US DRG arrangements). However, the fact that hospitals
were not paid per patient and all treatment was (and remains) free meant that the
financial systems in NHS hospitals were not set up to identify high cost patients18. We
conclude that, in practice, incentives for hospitals to select or to engage in differential
treatment of sicker patients were very weak in the period we study.

(ii) Controls for patient quality
Although we believe our research design makes selection issues less of a concern, it
does not eliminate them. To tackle the problem we introduce a large number of
controls for patient co-morbidity. First, we include in all regressions controls for
casemix such as the age and gender composition of emergency AMI admissions in a
particular hospital in a particular year. Second, we condition on mortality rates in the
local area which should pick up other unobservable influences on death rates from ill
health. Third, we present estimates controlling for unobservable hospital fixed effects.
Finally, in robustness checks we also condition on information on the severity of the
AMI admissions.

18

There are large fixed costs with introducing such a patient monitoring system and, in the absence of
strong incentives, hospitals did not use them. As evidence of this, when a cost per patient
reimbursement system was introduced in England three years after the end of our data in 2004, two
years had to be allowed between its introduction and full roll-out.

16

(iii) Business cycle effects on demand for health
Recently it has been suggested that population heart attack fatalities are positively
correlated with the business cycle. For example, Ruhm (2006) argues that there is a
greater number of heart attacks during “good times” using US state level
unemployment rates. It is therefore possible that the impact of high outside wages
that we find is not due to the result of nurse shortages within hospitals, but to
increases in fatalities due to the business cycle. While possible, there are several
reasons why our results seem unlikely to be driven by the effect of the business cycle
on population health. First, the group which appears to suffer most from falls in
unemployment during cyclical upturns is those aged 20 to 44. We examine fatalities
of persons aged 55 and over. Second, any relationship between business cycles and
population health is likely to be affected by institutions (Ruhm 2006, Gerdtham and
Ruhm 2002). The UK has a stronger welfare state and higher levels of labor
protection relative to the US. These may limit the mechanisms by which it is
hypothesized that upswings translate into heart attack fatalities. One mechanism is the
impact of increased hours and reduced leisure, which it is argued leads to less
investment in health production by younger workers and less time to care for older
persons. Hours are significantly less associated with the cycle in the UK than the US
(Gali 2005). So there may be less cyclicality of health investment (we present
evidence that this is the case below)19. We also examine conditioning on health
related aspects of the local business cycle such as pollution.

We therefore consider it unlikely that a positive association between high outside
wages and heart attack fatalities in the population outside the hospital drives our
results. However, as noted above, we use time varying controls for local population
health to control for any impact of the cycle on the health of those admitted to
hospitals. We also undertake an extensive series of robustness checks to attempt to
establish that a negative relationship between wages and population health is not the
source of our results.

19

The indirect caring effect is also likely to be mitigated by the UK social care system that provides
subsidized care for older persons and acts as a substitute for care from relatives.

17

(iv) Selection prior to hospital arrival or after hospital exit
Data constraints mean that we do not observe deaths prior to being admitted to
hospital nor after thirty days in hospital or after leaving the hospital. Lack of data post
discharge is unlikely to be problem as we discuss in detail in Appendix B. In short,
98% of AMI deaths occur within thirty days of being admitted to hospital; in fact over
half of deaths are within the first 48 hours.

The time between heart attack and hospital arrival (“Floor to door”) is in principle
important. But in our sample period ambulance staff provided little health care for
AMI victims. For example, even as late as 2000 only 0.6% of AMI emergencies
received reperfusion (treatment to stop clotting) from ambulance staff prior to arrival
at hospital (Birkenhead, 2005). Additionally, we show in the results section there was
no relationship between the outside wage and time spent in the ambulance (due to,
say, congestion on the roads).

III. Data
We have built an original, very rich database with “plant-level” panel information on
hospital quality, productivity and inputs such as staff skills and patient case mix. This
was compiled from a large number of mainly administrative data sources that we
discuss briefly here and in more detail in Appendix B and Tables A1-A3.
A. Basic information
The unit of observation in this study is the hospital, so all measures are at hospital
level. We construct a panel data set of NHS hospitals (called “trusts” in the UK20)
covering the financial years 1995/6 to 2002/3. The panel is unbalanced as the number
of hospitals changes over the period. In 1995 the number of acute hospitals in our data
was 234, and fell to 175 in 2002. We focus only on acute hospitals21.

20

An NHS “trust” is a financial, managerial and administrative unit and may cover more than one
physical hospital. It is appropriate to think of a hospital as a firm that may be single plant or multiplant.
We use the term “hospital” rather than “hospital trust” for expositional convenience.
21
Non-acute hospitals are a more heterogeneous set (they include mental health and community
hospitals) and generally do not provide emergency AMI treatment.

18

B. Measures of quality, productivity and casemix
These are derived from hospital episode statistics (HES) data. We measure quality of
output by within hospital deaths within thirty days of admission for emergency acute
myocardial infarction (AMI) for patients aged 55 or over. AMI was chosen for
several reasons. First, it is a common condition and the infrastructure used to treat
AMI is common to other hospital services making it a good general marker of hospital
quality22. Second, all patients with a recognized AMI are admitted, so there is little
scope for selection bias to affect the decision of who gets admitted (see the previous
section). Third, the quality of hospital care has been established to have an important
effect on survival rates, so there is ample scope for hospitals to affect outcomes
(Volpp et al, 2003). As an indication, deaths following emergency admission for AMI
have been published by both US and UK governments as indicators of hospital
quality. McClellan and Staiger (2000) argue that measures of AMI death rate correlate
well with other measures of quality. Fourth, variants of this measure have been used
widely in studies of hospital quality (starting with Kessler and McClellan, 2000).

We use annual hospital-level averages and, to avoid the problem of variability of rates
from small denominators, we only undertake analyses using hospitals with at least 150
emergency AMI admissions per year (results are robust to changes in this threshold).

To allow for differences in case-mix we include three sets of controls. First, we
control for unobserved hospital fixed effects, which will control for differences in
case-mix that are constant over time. Second, we control for all-cause time-varying
mortality of the catchment area of the hospital23 and will pick up the degree of ill
health of the population that the hospital draws its cases from. Third, we control for
the age-gender distribution of admissions for emergency AMI: the proportion of
emergency AMI admissions in five year bands separately for men and women.
Fourth, in robustness tests we control for more detailed AMI case-mix measures based
on the severity of the heart attack. Of course, there may remain some time varying,
within area, unobservable that increases AMI death rates that are not captured by area
22

Many of the actions to reduce deaths from emergency admissions for AMI need to be taken soon
after an attack, and so the performance of a hospital in terms of AMI reflects the performance of its
accident and emergency department. Around half the patients admitted to an acute English hospital are
admitted through the accident and emergency department.
23
Constructed from data on 354 Local authorities and standardized for age and gender.

19

mortality rates or the other observables. However, this unobservable would have to be
systematically positively correlated with outside wages in order to bias our results.

Productivity is measured in a way similar to labor productivity in studies of other
sectors, as total output per worker. Our measure of total output is finished consultant
episodes (FCEs). This is a standard output measure used in the NHS and indicates the
total volume of medical activity (e.g. Vita 1990). To allow for variation in case mix,
we again control for hospital fixed effects and for the age-gender profile of total
admissions at hospital level and type of admission24. In robustness tests we include
further controls for the case-mix of total admissions using an index based on the costs
of the procedures and diagnoses of all inpatient admissions.
C. Wages
We use several measures of outside wages. Our main measure is derived from the
New Earnings Survey (NES), which is a one per cent sample of all employees in
Great Britain covering about 300,000 individuals a year. The NES is mandatory
administrative panel data provided by firms to the Department of Work and Pensions
and contains information on earnings and hours. Our main measure is average annual
earnings, but we also consider hourly wages. We use the area code in the NES to
construct seventy-eight distinct county-based travel to work areas (or boroughs in
London). Using the zipcodes (“postcodes”) of the headquarters of county councils, we
matched each NHS hospital to all county councils that fell within a twenty-kilometer
radius from the hospital. The local area wage is constructed as the average of the
county wages of all the councils that fell into this radius. Where no councils fell
within the twenty kilometer radius the wage applicable to the nearest council was
used25.
Our main measure is the average wages of non-manual female workers since the
overwhelming bulk of nurses are women26. The nature of the NHS means physicians’
24

The proportion of admissions in eighteen five-year age bands for males and females separately plus
the proportion of admissions in three categories: emergencies, electives, transfers (omitted category is
elective).
25
About one quarter of trusts had no council within a twenty kilometer (thirteen mile) radius. Almost
half of the trusts had only one council within a twenty kilometre radius from the trust, with the
remaining quarter having two or more councils.
26
As an alternative to the NES we also considered the Labor Force Survey (LFS). The LFS is a selfreported household survey containing about 320,000 individuals per year (with 80,000 observations on
wages). From the LFS we can extract spatial wage differentials conditioning on more characteristics to

20

labor markets are national in scope and so local outside wages will be less important
for this group. Our main measure of the inside wage is simply the average wage paid
to clinical workers in the hospital, derived from staff numbers and expenditure data27.

D. Skill Groups
We define three clinical skill groups: physicians, qualified nurses (including qualified
Allied Healthcare Professionals, AHPS, such as radiologists and physiotherapists),
and health care assistants (including unqualified nurses and allied health
professionals). Extensive checks show that our results are not sensitive to the
summation over the qualified and unqualified. The staff measures are annual whole
time equivalents. We define total clinical staffing as the sum of staffing across these
groups. Shares for each group of staff are defined relative to this measure28.

IV. Preliminary data description
Table 1 presents the means, standard deviations, minimum and maximum for the
variables used in the regression analysis for our sample of hospitals. On average,
21.1% of emergency heart attack admissions die within thirty days with a wide range
from as few as 7% to as many as 37%. The average acute hospital is large with just
under 1,700 clinical workers.

build up the outside wage offered to a “typical” nurse. We experimented with such measures that
successfully predict labor supply problems in the cross section (e.g. Elliot et al, 2007). The smaller
sample size and sampling variation, however, means that such constructed variables are less useful in a
panel data analysis. So for the most part, we rely on the larger sample sizes of the NES that has less
measurement error as it is taken directly from employer records. We also experimented with using
measures of unemployment rates and employment rates as alternative indicators of labor market
“tightness”. We did not find that these added explanatory power over and above the information in the
wage, which in principle should fully reflect labor market conditions.
27
A problem with a measure of average wages is that it may reflect the skill mix, such as differential
grades within the hospital (as discussed above in the econometric section). We therefore also
experimented with a more exogenous measure of the price of labor based on the predicted regional
wage for a nurse following the method of Gosling and Van Reenen (2006). We use mandated wage
uprating by the National Pay Review Body (which has an area and grade specific component) to
calculate the predicted wage increase for an average nurse in the trust using the regional characteristics
based on the NES. The results are similar to those reported here and are available on request.
28
We also have a total employment measure that includes the non-clinical staff, but this does not
disaggregate between highly skilled groups such as senior managers and less skilled groups such as
janitors. Consequently, our main results use total clinical staff as the main employment measure and we
check the robustness of the results to conditioning on the total employment measure (see Table 6).

21

A. Variation of AMI rate and productivity over time
Figure 3 presents the distribution of AMI deaths between 1995 and 2002. We show
the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th quantiles of the distribution. The most striking feature
of Figure 3 is the remarkable variation of death rates at any point in time between
different hospitals. For example in 1995 the death rate is s17% for the bottom decile
and 27% in the top decile. Some of this variation can be accounted for by case mix
but there remains much residual variation that is potentially related to the quantity and
quality of labor inputs. Looking at the evolution of the distribution, Figure 3 shows a
gradual decrease in death rate over time indicating the long run trend in a decline in
the emergency AMI death rate. There is some convergence in death rates between
hospitals at the top and bottom of the distribution towards the end of the period. This
convergence and the falls in 2002 follow a major government initiative to reduce the
incidence of coronary heart disease through the “National Service Framework”29.
Although this is a genuine feature of the data we dropped 2002 to avoid any
contamination of the main results because of this major policy initiative30.
[Figures 3 and 4 about here]
Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of productivity which shows a large dispersion
some 60% between the top and bottom deciles in 1995. This heterogeneity mirrors the
well-known findings in the productivity literature that has looked at differences
between private sector firms: there is significant and persistent variation in
productivity even within disaggregated sectors that cannot be explained by observable
factor inputs. The figure also shows clearly the lack of a positive trend in our measure
of productivity.

B. Outside wages and outcomes: vacancies, labor supply and AMI death rates
In Figure 5 we display the geographical variation in outside wages, the intensity of
use of temporary agency nurses and AMI death rates to see if the raw data suggest the
relationships we have been discussing. There is considerable spatial variation in all
three measures. The similarity in patterns between the distribution of outside wages
and intensity of agency nurses is particularly striking, being concentrated heavily in
29

The framework set new standards and protocols, backed by increased resources and incentives. See
http://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/pubs/books/minap/HowHospitalsManageHeartAttacks12Nov2002.pdf.
After 2001 there were also other reforms to improve NHS performance, which included tougher targets
for waiting times in Emergency Rooms (see Friedman and Kelman, 2006, for an analysis).
30
The results are stronger if we include this year.

22

London and other urban centers with stronger labor markets. The pattern in AMI
deaths is slightly different, reflecting amongst other things, the distribution of
population ill-health which is higher in areas of greater poverty such as the North
East. Nevertheless there is considerable overlap in the regional distribution of AMI
deaths and that of outside wages and use of agency staff.
[Figure 5 about here]
We now examine some simple correlations across regions. First we plot the mean
outside wage against the nurse vacancy rate in Figure 6 across the ten English regions.
A clear upward sloping pattern emerges with the highest outside wage area (London)
having a vacancy rate that is fourfold higher than the vacancy rate in the lowest
outside wage area (the North East). Gosling and Van Reenen (2005) discuss the
correlation between nurse labor supply measured as the proportion of women with a
nursing qualification who are employed as nurses (rather than being employed in
another occupation or not participating). They show that labor supply is much lower
in the regions where outside wages are higher. In Inner London, for example, nurse
wages are about 5% lower than the regional average outside wage, whereas in the
North East of England nurses’ wages are 30% higher than the outside wage. In
London the nurse participation is 50% and in the North East participation rates are
75%31.
[Figures 6 and 7 about here]
Figure 7 examines the intensity of using agency nurses and the outside wage. Again,
we find that the regions with high outside wages rely a lot more on agency nurses than
the regions with low outside wages. Figure 8 plots the AMI death rate as a function of
the regional outside wage. There appears to be a positive relationship, London having
the highest AMI death rates and the low-outside wage regions of the North having
lower AMI death rates. In Figure 9 we consider these variables in growth rates over
the five-year period in our sample. Again, it appears that there is a positive
relationship between the change in the outside wage and the growth rate of AMI.
Although all areas have had some improvement in the quality of hospitals as

31

It cannot be concluded from this simple comparison that nurses outside London are earning quasirents from the public sector so that the regulated wage is above the unregulated wage in Figure 1. This
is because the comparison does not take into account non-pecuniary aspects of being a nurse, which
may be an unattractive occupation for many people. These non-pecuniary aspects are likely to be
relatively stable over time, however, so econometrically we control for them with fixed effects.

23

measured by AMI death rates, the rate of improvement was fastest in those regions
with the slowest increase in outside wages.
[Figures 8 and 9 about here]
Overall then, regions with high outside wages are characterized by higher vacancy
rates, greater use of temporary agency staff and higher death rates from AMI32. There
are, of course, many reasons why these figures may be misleading and there is no
causal connection between high outside wages and poor hospital performance. For
example, there may be many other factors positively influencing the outside wage and
the AMI death that we have not controlled for. To tackle this we turn to the
econometric results where we look at within region variation both in the cross section
(by using area and hospital trust level data) and in the time series (by controlling for
hospital fixed effects) as well as conditioning on confounding variables such as
casemix and local mortality rates.

V. Main results
In this section we present our main results looking at the effect of outside wages on
hospital quality and productivity. We then consider including inside wages, the
magnitudes of the effects, and the role of agency nurses, our placebo tests and other
robustness results.

A. Hospital quality as measured by death rates from AMI
Table 2 presents the estimates for hospital quality as measured by the log of the AMI
death rate. The outside wage is that derived from the log of the average wage of nonmanual women in the seventy-eight local “travel to work” areas. Column (1) presents
the pooled OLS estimates of the association of AMI death rates with staff shares and
outside wages, controlling for AMI casemix (admissions in fourteen age-gender
bands), hospital type (i.e. whether the hospital was a normal acute hospital or a

32

These results fit with Gosling and Van Reenen (2005), who use a long panel of regions between 1984
and 2001 (when there were some significant changes in mandated regional differences) to find a 10%
fall in nurse relative wages reduces nurse employment by up to 15%. Elliott et al (2007) find a positive
cross sectional relationship between vacancies and high outside wages.

24

teaching hospital), the local area mortality rates, hospital size (the log of total clinical
employees), year dummies and ten regional dummies33.

Column (1) of Table 2 confirms that the bivariate correlation in Figures 8 and 9,
which showed that higher outside wages are associated with higher AMI death rates34,
remains robust after adding controls. A 10% increase in outside pay is associated with
a 4% increase in AMI death rates. It also reveals that hospitals with better qualified
employees (i.e. a higher proportion of physicians and/or qualified nurses relative to
health care assistants) have lower AMI death rates. The coefficients are sensible being
larger for physician share (the highest human capital group) compared to nurse share.
Nevertheless, even after controlling for skill mix, the outside wage enters the
regression with a significantly positive sign.

Note that the standard errors are clustered by hospital. An alternative is to cluster by
area, but the standard errors were extremely close to those presented here, due to the
large number of areas35.

Column (2) of Table 2 considers long-differenced specifications (annualized three
year differences)36. The patterns of signs on the key variables are the same as OLS in
levels, but less precisely determined. The coefficient on the outside wage is positive
and significant at the 5% level. The skill share variables are correctly signed but
smaller in magnitude37. Finally, column (3) contains our preferred system GMM

33

The results were robust to including other measures of hospital size as extra controls (e.g. number of
finished consultant episodes, total number of beds or the total admissions). These terms were never
significantly different from zero.
34
Note that we also considered other health quality outcomes that showed similar patterns to those
reported here for AMI. For example, if we use death from strokes as the dependent variable in an
equivalent specification to column (1) the coefficient on outside pay is 0.475 with a standard error of
0.191. The coefficient on physician share was -2.305 with a standard error of 0.513.
35
The area-level clustered standard error on the outside wage in column (1) of Table 2 was 0.170 (as
compared to 0.176 when we cluster by firm). For productivity, the area-level clustered standard error
on the outside wage in column (1) of Table 3 was 0.199 (as compared to 0.198) when we cluster by
firm. See Bertrand et al (2004) or Cameron et al (2007) for a recent discussion of these issues.
36
We focus on long-differences to reduce the attenuation bias associated with transitory measurement
error. Including a full set of hospital dummies (within groups) leads to similar marginal effects with
larger standard errors. For example the coefficient on the outside wage in an identical specification to
column (1) estimated by within groups is 0.433 with a standard error of 0.324.
37
Running the regressions using five year differences also lead to strong results: the coefficient on the
outside wage was 1.718 with a standard error of 0.707. Note that the casemix variables were jointly
insignificant in the long-differences specifications so we do not include them (p-value of joint
significance is 0.353).

25

specification that treats skill shares and total employment as endogenous. This
estimator exploits the “within” information used in columns (2) and the levels
information used in column (1). The marginal effect of the outside wage is
statistically significant and similar in magnitude to column (1). The coefficients on the
skill shares are significant and larger in absolute magnitude compared to the previous
columns. This suggests some endogeneity bias of the coefficients on skill shares,
possibly because hospitals with high AMI rates rely on skilled staff to a greater extent,
which biases the OLS coefficients on the skill shares towards zero.

The diagnostics are given at the base of Table 2. For the instrumental variables to be
valid for system GMM there should be no second order serial correlation in the
differenced residuals and no correlation of the error term with the instruments. The
high p-values on the LM(2) and Sargan test are consistent with the validity of the
instrument set38.

B. Hospital Productivity
Table 3 repeats the analysis on the same sample as Table 2 but uses productivity as
the dependent variable. The order of the specifications is identical to Table 2 and the
control variables are the same except we use the vector of case mix controls specific
to total admissions. Column (1) shows that the share of physicians is significantly and
positively associated with higher productivity, while the share of nurses is also
positive, but statistically insignificant. Most importantly, higher outside pay is
associated with significantly lower productivity. A 10% increase in outside pay is
associated with a 6.6% decrease in productivity.

The long-differenced results are much weaker with no variable significant, possibly
reflecting the low degree of within-hospital variation in productivity. The final
column of Table 3 presents the preferred GMM results. Here, all three key variables

38

The p-value of the Sargan-Difference test of the invalidity of the extra moment conditions used by
the Blundell and Bond estimator (compared to the standard moment condition of Arellano and Bond,
1991) is 0.973. This implies the additional moments are not rejected, justifying the more efficient
estimation technique.

26

are correctly signed and significant. The magnitudes of outside pay and physician
share are similar to OLS, but the coefficient on qualified nurse share is larger39.

In summary, and taking both tables together, we have two key results. First, a richer
skill mix, in particular using more physicians, appears to have a positive association
with the quality and quantity of hospital output. This is what basic human capital
theory would predict although, to our knowledge, this has not been demonstrated
before in the health sector. Secondly, and more interestingly, higher outside wages
tend to depress the quality and productivity of hospitals. This is a more controversial
finding. In particular, we find that these outside wage effects exist even after
conditioning on skill inputs, so the outside wage coefficient is not simply reflecting a
lower quantity of key staff. We consider the other mechanisms through which external
labor markets may be having an effect on hospital quality and productivity below.

C. Inside Wages
According to our model, effort, quality and labor supply are determined by the
comparison between the inside wage in the hospital and the outside wage in the labor
market. We first have focused on the outside wage because of the relatively small
exogenous variation in the inside wage for a comparable nursing grade. In Table 4 we
look at this in more detail by re-running all the specifications in Tables 2 and 3
conditioning on the inside wage (the average clinical wage in the hospital).

Column (1) of Table 4 includes the inside wage in the OLS AMI death rate
regressions. The marginal effect of inside wages is negative as expected - higher
inside wages are associated with a significant reduction in AMI death rates. The
coefficient on outside wages remains very similar to Table 2 and remains significant.
The coefficients on the skills share terms do fall, however, and they are no longer
statistically significant. This suggests that the inside wage reflects, at least partially,
the different skill mix within a hospital. Similar results are observed in column (2) for
long differences and column (3) for GMM.

39
The Hansen-Sargan test rejects the validity of the instruments in this column. In the next sub-section
we show that this is due to misspecification – the omission of inside wages.

27

The final three columns of Table 4 use productivity as the dependent variable. In
contrast to the AMI regressions, the skill share terms dominate the inside wage in the
OLS productivity regression of column (4). The strongest evidence is in the GMM
results of column (6) where we find a positive and significant coefficient on the inside
wage – a 10% increase in hospital pay is associated with a 2.5% increase in
productivity. Outside wages remain negative and highly significant, however. The
Hansen-Sargan test no longer rejects at the 5% level suggesting that the main
diagnostic problems of Table 3 were related to the omission of inside wages.

Overall, we find some suggestive evidence that inside wages matter for hospital
performance, but identifying their effects is much harder than the effect of the outside
wage. Nevertheless, the coefficient on the outside wage, our key variable of interest,
remains robust to conditioning on the inside wage.

D. Magnitudes
The results appear to be statistically significant, but are they economically significant?
A 10% increase in the outside wages (holding the inside wage and labor inputs fixed)
is associated with a 4.6% increase in death rates (Table 2 column (3)). The decile ratio
of outside wages between areas in 1996 was about 33%, so a move from the worst to
best decile of labor markets is associated with a 15.2% increase in death rates. Thus a
gap of this size could account for just over one quarter of the 60% quality spread in
the 90-10. A 10% increase in outside wages is associated with a 5.5% fall in
productivity (Table 3 column (3)). Moving from the best to worst decile of labor
markets is associated with an 18.2% increase in productivity, which is just under a
third of the 60% between hospital productivity spread.

We can also compare our estimates of the impact of the labor market with those for
specific medical interventions for AMIs. Our estimates suggest a 10% increase in the
outside wage is associated with just under a five per cent increase in death rates,
which is about a one percentage point increase at the mean death rate of 21% in our
data. Heidenriech and McClellan (2001) estimate that the effect of increasing the use
of aspirins in treatment of AMI patients in the US by 70 percentage points (from 5 to
75 percent) was a fall of 3.3 percentage points in death rates; the effect of increasing
the use of thrombolytics from 0 to 31 percent was a 1.6 percentage point fall; and the
28

effect of increasing use of beta blockers from 21% to 50% was a 0.6 percentage point
fall. Austin and Mamdami (2006) estimate that prescription of statins at discharge
reduced three-year mortality by 2.1 to 4.5 percentage points.

Of course, although these show benefits, the costs of different policy interventions are
very different. Back of the envelope calculations (see Appendix C) show that in terms
of life-years saved, raising wages is much more costly compared with pharmaceutical
interventions. We calculate that there is an implied value of a life-year of $100,000
from raising wages compared to the $50,000-$100,000 generally used in US costeffectiveness studies (see Skinner et al, 2006)40.

Although across the board increases in the level of wages are not cost-effective,
changes in the regulation to allow the structure of nurse wages to reflect local labor
market conditions are more beneficial. We return to this in the Conclusion.

E. What is the mechanism through which higher outside wages affect hospital
outcomes? The role of temporary agency staff
The estimates above show that quality and quantity of hospital output are negatively
associated with the outside labor market wage. We have interpreted the coefficient on
the outside wage as reflecting worker quality. We now examine whether alternative
measures of staff quality are directly associated with outside wages and clinical
outcomes. The channel we examine is the possible greater reliance on temporary
agency staff in high outside wage areas. If agency staff have lower general or
hospital-specific human capital they may depress hospital outcomes41.

We have information available to construct a measure of the intensity to which
hospitals rely on nursing agency staff for a sub-sample of the data. We use the
proportion of total staff costs accounted for by agency nurses as our indicator in Table
5 (“Agency”). The first column reports regressions of this measure of intensity of use
of agency nurses on the outside pay rate (and other controls). There is a highly
significant correlation, suggesting that agency nurses are more commonly used in the
40

In the UK the National Institute of Clinical Excellence uses a figure of $60,000.
In a related literature, several recent papers (e.g. Autor and Houseman, 2005) have suggested that
temporary jobs are not “stepping stones” to better careers which is consistent with the notion that
workers build up little human capital in these positions.
41

29

high outside wage areas. Column (2) then includes the agency term directly in a
hospital AMI death rate regression identical to our preferred model (this is column (3)
of Table 4)42. A greater use of agency staff is associated with significantly higher
death rates in hospitals; a doubling of the intensity of use of agency staff is associated
with a 5.7% increase in the death rate. Column (3) simply repeats the preferred
specification on the sub-sample with non-missing agency nurse information with only
outside wages for comparison purposes. The results are very similar to the larger
sample. Then column (4) presents a “horse race” with both agency and outside wage
measures entered simultaneously. The outside wage coefficient falls to almost half of
its value in the previous column and is no longer significant at even the 10% level.
The coefficient on the agency variable also falls but it remains significant at the 10%
level. This suggests that an important part of the way that the outside labor market is
affecting hospital quality is through a greater reliance on temporary agency workers.
In support of this finding, detailed analysis of the payroll data of a small number of
hospitals indicates that agency staff are disproportionately deployed in emergency
rooms (known as accident and emergency departments in the UK), through which
emergency AMI cases are admitted.43

The next three columns of Table 5 repeat the experiment but use productivity instead
of AMI death rates as an outcome measure. In column (5) we show that a greater use
of agency staff is associated with significantly lower productivity. Column (6) shows
that the marginal effect of the outside wage on productivity is significant in the subsample where we have agency staff information (although somewhat larger in
magnitude). In column (7) where we condition on agency intensity the magnitude of
the outside wage coefficient falls by about 10% of its value in the previous column,
but remains significant at the 1% level. The coefficient on agency staffing has fallen
by about half but remains significant at the 1% level44.

42
We treat the agency variable as the other endogenous hospital-level variables like physician share
and instrument it with past values in the GMM approach.
43
There are no published breakdowns of where agency staff are deployed within NHS hospitals.
Analysis of detailed payroll data of fourteen NHS Trusts (data used in Crilly et al, 2007) shows the
share of agency staff expenditure accounted for by Accident and Emergency departments averages
9.1%. This is around twice the share of total nursing staff spend in Accident and Emergency
departments (4.7%) and is higher than the share of total nursing staff costs accounted for by agency
staff (7.9%).
44
We also re-estimated Table 5 by OLS and GMM excluding the inside wage and the results are
similar.

30

To further explore the role of agency staff, we examine whether there is a link
between agency staffing and a specific adverse medical outcome that is a major
problem in UK hospitals. Since 2001 acute NHS hospitals in England have been
subject to mandatory reporting of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
bacteraemias (bloodstream infections)45. This is known in the media as the MRSA
“Superbug”. It has been argued that hospital acquired infections are associated with
hospital physical cleanliness. For the UK, it has been hypothesized that greater
reliance on agency nurses may be associated with higher rates of MRSA. Temporary
nurses may be less knowledgeable about local infection control policies, and move
around more between wards within hospitals as well as switching between hospitals.
This implies a greater number of patient contacts per agency nurse, and patients on
wards with higher numbers of temporary staff may come into contact with more staff,
since temporary workers often work shorter shifts than permanent workers.

MRSA data is only available for 2001 and 2002. For these years we regressed MRSA
rates against agency staff intensity controlling for the same variables as in Table 2
column (1). Consistent with McCormick et al (2007) we found a positive and
significant association between levels of MRSA rates and use of agency staff (a
coefficient of 0.015 with a robust standard error of 0.006).

Taken as a whole, these results are suggestive that agency staffing may be part of the
mechanism through which higher outside wages negatively affect hospital outcomes.

F. Placebo Tests: No role for the outside wage in other sectors
A concern with our results is that the effects of the outside wage may be due to some
other factor than pay regulation. If this were so we would also expect outside wages to
affect performance in other sectors that had similar characteristics to hospitals. In this
section we conduct several placebo experiments to show that our outside wage
measure is not systematically correlated with performance in these sectors. We look at
one sector in depth and then consider 42 other private sector service industries.
45

Stapylococcus Aureas (SA) are bacteria commonly carried on the skin and it is estimated around
30% of the population of the UK carries SA bacteria at any one time. SA bacteria can cause serious
infections such as surgical wound infections and pneumonia. Bacteraemia infections occur when the
MRSA enters a normally sterile bloodstream either through an intravenous catheter or a local site of
infection.

31

We first consider nursing homes for senior citizens. Health care workers are employed
intensively in this sector which provides both medical and “hospitality” services for
elderly people on a long-term basis. Unlike hospitals, however, firms are free to set
wages without being constrained by a centralized regulated nursing wage. Firm-level
panel data for 1998 and 1999 was collected for 649 randomly selected nursing homes
which included extensive characteristics46. One measure of labor productivity specific
to this sector is the number of occupied beds per hour worked. This does not take into
account the differential quality of nursing homes, so our baseline results use revenues
per hour – this weights raw productivity figure by the price charged to stay in the
home (under the assumption that the higher quality nursing homes are more
expensive). We compare this with the beds per hour measure as well.

Table 6 contains the results. The key variable of interest is exactly the same as in the
earlier tables; the outside wage in the local labor market. We also control for the
average wage in the home (the inside wage), the proportion of employees who have
nursing qualifications, overall firm size (employment), gender composition, average
worker age, the proportion of residents subsidized by the government, regional
dummies and year dummies. In column (1) we report the basic results that show that
the inside wage is positive and significant (which could represent either unobserved
skills or efficiency wages). More importantly, the outside wage term although
negative is completely insignificant. Column (2) includes average hours as an
additional control since wages may affect hours worked (the denominator of the
dependent variable). The coefficient on the outside wage remains insignificant and
actually becomes positive. In 1999 the UK introduced a national minimum wage so
this constrained firms to pay a legal minimum. To make sure that this is not
contaminating our results we re-estimate on the 1998 cross section only in column (3)
and again the outside wage is insignificant47. In column (4) we include a full set of
firm fixed effects. Although the inside wage remains positive and significant the
outside wage remains insignificant. Finally, in column (5) we use output per hour

46

See Appendix B and Machin and Wilson (2004) for a more detailed data description
We also constructed the wage “gap” – the proportion that the 1998 wage bill in the home would have
to increase in order to comply with the minimum wage law. This is highly correlated with subsequent
wage growth. The outside wage term remains insignificant when the “gap” is included as an additional
variable.
47

32

instead of revenue per hour as the dependent variable without changing the qualitative
results.

We also examined production functions from a number of other service industries
where there were many female employees. In contrast to the US, all UK firms are
legally required to lodge their accounts in Companies’ House and, if they are above a
minimum size threshold, legally obliged to report their wage bill, employment, sales
and other characteristics (even if they are not listed on the Stock market). This data is
available electronically through BVD’s Amadeus Dataset (see Appendix B for details)
and we exploit this to run panel data regressions of labor productivity (ln(revenues per
worker)) on the outside wage. We mimic the same three specifications of Table 3
(OLS, long-differences and system GMM) including as additional controls the inside
wage, ln(employment), the ln(capital-labor ratio), regional and year dummies. The
full results for these 126 regressions (three specifications in forty-two industries) are
summarized in Appendix Table A4. In only seven cases was the coefficient on the
outside wage negative and significant at the 5% level (5.6% of the total number of
regressions), which is what would be expected by pure chance given the large number
of regressions.

Taken together, these results from sectors where there are no maximum pay limits
suggests that the negative effect of outside wages is limited to the hospital sector. The
absence of such a placebo effect in the other industries strongly suggests that it is
regulation which is causing the results rather than some other unobserved factor.

VI. Robustness of the results
We describe here a sample of the large number of robustness checks we performed on
the main results. These are summarized in Table 7. All cells report the coefficient and
standard error on the outside wage from separate regressions. The first column has
AMI death rates as the dependent variable and the second column has productivity as
the dependent variable. Both columns include the inside wage. We begin in row 1
with a baseline regression taken from Table 4 columns (3) and (6). The other
regressions use this as the baseline in the rest of the table.

33

A. Severity of AMI cases and the local labor market
As discussed above, Ruhm (2006) has suggested that a booming local labor market
could increase ill health and the incidence of heart attacks and has presented US
evidence to support this hypothesis48. We have sought to deal with co-morbidity
through an extensive set of demographic controls, area mortality rates and hospital
fixed effects. But it is possible there are still omitted casemix variables and that a
positive correlation between economic activity and severity of patients admitted that
is driving our results. We test the robustness of our results to this idea in a number of
ways.

First, we examine whether the severity of those admitted with AMI is associated with
outside wages. Using HES data we calculated the proportion of emergency AMI cases
that were admitted “with complications” compared to the total49. Regressing this AMI
case severity measure on the outside wage and all the variables in a specification like
column (1) of Table 2 shows that there is no significant association with outside
wages50. We then include this measure of AMI casemix severity directly in the AMI
death rate regressions (row 2 of Table 7). In simple OLS specifications - as in Table 2
column (1) - the coefficient on this variable took the expected positive sign and was
statistically significant (0.262 with a standard error of 0.116) when we omitted our
demographic controls. When the demographic controls were included, the extra comorbidity variable was positive but insignificant (in OLS or in GMM). This suggests
that our included demographics are doing a good job at reflecting casemix. The
marginal effect of the outside wage was very similar when the extra casemix variable
was included as shown in the first column of row 2.

As a robustness check for the productivity regressions we use a casemix variable
based on the severity of all admissions to each hospital. This index, known as the
reference cost index, is derived from all admissions to the hospital as classified by
48

Note our outcome measure differs from the population AMI rates in Ruhm (2006). Our measure is
the death rate conditional on having a heart attack. So Ruhm’s effect of strong labor markets causing
more heart attacks is distinct from our measure of hospital quality.
49
We constructed this ratio from the proportion of emergency patients 55 years or older admitted with
HRG codes E11 (AMI with complications) and E12 (AMI without complications). For discussion of
HRGs, see Appendix B.
50
The coefficient on outside wages was 0.001 with a standard error of 0.041. If we drop the time
dummies, however, the coefficient on the outside wage becomes positive and significant (0.068 with a
standard error of 0.030), suggesting that it is important to control for omitted aggregate time shocks.

34

Healthcare Resource Group (HRGs are similar to US DRGs, Diagnostic Related
Groups - see Appendix B). A higher value of the index reflects greater complexity of
cases. When included in the productivity regressions the relative costs index takes the
expected sign and is significant (the index has a coefficient of -0.715 and a standard
error of 0.186). The effect of the outside wage is robust, however, remaining negative
and significant (row 3 column (2) of Table 7).

Second, we investigate whether outside wages are associated with higher AMI death
rates at the community level (i.e. in the whole local area both inside and outside
hospitals). We would expect some positive relationship between community level
death rates and outside wages as our model implies that local death rates rise because
of the decline in hospital quality, even though in-hospital deaths only account for a
minority of local area deaths (Norris et al, 1998). The Ruhm hypothesis suggests a
strong positive relationship. Taking the local authority as the unit of observation, we
examine the relationship between (age and gender standardized) AMI death rates and
our outside pay variable (lagged), controlling for year and local authorities effects for
1996-200151. We find, as expected, a small positive relationship, but one which is
insignificantly different from zero. The coefficient on outside pay is 0.04 (standard
error = 0.17).

The lack of any strong positive relationship between outside wages and AMI fatalities
at community level is supported by a lack of a positive relationship between outside
wages and factors that might drive higher community level fatalities. We found no
significant correlation between increases in outside wages and increase in levels of
pollution, smoking or obesity, all of which are key risk factors for AMI52.

51

There are 354 local authorities in England. These are the primary political level below national level
in England.
52
Regressing smoking on outside wages using local authority as the unit of analysis with controls for
local authority fixed effects and year, we find a coefficient of –0.078 (standard error = 0.120).
Regressing obesity on outside wages using local authority as the unit of analysis with controls for local
authority fixed effects and year, we find a coefficient of 0.11 (standard error = 0.11). We examined the
relationship between four measures of air borne pollutants (carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide,
particulate matter and ozone) and found no evidence of a positive association between pollution and
outside pay. Instead, the evidence points to a negative association.

35

We conclude that our finding of a positive relationship between in-hospital mortality
and outside wages seems unlikely to be driven by an association between outside
wages and poorer health in the area from which the hospital draws its patients.

B. Outside labor markets affecting care in ambulance prior to hospital?
Medics distinguish two important periods after a heart attack: “floor to door” (from
having the heart attack to admission to hospital) and “door to needle” (from admission
to initial treatment – usually injection of an anti-blood clotting agent such as a
thrombolytic drug). Since our measure of quality is death rates from AMI taken from
the moment a patient is admitted to hospital, it is possible that the outside wage is
actually affecting treatment in the floor to door period. Perhaps the most obvious
mechanism would be that stronger economic activity generates more road congestion
causing patients to arrive at hospitals later and decreasing their chances of survival.
To check this we re-estimated AMI equations including an additional control for
ambulance speeds (the proportion of urgent ambulance journey arriving on time). Our
outside wages estimates were robust to this control (coefficient of 0.446 with a
standard error of 0.172) 53.
More subtly, hospitals in high outside wage areas may have higher death rates
because of the behavior of ambulance crews. If ambulance crews were of poorer
quality in high outside wage areas (for the same reason as nurse quality is poorer) then
patients might arrive in hospitals in a worse state and therefore be more likely to die
in the “door to needle” period. Over our time period, however, there was hardly any
treatment of heart attack patients in ambulances. For example, in 2000 only 0.6% of
reperfusion (thrombolytic drugs) for heart attack patients was given before admission
to hospital in 2000 and 2001 (Birkenhead, 2005). We conclude that poorer treatment
by ambulance crews in high outside wage areas is unlikely to drive our results.

C. Financial Pressure
An alternative explanation for the importance of the outside wage is that hospitals in
stronger local labor markets face sharper budgetary constraints. The British
government’s funding formula for the health service contains a “market forces factor”
that allocates more funds to reflect the higher costs in more expensive areas, but it
53

These data are only available as a consistent series for three years in our data.

36

may not fully compensate (e.g. Crilly et al, 2007). Consequently, hospitals in high
wage areas may be chronically under-funded and this could cause worse quality and
productivity. To test this idea we included a measure of the hospital’s financial
surplus (or deficit) as an additional control. In row 3 we show that the coefficient on
the outside wage remains significant and very similar in magnitude in the sub-sample
where we have information on a hospital’s financial position.

C. Dynamics and short-run monopsony
We were concerned that we may have misspecified the econometric model and not
allowed for sufficient dynamics. The specification in row 4 of Table 7 includes a
lagged dependent variable (treated as endogenous using the standard GMM approach)
and presents the long-run effects of outside wages. Although the lagged dependent
variable was significant, the long-run effects of the outside wage remain significant
and become slightly larger in absolute magnitude for both equations. The fact that
there is a long-run effect of outside wages is important and consistent with the cross
sectional raw data in Figures 6 through 8. Labor supply difficulties in the NHS are not
simply due to hospitals optimally smoothing their labor force in response to positive
shocks (due to higher adjustment costs for permanent compared to temporary staff) or
because of short-run monopsony power as may be the case in the US (see Houseman
et al, 2003). They appear to be long-term.

D. Regional heterogeneity in effect of outside wage
According to Figure 1, the high outside wage areas may be affected more by the
regulated wage than the low cost areas (for example, the regulated wage may be close
to the unregulated equilibrium wage for the North). Consequently, we would expect a
larger effect in London than in the rest of the country. We experimented with
dropping London from the sample in row 5. As we expect, the marginal effects are
somewhat smaller in this reduced sample for both AMI and productivity, but they
remain significant at the 5% level.

E. Further Robustness Tests
We also tried dropping some outliers in the change in the outside wage in row 6 and
running the regressions only on the balanced panel in row 7. The results are stronger
than the baseline in these sub-samples. In row 8, we use an alternative measure of the
37

outside wage – the regional wage in each of the ten English regions (i.e. much more
aggregated than the seventy-eight area outside wages used in our main analysis). The
marginal effects are larger in magnitude but statistically insignificant unless we drop
the regional dummies (row 9). This illustrates the importance of using spatially
disaggregated measures. In row 10 we include a variable measuring total hospital
employees, including non-clinical workers. The employment variable is insignificant
and the coefficient on outside wages falls, but is still significant at the 5% level.

One simple concern is that the inclusion of linear skill shares in equation (7) may be
too restrictive. We relax this by including squares and cross-product terms of the three
skill groups in row 11. The higher order terms were generally insignificant and the
coefficients on the outside wage terms remain significant and are larger in absolute
magnitude.

Overall then, our results appear robust to a wide variety of experiments.

VII. Conclusions
This paper has examined the impact of centralized pay regulation on the performance
of hospitals. Regulated skill prices offers a useful identification strategy for
examining the impact of labor markets on organizational performance relative to a
competitive labor market where wages inside and outside the firm should be
equalized. Our unusually rich data of a panel of essentially all acute hospitals in
England allows us to control for a number of confounding influences.

We find that keeping pay flat over heterogeneous local labor markets leads to lower
hospital performance (as indicated by higher AMI death rates and lower productivity)
in areas with stronger outside labor markets54. This is not simply because hospitals in
high outside (relative to inside) wage areas have trouble maintaining high enough
staffing levels, as we condition on labor inputs. It is more likely to be due to the
difficulty of retaining high quality staff and/or the lower levels of effort that are
supplied when outside wages are high. The negative association between firm
54

One of the little-discussed costs of centralized wage setting proposed by some macro-economists
(e.g. Layard, Nickell and Jackman, 2005) are these types of perverse effects on firm productivity.

38

performance and the outside wage is unique to hospitals – we do not find it in the
other 43 service sectors we examine where their pay is not regulated, such as the
market for nursing homes for senior citizens.

We show that reliance on temporary agency staff instead of permanent staff is a
possible mechanism in generating these worse outcomes for hospitals in high outside
wage areas. This finding is related to the emerging literature on the quality of
temporary jobs for workers (e.g. Autor and Houseman, 2005).

One further direction we would like to explore is the impact of regulated prices on
technology adoption (see Acemoglu and Finkelstein, 2006). Our setting is useful
because the external regulation of wages enables us to examine whether part of the
performance effect comes from the adoption of sub-optimal techniques. We have
collected data on the management practices and organizational structure of these
hospitals (using the methodology of Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007) in order to
understand in more detail the mechanisms generating the extreme variation we
observe in hospital performance.

From a policy perspective, our study has important implications for regulated labor
markets. The National Health Service, a quasi-monopoly provider, dominates the UK
health system and wages for physicians and nurses are determined centrally. The local
variation of wages does not fully reflect the higher outside wage in areas where the
labor market is tight (such as London and the South East). The low relative wages in
these high outside wage areas appear to have a direct impact on the death rates in
hospitals and the level of their productivity. Rather than focusing on across the board
increases in national pay which we found not to be cost effective, relaxing the
regulatory system to allow local wages to reflect local market realities would improve
productivity and save lives in the higher outside wage areas.

39

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Finkelstein, Amy. 2006. “Input and Technological choices in
regulated industries: Evidence from the healthcare sector” MIT mimeo
Ackerberg, Daniel, Lanier Benkard, Steven Berry, and Ariel Pakes. 2007.
“Econometric Tools for Analyzing Market Outcomes.” Handbook of
Econometrics Volume VI, edited by James Heckman, and Ed Leamer.
Aiken, Linda H., Sean P. Clarke, Robyn B. Cheung, Douglas M. Sloane, and Jeffrey
Silber. 2003. “Educational Levels of Hospital Nurses and Surgical Patient
Mortality.” Journal of the American Medical Association 290(24) 1617-1623.
Akerlof, George. 1982. “Labor contracts as Partial Gift Exchange” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 97, 543-569
Antonazzo, Emmanuel, Anthony Scott, Diane Skatun, and Robert F. Elliott. 2003.
“The labor market for nursing: a review of the labor supply literature” Health
Economics 12 (June): 467-478
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel
Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations”
Review of Economic Studies 58: 277-297.
Audit Commission. 2001. Brief Encounters: getting the best from temporary nursing
staff. London: Audit Commission.
Austin, Peter C., and Muhammad M. Mamdani. 2006. “A comparison of propensity
score methods: a case-study estimating the effectiveness of post-AMI statin
use.” Statistics in Medicine 25 (June): 2084-2106
Autor, David, and Susan Houseman. 2005. “Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor
Market Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from Random
Assignments.” MIT mimeograph, Cambridge, MA.
Bertrand, Marianne, Duflo, Esther and Mullainathan. 2004. “How much should we
trust difference in difference estimates” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
249-275
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2005. “Competition and Incentives with
Motivated Agents.” American Economic Review 95 (June): 616-636.
Birkenhead, J. S. 2005. “Presentation of data from National Audit of Myocardial
Infarction (MINAP)” www.rcplondon.ac.uk/college/ceeu/ceeu_ami_home.htm
Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. 1998. “Initial conditions and moment
restrictions in dynamic panel data models.” Journal of Econometrics 87: 115-143.
Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. 2000. “GMM estimation with persistent panel
data: an application to production functions.” Econometric Reviews 19 (3): 321340
Bond, Steven, and Måns Söderbom. 2005. “Adjustment costs and the identification of
Cobb Douglas production functions.” Institute for Fiscal Studies Working
Paper no. W05/04 (February).
Bloom, Nick and Van Reenen, John. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management
practices across firms and nations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII, (4)
1351- 1408
Borjas, George J. 2002. “The Wage structure and the Sorting of Workers into the
Public Sector.” NBER Working Paper no. 9313 (November).
Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and
Andrei Schleifer. 2004. “The Regulation of Labor.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119 (November): 1339-1382.

40

Bulman, Joanna. 2002 “Patterns of Pay: Results of the 2002 New Earnings Survey.”
Labor Market Trends 110 (December): 643-655.
Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, Johan and Miller, Douglas. 2007. “Bootstrap based
improvements for inference with clustered standard errors” NBER Technical
Working Papers No.344
Cawley, John, David C. Grabowski, and Richard A. Hirth. 2006. “Factor Substitution
in Nursing Homes.” Journal of Health Economics 25 (March): 234-247.
Crilly, Tessa, John Crilly, Margaret Controy, Roy Carr-Hill, and David Parkin. 2007.
“Review of Specific Cost Approach to Staff Market Forces Factor.” Report to
the UK Department of Health (May).
Cutler, David and McClellan, Mark. 2001. “Is Technological Change in Medicine
Worth It?” Health Affairs 20: 11-29.
Disney, Richard, and Amanda Gosling. 1998. “Does it pay to work in the public
sector?” Fiscal Studies 19 (November): 347-374.
Finlayson, Belinda, Jennifer Dixon, Sandra Meadows, and George Blair. 2002. “Mind
the gap: the extent of the NHS nursing shortage.” British Medical Journal 325
(September 7): 538–541.
Frijters, Paul, Michael A. Shields, and Stephen W. Price. 2003. “Investigating the
Quitting Decision of Nurses: Panel Data Evidence from the British National
Health Service.” IZA Discussion Paper no. 794 (June).
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2005. “Reallocation, Firm
Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” NBER
Working Paper no. 11555 (August).
Friedman, John and Kelman, Steve. 2006. “Effort as Investment: Analyzing
Incentives in the Public Sector”, mimeo, Harvard University
Gali, Jordi. 2005. “Trends in Hours, Balanced Growth and the Role of Technology in
the Business cycle” Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, 87 (4), 459-86.
Gaynor, Martin. 2004. “Competition and Quality in Health Care Markets. What Do
We Know? What Don’t We Know?” Economie Publique 15: 3-40.
Gerdtham, Ulf-G and Ruhm, Christopher, J. 2002. “Deaths Rise in Good Economic
Times: Evidence from the OECD”. IZA Discussion Paper No. 654.
Gosling, Amanda and Van Reenen, John. 2006. “Using Institutionalized pay setting to
identify the effect of wages on employment: The Case of Nurses.” mimeo,
Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics.
Grossman, G. 1983. “Union Wages, Seniority and Unemployment” American
Economic Review, 73, 277-90
Heidenreich, Paul A. and McClellan, Mark. 2001 “Trends in treatment and outcomes
for acute myocardial infarction: 1975-1995.” The American Journal of
Medicine 110 (February): 165-174.
Hellerstein, Judith, David Neumark, and Ken Troske. 1999. “Wages, Productivity and
Worker Characteristics: Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions and
Wage Equations.” Journal of Labor Economics 17 (July): 409–446.
Houseman, Susan N., Arne L. Kalleberg, and George A. Erickek. 2003. “The Role of
Temporary Agency Employment in Tight Labor Markets.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 57 (October): 105-127.
Kessler, Daniel P. and Mark B. McClellan. 2000. “Is Hospital Competition Socially
Wasteful?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (May): 577-615.
Layard, Richard, Nickell, Stephen and Jackman, Richard (2005) Unemployment,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, Second Edition

41

Machin, Steve and Manning, Alan. 1992. “Testing Dynamic Models of Worker
Effort” Journal of Labor Economics, 10(3) 288-305
Machin, Stephen and Wilson, Joan. 2004. “Minimum Wages in a Low Wage Labor
Market: Care Homes in the UK”, Economic Journal, 114, 102-109.
Mas, Alex (2006) “Pay, Reference Points and Police Performance” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 121 (3) 783-821.
McCormick, Barry, Ian Stone, and P. Sherrell. 2007. “Hospital Organization,
Specialty Mix and MRSA.” mimeo, UK Department of Health.
Nickell, Stephen, and Glenda Quintini. 2002. “The Consequences of the Decline in
Public Sector Pay in Britain: A Little Bit of Evidence.” Economic Journal
112 (February): F107-F118.
Norris, R M on behalf of the United Kingdom Heart Attack Study Collaborative
Group (1998) “Fatality outside hospital from acute coronary events in three
British health districts 1994-5” British Medical Journal, 316, pp 1065-70.
Office of Manpower Economics. 2003. Workforce Survey results for Nursing Staff,
Midwives and Health Visitors. London: Office of Manpower Economics.
Propper, Carol, Simon Burgess, and Denise Gossage. (2007). “Competition and
Quality in Hospital Markets: Evidence from the NHS Internal Market 199199.” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Propper, Carol, Simon Burgess, and Katharine Green. 2004. “Does Competition
between hospitals improve the quality of care? Hospital death rates and the
NHS internal market.” Journal of Public Economics 88 (July): 1247-1272.
Review Body for Nursing Staff, Midwives, Health Visitors and Professions Allied to
Medicine. 2003. Twentieth report on nursing staff, midwives, health visitors
and professions allied to medicine 2003. London: Stationery Office.
Ruhm, Christopher. 2006. “A Healthy Economy Can Break Your Heart.” NBER
Working Paper no. 12102 (March).
Shapiro, Carl, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1984. “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker
Discipline Device.” American Economic Review 74 (June): 433-44.
Skinner, Jonathan S, Staiger, Douglas O, and Elliott S Fisher. 2006. “Is Technological
Change in Medicine Always Worth It? The Case of Acute Myocardial
Infarction.” Health Affairs 25 (February): w34-w47.
Shields, M., (2004), Addressing Nurse Shortages: What can Policy Makers Learn
from the Econometric Evidence on Nurse Labor Supply? Economic Journal,
114 : 464-498.
Vita, Michael G. 1990. “Exploring hospital production relationships with flexible
functional forms.” Journal of Health Economics 9: 1-21.
Volpp, Kevin, Sankey V. Williams, Joel Waldfogel, Jeffrey H. Silber, J. Sanford
Schwartz, and Mark V. Pauly. 2003. “Market Reform in New Jersey and the
Effect on Mortality from Acute Myocardial Infarction.” Health Services
Research 38 (April): 515-533.
Weiss, Andrew (1980) “Job Queues and layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible
Wages”, Journal of Political Economy, 88, 526-38

42

Table 1: Descriptive statistics

AMI Variables
AMI death rate (55 plus)
Total AMI deaths (55 plus)
Total AMI admissions (55 plus)
Productivity and FCE (finished
Consultant Episodes)
Productivity (total FCEs/ total
clinical staffing)
Total FCEs
Staffing Variables
Total clinical staffing (physicians
+ nurses + Allied Health
Professionals + Health Care
Assistants)
Physicians share of clinical
staffing
Qualified Nurses (plus qualified
Allied Health Professionals) share
Health Care Assistants share
Hospital Expenditure Variables
Share of expenditure on agency
staff as a proportion of total
expenditure (“Agency”)
Retained Surplus (£1000);745 obs
Wages
Ln(Area outside wage)
Ln(nurse inside wage)
Ln(area inside wage)
Other variables
Directly Standardized Mortality
rate in local area (per 100,000)
Teaching trust
Proportion of emergency
admissions (to total admissions)
Proportion of transfer admissions
(to total admissions)
Proportion of AMI admissions
with complications (HRG E11)
HRG case mix index; 892 obs
MRSA rate; 216 obs

Mean

Standard
deviation

Min

Max

21.14
79.99
385.02

4.483
33.83
160.84

7.454
13
151

36.941
294
1,348

31.17

7.57

12.09

65.12

58,664.58

24,515.83

13,490

138,984

1675.79

692.25

398.61

4010.70

0.148

0.030

0.058

0.270

0.597

0.037

0.476

0.741

0.246

0.046

0.121

0.393

0.034

0.028

0.001

0.163

-206.1

1313.4

-11487

8505

9.60
9.99
10.09

0.140
0.152
0.110

9.27
9.52
9.53

9.99
10.50
10.45

723.43

77.13

518.73

944.21

0.111
0.411

0.341
0.082

0
0.224

1
0.808

0.160

0.066

0

0.448

0.162

0.075

0

0.667

93.98
0.169

9.08
0.088

75.49
0.02

175.89
0.55

Notes: Acute hospitals in 211 English NHS (regression sample used in Tables 2-4). Unless otherwise
noted, data are for 901 observations between 1996 and 2001. Other case mix variables are admissions
within 5 year age-gender bands for emergency AMI (age 55+) and for total admissions. Staffing
variables refer to whole time equivalent clinical staffing.

43

Table 2: Hospital quality and the outside wage

Dependent variable
Estimation technique

Ln(AMI Death Rate)
OLS
(1)

Ln(AMI Death Rate)
3 year annual Long Differences
(2)

Ln(AMI Death Rate)
GMM-SYS
(3)

0.407**
(0.176)
Physicians share
-0.856**
(0.414)
Nurses share
-0.480
(0.306)
(omitted base is health care assistants)

0.766**
(0.386)
-0.654
(0.616)
-0.288
(0.467)

0.460***
(0.175)
-2.629**
(1.258)
-1.416
(0.959)

Hospital fixed effects
Casemix controls (14)
Year dummies (6)
Region dummies (10)
SC(1) p-value
SC(2) p-value
Hansen-Sargan p-value
No of Hospitals
Observations

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes
No

210
901

133
345

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.000
0.142
0.923
210
901

Ln (Area outside wage)

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Quality is measured by the within hospital deaths within 30 days of emergency admission for acute myocardial infarction (AMI) for over 55 year olds admitted to the
hospital. Casemix controls are the proportion of total emergency admissions for AMI made up by each 5-year age-gender band from age 55 upwards. All regressions control
for area mortality rates, (lagged) employment and hospital type (i.e. whether the acute hospital was a specialist hospital, teaching hospital or “normal” hospital). Longdifferences are three- year annual average growth rates. In the System-GMM estimates, one-step robust estimates are presented equations are levels of own values t-2
through t-5; instruments in the levels equations are once lagged differences. SC(k) is Arellano-Bond (1991) test of serial correlation. Physician share, nurse share and total
employment are treated as endogenous (the outside wage is lagged and treated as exogenous). We also use the lagged predicted inside wage as an instrument. In the GMM
specification instruments in the differenced of order k of the first differenced residuals. Sargan-Hansen is a test of all the over-identifying restrictions. Time period is 19962001. Standard errors in parentheses under coefficients are robust to arbitrary heteroskedacity and autocorrelation.

44

Table 3: Productivity in hospitals and the outside wage

Dependent variable
Estimation technique

Ln(Productivity)
OLS
(1)

Ln (Area outside wage)

-0.658***
(0.198)
Physicians share
3.837***
(0.484)
Nurses share
0.386
(0.278)
(omitted base is health care assistants)
Hospital fixed effects
No
Casemix controls (39)
Yes
Year dummies (6)
Yes
Region dummies (10)
Yes
SC(1) p-value
SC(2) p-value
Hansen-Sargan p-value
No of Hospitals
210
Observations
901

Ln(Productivity)
3 year annual Long Differences
(2)

Ln(Productivity)
GMM-SYS
(3)

0.252
(0.279)
0.248
(0.411)
0.006
(0.216)

-0.551***
(0.181)
3.909***
(0.898)
1.736***
(0.627)

No
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.004
0.462
0.042
210
901

133
345

Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Productivity measured as the number of Finished Consultant Episodes (FCEs) per whole-time
equivalent (WTE) employee; casemix controls are proportion of admissions in five year age-gender cells and the proportions of admissions that are (a) elective, (b)
emergency or (c) transfers. All regressions control for area mortality rates, (lagged) employment size and hospital type (i.e. whether the acute hospital was a specialist
hospital, teaching hospital or “normal” acute hospital). Long-differences are three-year annual average growth rates. In the System-GMM estimates, one-step robust
estimates are presented. Physician share, nurse share and total employment are treated as endogenous (the outside wage is lagged and treated as exogenous). We also use the
lagged predicted inside wage as an instrument. In the GMM specification instruments in the differenced equations are levels of own values t-2 through t-5; instruments in the
levels equations are once lagged differences. SC(k) is Arellano-Bond (1991) test of serial correlation of order k of the first differenced residuals. Sargan-Hansen is a test of
the over-identifying restrictions. Standard errors in parentheses under coefficients are robust to arbitrary heteroskedacity and autocorrelation.

45

Table 4: Controlling for the inside wage

Dependent
variable
Estimation
technique
Ln (Area outside
wage)
Average inside
wage
Physicians share
Nurses share
SC(1) p-value
SC(2) p-value
Hansen- p-value
Hospital fixed
effects
Casemix controls
Year dummies (6)
Region dummies
(10)
Hospitals
Obs

Ln(AMI Death
Rate)
OLS

Ln(AMI Death
Rate)
Long Differences

Ln(AMI Death
Rate)
GMM-SYS

Ln(Productivity)

Ln(Productivity)

Ln(Productivity)

OLS

Long Differences

GMM-SYS

(1)
0.406**
(0.171)
-0.286**
(0.122)
-0.498
(0.443)
-0.313
(0.299)

(2)
0.765**
(0.384)
-0.126
(0.161)
-0.544
(0.641)
-0.253
(0.471)

(4)
-0.659***
(0.195)
0.071
(0.150)
3.750**
(0.533)
0.347
(0.270)

(5)
0.244
(0.282)
0.097
(0.128)
0.201
(0.394)
0.004
(0.212)

No

No

(3)
0.431**
(0.172)
-0.334**
(0.168)
-1.787
(1.236)
-0.910
(0.822)
0.000
0.162
0.795
Yes

No

No

(6)
-0.547***
(0.172)
0.241**
(0.125)
4.130***
(0.930)
1.680***
(0.607)
0.002
0.436
0.081
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

211
901

211
901

211
901

211
901

211
901

211
901

Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Quality is measured by the within hospital deaths within 30 days of emergency admission for
acute myocardial infarction (AMI) for over 55 year olds admitted with AMI to the hospital. Productivity measured as the number of Finished Consultant Episodes
(FCEs) per whole-time equivalent (WTE) employee; casemix controls are the same as in Table 2 (for AMI regressions) and Table 3 (for productivity). All regressions
control for area mortality rates, (lagged) employment size and hospital type (i.e. whether the acute hospital was a specialist hospital, teaching hospital or “normal” acute
hospital). System-GMM estimates with one-step robust estimates are presented. Physician share, nurse share, employment size and lagged inside wage (except in
columns (3) and (6) where we exclude this variable) are treated as endogenous. Outside wage is lagged and treated as exogenous. Instruments in the differenced
equations are levels of own values t-2 through t-5; instruments in the levels equations are once lagged differences. We also use the lagged predicted inside wage as an
instrument. SC(k) is Arellano-Bond (1991) test of serial correlation of order k of the first differenced residuals. Sargan-Hansen is a test of the over-identifying
restrictions. Time period is 1996-2001.

46

Table 5: The role of agency staff in accounting for the impact of the labor market on hospital quality and productivity

Dependent
variable

Ln (Area
outside wage)
Ln(Inside
wage)
Ln(Agency)
SC(1) p-value
SC(2) p-value
Hospital fixed
effects
Year dummies
(6)
Region
dummies (10)
Hansen p-value
No. of hospitals
Observations

Ln(Agency)

(1)
2.851**
(1.138)
0.077
(1.045)

Ln(AMI)

(2)

Ln(AMI)

(3)
0.314*
(0.170)
-0.494***
(0.153)

Ln(AMI)

Ln
(productivity)
(5)

Ln
(productivity)
(6)
-0.805***
(0.182)
0.219
(0.134)

Ln
(productivity)

0.799
0.130
Yes

0.057**
(0.026)
0.006
0.983
Yes

0.002
0.485
Yes

(4)
0.175
(0.202)
-0.477***
(0.161)
0.046*
(0.024)
0.006
0.921
Yes

-0.106***
(0.027)
0.006
0.355
Yes

0.011
0.488
Yes

(7)
-0.729***
(0.194)
0.296**
(0.141)
-0.057***
(0.018)
0.043
0.944
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.377
176
523

0.178
176
520

0.651
176
520

0.314
176
520

0.379
176
520

0.351
176
520

0.471
176
520

Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. “Agency” Expenditure is the share of total staff expenditure that is accounted for by expenditure
on non-NHS nursing staff. Productivity measured as the number of Finished Consultant Episodes (FCEs) per whole-time equivalent (WTE) employee. Quality is
measured by the within hospital deaths within 30 days of emergency admission for acute myocardial infarction (AMI) for over 55 year olds admitted with AMI to the
hospital. Physician share, nurse share, employment size, agency (except in columns (3) and (5) where agency is excluded) and inside wage (except in columns (2) and (5)
where we exclude inside wages) are treated as endogenous. All columns are estimated by System GMM (instruments in the differenced equations are levels of own
values t-2 through t-5; instruments in the levels equations are once lagged differences). Column (3) is an identical specification to column (3) of Table 4 and column (6)
is an identical specification to column (6) of Table 5 except we estimate on the sub-sample where we observe agency staff expenditure. All standard errors are robust to
arbitrary heteroskedacity and autocorrelation; in the System-GMM estimates one step robust estimates are presented and all staff variables are treated as endogenous
(outside wage is lagged and treated as exogenous). SC(k) is Arellano-Bond (1991) test of serial correlation of order k of the first differenced residuals. Sample size is
larger in column (1) because we do not condition on lagged agency as we do in other columns.

47

Table 6: A Placebo experiment - productivity and outside wages in nursing homes for senior citizens

Dependent variable
Estimation technique

Ln(revenues/hour)
OLS
(1)

Ln(revenues/hour)
OLS
(2)

Ln(revenues/hour)
OLS
(3)

Ln(revenues/hour)
OLS
(4)

Ln(output/hour)
OLS
(5)

Ln (Area outside
wage)
Ln(Inside wage)

-0.005
(0.191)
0.169***
(0.051)

0.098
(0.171)
0.182***
(0.031)
-0.460***
(0.057)

-0.039
(0.152)
0.170***
(0.045)

0.119
(0.589)
0.165***
(0.059)

-0.060
(0.203)
0.052*
(0.029)

Nursing Home fixed
effects?
Year dummies (2)
Region dummies (10)

No

No

No

Yes

No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Number of Nursing
Homes
Observations

649

649

513

443

649

1,054

1,054

513

886

1,054

Ln (average hours)

Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Productivity measured in columns (1) through (4) by revenues divided by hours. Revenues measured
by the number of occupied beds multiplied by average price per bed. Output is simply the number of occupied beds. Hours are total hours worked. All regressions control for
proportion of qualified nurses, proportion of female, average age of worker, a quintic in size of the nursing home (measured by employees), the proportion of residents who
are paid for by the government, regional dummies and year dummies. Standard errors are clustered by nursing home. Data is from UK nursing homes in 1998 and 1999 (see
Machin and Wilson, 2004), except for column (3) which is on 1998 only.

48

Table 7: Robustness tests - coefficient (standard error) on outside wage

Dependent variable

Ln(AMI)
(1)

Ln(Productivity)
(2)

Observations
(3)

1

Baseline
Additional casemix controls

3

Include hospital financial surplus

4
5

Include lagged dependent variable: long-run
[p-value]
Drop Inner and Outer London

6

Drop big jumps in outside wage

7

Balanced Panel

8

Regional outside wage

9

Regional outside wage (drop regional
dummies)
Include alternative total hospital employment
measure
Include higher order and cross product terms
in skill shares

-0.547***
(0.172)
-0.556***
(0.153)
-0.516***
(0.184)
-0.572***
[0.020]
-0.383**
(0.173)
-0.622***
(0.167)
-0.612***
(0.163)
-0.445
(0.587)
-0.493**
(0.169)
-0.540**
(0.170)
-0.637***
(0.181)

901

2

0.460**
(0.175)
0.427***
(0.170)
0.399**
(0.182)
0.508***
[0.008]
0.304**
(0.156)
0.530**
(0.197)
0.600***
(0.207)
0.609
(1.022)
0.520***
(0.172)
0.404**
(0.160)
0.541***
(0.200)

10
11

900 (for AMI)
892 (for productivity)
745
901
776
885
582
901
901
901
901

Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Each cell reports the coefficient and robust standard error from a separate system GMM
regression. Productivity measured as the number of Finished Consultant Episodes (FCEs) per whole-time equivalent (WTE) employee; Quality is measured by the within
hospital deaths within 30 days of emergency admission for acute myocardial infarction (AMI) for over 55 year olds admitted with AMI to the hospital. All regressions
have the same System GMM estimation and specifications as follows: column (1) equivalent to Table 2 column (3); column (2) is equivalent to column (3) of Table 3.
Outside wage is (lagged) area wage unless elsewhere specified. See text for exact experiments.

49

Figure 1: Hypothetical impact of regulated wage on the labor market

Notes: The theoretical impact of a nationally regulated wage on NHS labor supply in two areas with
different outside labor markets. South (e.g. London area) has a stronger outside labor market with
higher alternative wages than North, so the supply curve lies to the left. A single nationally fixed wage
(so long as it is below the competitive level) will result in a lower number of employees in the South
than in the North.

50

Figure 2: The role of private sector temporary agency nurses

Notes: This describes the possible reaction of hospitals to a mandated wage when there is also the
possibility of hiring temporary agency staff whose wages are not restricted by the regulation mandated
to permanent staff. In the face of a regulated wage and a competitive market for agency nurses, the
agency wage will rise and employment will from NPERMANENT to NTOTAL

51

Figure 3: The distribution of death rates from AMI across hospitals, 1995-2002

Notes: Data for full panel of acute hospital trusts. The top line shows the evolution of AMI death rates
at the 10th percentile (highest death rates) and the bottom line the evolution of death rates at the 90th
percentile (lowest death rates).

52

Figure 4: The distribution of productivity (Finished Consultant Episodes per
clinical staff member) across hospitals, 1995-2002

Notes: Data for the full sample of acute hospital trusts. The top line shows the evolution of
ln(productivity) at the 90th percentile (highest productivity) and the bottom line the evolution of
ln(productivity) at the 10th percentile (lowest productivity).

53

Figure 5: Distribution of outside wages, intensity of use of agency nurses and
AMI death rates in England

Notes: Data are 1996-2001 averages. Outside pay is the average ln wages of all female non-manual
workers (from New Earnings Survey). Intensity of use of agency nurses is the proportion of employees
who are agency staff. AMI rates are within hospital deaths within 30 days of emergency admission for
acute myocardial infarction for over 55 year olds admitted with AMI to the hospital.

54

Figure 6: Nurse vacancy rates and outside wages
predicted vacancy rate

Vacancy Rates for nurses
5

Inner Lo

4

Outer Lo

South Ea

3

2
West Mid
East of
South We
Yorkshir
East MidNorth We

1

North Ea

9.4

9.6

9.8

10

mean ln(outside wage)

Notes: Each observation is one of the ten regions in England (the average region has 4.9m people and
we have a 1% example of workers from the New Earnings Survey). Outside pay is the average ln
wages of all female non-manual workers (from New Earnings survey). Vacancy rates are the
proportion of nurse posts that have been vacant for three months or more (Office of Manpower
Economics, 2003). 1996-2001 averages. The straight line is the prediction from a linear regression.

55

Figure 7: Intensity of use of agency nurses and outside wages
predicted Agency rate

Intensity of using agency nurse
6

Inner Lo

4

Outer Lo

2

South Ea
East of
West Mid
South We
North We
EastYorkshir
Mid
North Ea

0
9.4

9.6

9.8

10

mean ln(outside wage)

Notes: Each observation is one of the ten regions in England. Outside pay is the average ln wage of all
female non-manual workers. Intensity of use of agency nurses is the proportion of employees who are
agency staff. 1996-2001 averages. The straight line is the prediction from a linear regression.

56

Figure 8: AMI death rates and outside wages

AMI = 1.96*W -0.10W2

AMI Rate
Yorkshir

23
Inner Lo
Outer Lo
North We
South Ea

22

South We

East of

21
NorthEast
Ea Mid

20
West Mid

9.4

9.6

9.8

10

mean ln(outside wage)

Notes: Each observation is one of the ten regions in England. Outside pay is the average ln wage of all
female non-manual workers. AMI rates are within hospital deaths within 30 days of emergency
admission for acute myocardial infarction for over 55 year olds admitted with AMI to the hospital.
1996-2001 averages. The curved line is the predictions from a regression of AMI death rates on the
level and square of the ln(outside wage).

57

Figure 9: Changes in AMI death rates and changes in outside wages

AMI growth pa 1996-2001
0
West Mid
East Mid
Outer Lo

North Ea
South Ea

-.02
Inner Lo
Yorkshir

North We

South We

-.04

East of

-.06
.044

.046

.048
av. outside wage gr 1996-2001

.05

.052

Notes: Each observation is one of the ten regions in England. Outside pay is the average ln wage of all
female non-manual workers. AMI rates are within hospital deaths within 30 days of emergency
admission for acute myocardial infarction for over 55 year olds admitted with AMI to the hospital. The
variables are the growth rates between 1996 and 2001. The straight line is the prediction from a linear
regression.

58

Appendix A: Brief review of literature on the impact of skills in hospital production and the
responsiveness of medical labor supply to wages
A1. The impact of medical staff on hospital output
There is a growing literature on the importance of nurses in hospital production, although less focus on
the impact of physicians. Jensen and Morrissey (1986) is one of the few papers that focus directly on
the impact of physicians on hospital productivity. They find that increases in physicians increased
hospital output, but by less than increases in nurses (although by more than medical residents). This is
surprising as physicians have longer in training and therefore are likely to have higher human capital.
However, since the period covered by the data in this study, the amount of training received by nurses
has risen and there has been considerable technological change in hospital production.
Most of the literature on the impact of nurses on patient outcomes is from the US (see Curtin, 2003, for
a recent review). Cross sectional studies dominate the literature and tend to find a significant effect of
nurse labor on outcomes. Aiken et al. (2002) using a large cross section of acute care Pennsylvanian
hospitals, examine the relationship between two measures of patient care (deaths within 30 days of
admission and ‘failure to rescue’) and nurse staffing ratios (the average number of patients in a nurse’s
workload). They find an effect of nurse staffing on both outcomes: the odds of patient mortality
increased by 7% for every additional patient in the average nurse’s workload in the hospital. Aiken et
al. (2003) finds a positive relationship between education level and patient mortality Needleman et al.
(2002) study over 5 million patient discharges from 799 hospitals in 11 states and use several measures
of patient outcomes and hours of nursing care per day (adjusted for the severity of the casemix). They
found a strong and consistent relationship between hours of nurse staffing and five outcomes for
medical patients. These – and most - studies on the impact of nurses on quality of care use cross
sectional data, so are unable to control for unobserved heterogeneity between hospitals. It is not clear a
priori how this may bias the results: hospitals with high levels of staffing may be better hospitals, so
generating an upward bias. Alternatively, they may attract sicker patients, so generating a downward
bias. Bartel et al (2007) do use panel data and examine the relationship between job specific capital of
nursing staff and patient outcomes, arguing that job specific capital is likely to impact upon the quality
of the care provided in hospital settings. Their analysis focuses on registered nurses (RNs) in intensive
care units in 70 Veteran Association hospitals between 2003 and 2006. They examine two measures of
patient outcomes and define three measures of job specific capital. They find one of these - tenure of
the RN in the hospital – is correlated with one measure of patient outcomes (infection rates) allowing
for unobserved features of the Intensive Care Unit. However, they are unable to control for experience
as well as tenure; thus tenure may be a marker for general nurse experience rather than unit specific
capital. Mark et al (2004) also uses panel data and finds little evidence of a causal relationship between
nurse staffing and hospital mortality.
A2. Is the labor supply of nurses responsive to labor market conditions?
Antonazzo et al (2003) review empirical evidence of nursing labor supply. The estimates (mainly from
North American studies) display a large degree of variation. Most of the studies are of hours, rather
than participation per se. Most studies point to a shortage of nurses; a recent summary of trends in the
US market is provided by Buerhaus et al (2004). In the UK, the hours margin is relatively inflexible as
there is little choice in the number of hours worked per week in the NHS. Skatun et al (2005) and
Frijters et al (2003) both use longitudinal data from the Quarterly Labor Force Survey (QLFS). Frijters
et al (2003) look at quitting decision and conclude that wages have a small effect relative to non-wage
factors. Skatun et al (2005) look at labor market participation (but not at occupational choice between
nursing and other in work options). Both these papers find that the wage elasticity of participation is
below unity; the estimates in Frijters et al are less than under 0.1.
On the other hand, Gosling and Van Reenen (2005) use the structure of pay determination for public
sector nurses to identify the impact of wages on participation in nursing. This approach deals with the
endogeneity of wages by using regulatory decisions as an instrumental variable for the observed wage
in a (selection adjusted) participation equation. They also allow for the participation choice to include
working in another profession, rather than simply to be not-working. They find estimates of the
elasticity of wage on employment elasticities are biased downwards in OLS and reasonably large in
their IV results, typically around unity. And research in another setting in which wages for nurses are

59

set centrally – Norway – which uses panel data also finds nurses’ labor supply responds to wages (and
other factors): see Askildsen et al (2002) and Holmas (2002).
Finally, Elliot et al (2007) uses a sample of English hospitals for the years 1999-2002 and examines the
association between the average (over the four years) wage gap between nurses pay and that of
comparable women at regional level and the nursing vacancy rate at hospital level. They find that
higher levels of the wage gap are positively associated with higher vacancy rates. They do not exploit
the panel nature of their data, so do not to control for heterogeneity across hospitals.
Appendix B: Data Description
Data sources for all variables are contained in Table A1.
B1. Sample of hospitals
We use data from financial year 1995/6 onwards referring to “1995”, etc. as indicating the 1995/6
financial year. Trust data pre-1995/6 is only for those hospitals that had been given freestanding
financial status within the NHS prior to that date. By 1995/6 almost all hospitals had freestanding
status; before that date the finances (and so expenditure data) for some were still recorded at District
Health Authority level. AMI episodes (from HES) were subject to recoding (a change in ICD codes) in
1994/5. We use only acute trusts for the analysis as there are very few non-acute trusts with over 150
AMI admissions in a year. The results are robust to inclusion of these non-acute trusts. Consequently
we do not have specialist or mental health trusts in the data. We include dummy variables in all the
regressions to control for teaching hospitals.
Use of AMI death rates as a measure of low hospital quality
We use the “30-day” death rate for acute myocardial infarction (AMI). This measures in-hospital
deaths within 30 days of emergency admission with a myocardial infarction for patients aged 55 and
over. There are several issues in using this measure. The first is the variability in rates: death rates may
be quite variable over time hospital-by-hospital, reflecting, in part, small denominators (hospitals may
treat relatively few patients in any one year). This noise in the measures of death rates can lead to
misclassification of the quality of hospitals (McClellan and Staiger, 1999). Propper et al (2007)
conclude that raw UK hospital level rates exhibit considerably less variability than the raw US data, but
not than the US rates which have been ‘filtered’ to reduce noise. To reduce misclassification based on
small sample sizes, we omit all hospitals with less than 150 emergency AMI admissions in any one
year
The second issue is that we use the thirty-day rate itself. The seven day rate was not available until
1999, but it is highly correlated with the thirty-day rate and results using this as the dependent variable
show similar patterns. We were also concerned that some patients may die after thirty days and we are
missing these deaths. Examination of the distribution of AMI deaths in hospitals from other sources,
however, shows that about half of deaths from AMI occur within the first day of admission (see Table
A2 below). 98% of the deaths occur within the first thirty days. Consequently the thirty-day window is
more than adequate.
The third issue arises because our measure is the death rates within a hospital. Deaths occurring after
transfer to another provider are credited to the provider where the patient was first admitted, whilst
deaths following discharge are omitted. This may bias the results if hospitals have a motive to
discharge early. Such incentives would have been small as these death rates were not published until
1999 and hospitals not ranked by the Department of Health in terms of outcomes until 2001, when they
were ranked on a composite bundle of over twenty indicators. Finally, in richer areas hospitals it may
be possible that there are earlier discharges because patients have more care available. This would bias
our results against finding an effect of the outside wage on AMI in hospital deaths.
We lose 1995 because of the need to use lagged values in some regressions. Starting with 1,000 acute
hospital-year observations after cleaning, we lose 83 observations because of the condition to have 150
AMI admissions. We lose 10 observations because of the need for continuous series.

60

B2. Wages
(a) Inside Wage
Out main measure of the inside wage is the average hourly clinical wage. This is constructed by
dividing the clinical wage bill by whole time equivalent hours. We also considered the wages of
individual groups of workers separately, but found these variables insignificant once we controlled for
overall clinical wage.
(b) Regulation
To get an idea of the regulated pay structure consider nurse pay scales at 1st April 1999. Clinical grades
range from A to I and correspond to spinal points 3 to 37 (see Table A3). For example, Clinical Grade
G, a “district nurse” corresponds to a grade between spinal points 12 (£20,145 per annum) to spinal
point 9 (£23,300 per annum). There are allowances (or “weightings”) for being in high cost areas. For
Inner London this was £2,205 plus 5% of salary up to a maximum of £750, for Outer London this was
1570 plus 5% of salary up to a maximum of £750 and for the “fringe” (various areas in the South East)
this was £285 plus 2.5% of salary up to a maximum of £375. For a senior nurse on £23,300 a year
working in the most expensive area of the UK, Inner London, and the extra regional allowance would
be worth only 11% more salary (£2,205 + £750/ (£2,205+£750+£23,300)). Since this is capped, for a
more senior nurse on a higher salary the proportional value is lower. By contrast, in 1999 in the NES
the annual non-manual wage in Inner London is about 65% higher than that of the North East, the
lowest wage region.
In calculating the instrumental variable for inside pay measure we take into account the NHS grade
structure in a region in a year (using wage data from the NES). We then use the decisions of the NPRB
over the changes in the wage structure taking into account all the London weightings, etc (which may
differ by grade) to form the predicted wage in the next period (specific to each region).
(c) Outside Wage
We use several measures of outside wages. Our main measure is the average wages of non-manual
female workers since the overwhelming bulk of nurses are women. Our main measure is derived from
the New Earnings Survey (NES) that is a one per cent sample of all employees in Great Britain
covering about 300,000 individuals a year. The NES is mandatory administrative panel data provided
by firms to the Department of Work and Pensions and contains information on earnings and hours. Our
main measure is average annual earnings, but we also consider hourly wages. We use the area code in
the NES to construct seventy-eight distinct county-based travel to work areas (or boroughs in London).
Using the postcodes of the headquarters of county (and borough) councils, we matched each NHS
hospital to all county (borough) councils that fell within a twenty-kilometer radius from the hospital.
The local area wage is constructed as the average of the county wages of all the councils that fell into
this radius. Where no councils fell within the twenty kilometer radius the wage applicable to the nearest
council was used.
As an alternative to the NES we also considered the Labor Force Survey (LFS). The LFS is a selfreported household survey containing about 320,000 individuals per year (with 80,000 observations on
wages). From the LFS we can extract spatial wage differentials conditioning on more characteristics to
build up the outside wage offered to a “typical” nurse. We experimented with such measures that
successfully predict labor supply problems in the cross section (e.g. Elliot et al, 2007). The smaller
sample size and sampling variation, however, means that such constructed variables are less useful in a
panel data analysis. So for the most part, we rely on the larger sample sizes of the NES that has less
measurement error as it is taken directly from employer records. We also experimented with using
measures of unemployment rates and employment rates as alternative indicators of labor market
“tightness”. We did not find that these added explanatory power over and above the information in the
wage, which in principle should fully reflect labor market conditions.
B3. Health Episode Statistics (HES) Data
HES data are used for the AMI, productivity and case mix variables. HES are discharged based records
of all inpatient activity delivered in NHS hospitals. The main unit of recording is the Finished
Consultant Episode (a period of admitted patient care under a consultant or allied healthcare
professional within an NHS trust). This is not always the same as a single stay (spell) in hospital,
because a patient may be transferred from one consultant to another during their stay. In these cases,
there will be two or more episode records for the spell of treatment. Diagnoses are currently coded

61

according to the International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision (ICD-10) and surgical
procedures (operations) according to the Office of Population, Censuses and Surveys: Classification of
Surgical Operations and Procedures, fourth Revision (OPCS-4.2). HES records includes further codes
– for example, age of the patient55.
B4. Case-mix adjustment of FCEs
For the robustness tests in Table 7 we calculated extra casemix controls. To estimate the casemix
adjustment for a hospital, all inpatient spells are allocated to a Healthcare Resource Group (HRG)
category. An HRG is a code for a group of clinically similar treatments and care that require similar
levels of healthcare resources. They are similar to Diagnostic Related Groups or DRGs in the US. An
example of an HRG is renal dialysis, separated into haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis. HRG codes
are derived from ICD-10 and the OPCS 4.2 codes on HES records.
For additional AMI casemix we constructed "AMI with complications" from the proportion of
emergency patients 55 years or older admitted with HRG codes E11 (AMI with complications) and
E12 (AMI without complications).
For the productivity casemix we begin with a weight representing the expected cost (the reference cost)
is attached to each HRG to derive the scalar case mix index for all spells treated over a year for each
hospital. The national average case weight is set to equal 100: case mix indices above 100 represent
hospitals that have treated a more complex than average mix of cases. The index used here based on
reference costs from 1998/99 onwards (when reference costs were first available). Prior to that, the cost
weights prior are based on expected costs. Because we are concerned about the precise consistency of
this variable before and after 1998, we use it only as a robustness check rather than include it in our
main specifications.
B5. Nursing Homes Data
The nursing (or “care”) homes data is discussed in the text and in more detail in Machin and Wilson
(2004). Homes were surveyed in 1997 and 1998 (there is also data in 1992 and 1993, but this does not
contain the information needed to construct revenue). We observe individual worker data so we can
construct various measures of the internal wage structure of the firm. Information was also collected on
average price (a quality measure), the proportion of residents who are government subsidised and
various demographic characteristics of workers (their qualifications, age, gender, etc.).
Total revenue and profits are not reported directly in the care homes data. We calculated them from the
underlying home-specific components. Sales (S) is calculated as Occupancy Proportion* Number of
Beds * Average Price (all reported in the survey). Average weekly hours are reported in the survey and
our key measure is therefore revenues per hour. We also consider the physical measure of productivity
as output per hour ((Occupancy Proportion* Number of Beds)/(hours*workers)). We matched in
outside wages using zip codes using exactly the same data and methods as for hospitals.
B6. UK Firm-level panel data
All incorporated UK firms, both private and public, are obliged to lodge accounts at Companies’
House. Bureau Van Dijk (BVD), a private company, supplies this accounting data through its
AMADEUS database. We appended the Amadeus DVDs from 1996 to 2006 to generate longitudinal
data on living and dead firms from 1988 onwards. From this we selected all firms in two digit
industries 53 through 60, 71 through 79 and 81. We ran regressions at the three digit industry level. We
chose these because (a) they were service sectors so more comparable with the health sector and (b)
they are mainly sectors where there are a relatively large proportion of women workers (like hospitals).
We selected firms who were alive at some point between 1996 and 2001, who had non-missing
information for at least one year on employment, wages, sales and capital. We also insisted in having at
least 100 observations in each three digit industry. We matched in outside wages using zip codes using
exactly the same data and methods as for hospitals. We are left with 63,052 firm-year observations in
the overall dataset that we run regressions on.
The full set of results from the industry-specific regressions is contained in Table A4.
55

http://www.hesonline.nhs.uk/Ease/servlet/ContentServer?siteID=1937&categoryID=537 (accessed 4
July 2006).

62

Appendix C. Calculation of estimates of costs of a life year saved
Estimates of the cost per life year saved by increasing nurses’ wages (by increasing the inside wage)
and increasing the shares of skilled labor are as follows.
We use the GMM estimates of Table 2 (column 3) and Table 4 (column 3), mean AMI death rates
(mean death rate = 21%, mean AMI admissions = 385) and staff numbers (total staff = 1700, mean
nurses = 1006) from our data, and mean wages for 199956.
The reduction in fatalities and the costs are:
• A 10% increase in inside wages decreases death rate by 3.71%. New death rate = 20.23%.
Decrease in deaths = (385*0.0077) = 3. Cost = (£1,006*10%*£15,000) = £1.5m.
• A one-percentage point increase in the share of nurses reduces AMI death rate by 1.4%. Death
rate fall = (21%*0.014) = 0.294%. Decrease in deaths = (385*0.00294) = 1. A one-percentage
point increase in nurses (relative to unskilled) = 17. Cost = 17*£(15,000-£10,000) = £85,000.
• A one-percentage point increase in share of physicians reduces AMI deaths rates by 2.6%.
Decrease in deaths = 2. Cost = 17* £(50,000-10000) = £680,000.
To derive an estimate of the cost per life year saved we translate one fatality reduction into life years
gained. The modal admission in our data is a male aged 70-74. Life expectancy in 2000 for this agegender group ages was 11.157, so each fatality reduction = 11 saved life years. With this assumption
the ball park cost of one patient year gained from:
• increasing inside nurse wages = £45,000
• increasing physician share = £31,000
• increasing nurse share = £8,000.
These can be compared with US estimates of the cost per life year of technological innovation. Cutler
and McClellan (2001) estimated the cost of a one year increase in life expectancy after a heart attack
was around $10,000 between 1984 and 1998, which Heidenreich and McClellan (2001) attribute to the
use of low cost treatments such as aspirin, beta-blockers, and thrombolytics. Skinner et al (2006)
derive a cost per life year saved of just under $300,000 for the period since 1996. Note our back of the
envelope estimates are a lower bound as they incorporate only the impact of preventing AMI fatalities
and do not include any effect on productivity and the use of expensive agency staff.

56

Staff numbers from Table 1. Wages: £15,000 p.a. for a qualified nurse, £10,000 for a health assistant
and £50,000 for a physician
(http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Pressreleases/DH_4002451).
57
Government Actuary calculations for England for 1999-2001
http://www.gad.gov.uk/Life_Tables/docs/whltengm.xls

63

Additional References
Aiken, Linda H., Sean P. Clarke, Douglas M. Sloane, Julie Sochalski, and Jeffrey H.
Silber. 2002 “Hospital Nurse Staffing and Patient Mortality, Nurse Burnout
and Job Dissatisfaction.” Journal of the American Medical Association 288
(October 23): 1987-1993.
Askildsen, Jan Erik, Badi H. Baltagi, and Tor H. Holmas. 2002. “Will increased
wages reduce shortages of nurses? A panel data study of nurse labor supply.”
Working Paper in Economics no 21-2002, Department of Economics,
University of Bergen.
Bartel, Ann, Beaulieu, Nancy, Phibbs, Ciaran S, Stone, Patricia. 2007. Human Capital
and Relational Capital in the Nursing Workforce: An Analysis of their Impacts
on Patient Outcomes, mimeo, Columbia Business School
Buerhaus, Peter, Staiger, Douglas, David Auerbach. 2004. “New signs of a
strengthening US Nurse Labor Market?” Health Affairs w4:526-533.
Curtin, Leah L. 2003 “An Integrated Analysis of Nurse Staffing and Related
Variables: Effects on Patient Outcomes.” Online Journal of Issues in Nursing
8 (September): www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic22/tpc22_5.htm.
Elliott, Robert F., Ada H. Y. Ma, Anthony Scott, David Bell, and Elizabeth Roberts.
2007. “Geographically differentiated pay in the labor market for nurses.”
Journal of Health Economics 26 (January): 191-212.
Holmas, Tor H. 2002. “Keeping nurses at work: a duration analysis”. Health
Economics 11: 493-503.
Jensen, Gail A., and Michael A. Morrisey. 1986. “The Role of Physicians in Hospital
Production.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (May): 432-442.
Mark, Barbara A., David W. Harless, Michael McCue, and Yihua Xu. 2004 “A
Longitudinal Examination of Hospital Registered Nurse Staffing and Quality
of Care.” Health Services Research 39 (April): 279-300.
McClellan, Mark, and Doug Staiger. 2000. “Comparing the Quality of Health Care
Providers.” In Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Volume 3, edited by Alan
M. Garber. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Needleman, Jack, Peter Buerhaus, Soeren Mattke, Maureen Stewart, and Katya
Zelevinsky. 2002. “Nurse-Staffing Levels and the Quality of Care in
Hospitals.” New England Journal of Medicine 346 (May 30): 1715-1722.
Skatun, Diane, Emanuela Antonazzo, Anthony Scott, and Robert F. Elliott. 2005.
“The supply of qualified nurses: a classical model of labor supply.” Applied
Economics 37 (1): 57-65.

64

Table A1: Data sources

AMI deaths and admissions
rates
Finished Consultant Episodes
(FCEs)
AMI case mix

FCE case mix
Whole time equivalents of
clinical staff (Physicians,
Qualified Nurses Unqualified
Nurses; Qualified AHPs;
Unqualified AHPs; Health
Care Assistants)
Expenditure on agency nurses
(and all other clinical staff
groups)
Nurse vacancy rates
Local authority directly
standardized all cause
mortality rates and AMI rates
Outside wage data (regional
and area wages)
MRSA rates

Ambulance times
Trust retained surplus and
deficits
NPRB IV wage

Source of Data
Hospital Episode Statistics (HES)

Years
1995-2002

HES

1995-2002

HES; HRG codes E11 (AMI w/
complications) and E12 (AMI w/o
complications)
HES; index based on HRGs and
national reference costs
Department of Health Medical
Workforce Census

1996-2002

1995-2001
1995-2002

Trust financial returns (from Dept
Health)

1995-2002

Office of Manpower Economics
Office of National Statistics

1996-2001
1995-2004

New Earnings Survey

1995-2001

Health Protection Agency
2001-2002
Communicable Disease
Surveillance Centre
Department of Health, Health Care 1998-2002
Statistics
Trust financial returns TAC01
1997-2002
(from Department of Health)
Gosling and Van Reenen (2005)
predicted regional wage based on
National Pay Review Body
recommendation.

1984-2001

Notes: Both NES and NHS years are financial years commencing in April of each calendar year. ONS
data are for calendar years.

65

Table A2: AMI admissions and in-hospital death rates in 1997/98, over 55s only
Primary diagnosis
Time until death Frequency Percent of total
0 days
3,220
26
1 day
2,780
22
2 days
1,424
11
3 to 5 days
2,111
17
6 to 10 days
1,456
12
11 to 20 days
914
7
21 to 30 days
251
2
More than 30 days
276
2
Total known
12,432
100
Unknown
1
Total
12,433
Source: Authors calculations from HES data.

66

Primary or secondary diagnosis
Frequency Percent of total
3,647
25
3,213
22
1,683
11
2,511
17
1,811
12
1,197
8
336
2
362
2
14,760
100
1
14,761

Table A3: Example of nursing pay bands, 1st April 1999

(a) Basic Pay Scales
Clinical Grade Description, example

Minimum £pa

Spine points

A

Nursing Auxiliary

3 to 9

B

Nursing Auxiliary
working without
supervision
Enrolled nurse
Staff nurse without
further qualifications
Staff nurse with
qualifications
Ward sister
Ward sister with
additional ward
experience, district nurse,
health visitor, community
midwife
Senior nurse with
responsibility for
management of more than
one ward
Senior nurse with
management
responsibility and
teaching qualifications

£7,955(<18)
£8,705 (18+)
£10,310

8 to 12

£11,735
£14,400

12 to 17
18 to 21

£15,395

20 to 24

£17,075
£20,145

23 to 28
27 to 31

£22,505

30 to 34

£24,920

33 to 37

Clinical Grade Inner London
A and B
£1850 + 5% of salary up
to a maximum of £750

Outer London
£1570 + 5% of salary
up to a maximum of
£750

C and above

£1570 + 5% of salary
up to a maximum of
£750

Fringe
£285 + 2.5%
of salary up to
a maximum of
£375
£285 + 2.5%
of salary up to
a maximum of
£375

C
D
E
F
G

H

I

(b) Local Allowances

£2205 + 5% of salary up
to a maximum of £750

Source: Income Data Services (2000) Pay in the Public Services: Review of 1999, prospects for 2000.
One UK £ is approximately two US$.

67

Table A4: Productivity Regressions for service industries, 1996-2001, coefficient (standard error) on area outside wage
Dependent variable:
Industry Name

Ln(Sales per worker)
US SIC Code (1987) OLS

Department Stores

531

Grocery Stores

541

Meat and Fish
Markets
Confectionery Stores

542

Miscellaneous Food
Stores
Gasoline Service
Stations
Motorcycle Dealers
Family Clothing
Stores
Shoe Stores
Home furnishing
Stores
Household Appliance
Stores

544
549
554
557
565
566
571
572

GMM-SYS

Number of Firms

(1)

3 year annual Long
Differences
(2)

(3)

(4)

0.021
(0.042)
-0.587
(0.936)
-1.022
(1.032)
2.257
(3.832)
-0.663
(2.170)
1.458
(2.118)
-5.733**
(2.574)
0.458
(0.442)
-3.133***
(1.189)
1.650***
(0.629)
1.576*
(0.811)

-0.038
(0.623)
-0.004
(1.730)
-7.916***
(1.546)
5.975
(5.717)
-1.356
(4.595)
3.472
(1.991)
1.639***
(0.415)
-0.649
(1.261)
0.758
(4.093)
0.484
(1.021)
0.050
(1.578)

-0.253
(0.434)
0.375
(1.307)
-0.379
(1.148)
-0.927
(1.207)
-0.397
(1.272)
1.052
(1.806)
-1.684*
(1.017)
0.147
(0.400)
-1.801**
(0.794)
0.899
(0.609)
1.681**
(0.730)

501

68

219
71
48
58
179
32
490
122
275
224

Eating and Drinking
Places
Drug Stores and
Proprietary Stores
Liquor Stores
Used Merchandise
Stores
Jewelry Stores
Catalog, Mail-Order
Houses and direct
selling outlets
Miscellaneous Retail
Stores
Hotels and Motels
Rooming and
Boarding Houses
Sporting,
Recreational Camps
Laundry and Garment
Services
Photographic Studios,
Portrait
Beauty Shops
Funeral Services and
Crematories
Miscellaneous

581
591
592
593
594
596

599
701
702
703
721
722
723
726
729

0.817**
(0.377)
0.273
(0.577)
1.619
(1.873)
0.664
(1.121)
-0.020
(0.909)
0.423
(1.006)

0.368
(0.742)
-1.725
(1.870)
-0.964
(2.297)
-2.359
(9.258)
-1.437
(1.987)
3.484
(2.307)

0.152
(0.351)
0.044
(0.609)
0.433
(1.321)
0.502
(1.163)
0.396
(0.955)
0.186
(1.013)

0.589
(0.585)
0.548**
(0.268)
-1.009
(0.879)
1.373**
(0.596)
0.228
(0.267)
-0.994
(0.754)
-2.053**
(0.826)
1.390*
(0.779)
1.283

1.107
(1.110)
1.393***
(0.437)
-5.308
(4.305)
-0.276
(0.670)
-0.543
(0.542)
-2.153
(2.436)
3.315
(10.585)
0.555
(2.225)
-3.885***

0.382
(0.424)
0.184
(0.225)
-0.444
(0.921)
0.642
(0.501)
0.057
(0.222)
-0.330
(1.099)
-1.081
(0.901)
1.520
(0.883)
0.493

69

1546
223
71
146
155
246

711
1098
102
88
3577
138
126
166
46

Personal Services,
Advertising

731

Building Cleaning

734

Industrial Rental

735

Employment
Agencies
Computer services

736
737

Misc. Business
Services (security,
news, photofinishing
etc.)
Car Rental

738

Auto repair shops

753

751

Non-auto repair shops 769
Movie production
services
Movie distribution
services
Dance Studios
Theatrical Producers
and Services (Except
Movies)

781
782
791
792

(1.159)
-1.004*
(0.526)
0.522
(0.495)
-0.370
(0.483)
-0.005
(0.561)
0.277
(0.191)
0.396*
(0.220)

(1.013)
0.283
(0.944)
1.797
(1.231)
0.558
(0.960)
0.289
(1.032)
0.304
(0.433)
-0.195
(0.544)

(1.046)
-0.218
(0.637)
0.815
(0.371)
-0.091
(0.437)
-0.474
(0.503)
0.119
(0.180)
0.438**
(0.199)

0.827
(1.217)
-0.161
(0.618)
3.696
(2.965)
-1.824*
(0.953)
-7.044
(5.509)
0.716
(0.950)
-0.168
(1.149)

1.156
(1.262)
0.954
(0.796)
-5.646
(6.739)
10.427
(10.102)
-26.706
(16.205)
-4.476***
(1.520)
5.480**
(2.168)

0.892
(1.190)
0.056
(0.493)
-3.751
(2.452)
2.343**
(0.994)
-2.057
(2.816)
0.434
(0.685)
1.493
(1.418)

70

809
215
441
371
6151
7117

180
492
58
139
67
709
216

Professional Sports
Clubs, racing and
Promoters
Gyms and other
sports recreation
Legal Services

794

1.053**
(0.419)

0.363
(0.537)

0.817**
(0.385)

700

799

1.051
(0.804)
-0.095
(1.101)

-0.562
(0.891)
2.314
(3.856)

0.495
(0.652)
0.676
(0.924)

528

811

100

Notes: These specifications are analogous to those in Table 3. The coefficient (standard error) is that on the ln(outside wage) variable which is identical to that of Table 3
(and elsewhere). We use company level panel data from UK part of AMADEUS data (all firms in UK economy with non-missing data on variables) between 1996 and 2001.
We selected three digit industries in two digit codes from US SIC (1987) 53 through 60 and 71 through 81 (the main service industries in the private sector where women
work). Only regressions with at least 100 observations were included (which is why some three-digit sectors where not used). Controls include ln(inside wage),
ln(capital/labor ratio), ln(employees), 10 regional dummies and time dummies. Column (1) estimated by OLS. Long-differences are three- year annual average growth rates
in column (2). In the System-GMM estimates of column (3), one-step robust estimates are presented. Capital, employment and inside wages are treated as endogenous (the
outside wage is lagged and treated as exogenous). In the GMM specification instruments in the differenced equations are levels of own values t-2 through t-5; instruments in
the levels equations are once lagged differences. Standard errors in parentheses under coefficients are robust to arbitrary heteroskedacity and autocorrelation.

71

