NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CONTINENTAL DOLLAR:
WHAT HAPPENED TO IT AFTER 1779?
Farley Grubb
Working Paper 13770
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13770

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

A preliminary version was presented at SUNY-Binghamton and at the 2008 American Economic Association
meeting in New Orleans. The author thanks the participants at these presentations and Christopher
Hanes and Peter Rousseau for helpful comments. He also thanks Kelly Lynn Perkins, Nathan Richwine,
and Zachary Rose for research assistance and Tracy McQueen for editorial assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Farley Grubb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Continental Dollar: What Happened to It after 1779?
Farley Grubb
NBER Working Paper No. 13770
February 2008
JEL No. N1,N11,N2,N21
ABSTRACT
Congress financed the American Revolution by issuing paper Continental Dollars. The story of the
Continental Dollar is familiar to all -- a lot were issued and hyper-inflation ensued. Emissions were
permanently discontinued in 1779. Thereafter, they became worthless and were forgotten. They had
no impact on subsequent public finance. The veracity of the last part of this story is challenged here.
Evidence is presented to establish that the disposition of the Continental Dollar remained an open question
well into the 1790s. Evidence is also presented to establish the exact time path of the retirement of
Continental Dollars between 1779 and 1790.

Farley Grubb
University of Delaware
Economics Department
Newark, DE 19716
and NBER
grubbf@lerner.udel.edu

The Continental Dollar: What Happened to It after 1779?*
Congress financed the American Revolution by issuing paper Continental Dollars. The
story of the Continental Dollar is familiar to all—a lot were issued and hyper-inflation
ensued. Emissions were permanently discontinued in 1779. Thereafter, they became
worthless and were forgotten. They had no impact on subsequent public finance. The
veracity of the last part of this story is challenged here. Evidence is presented to establish
that the disposition of the Continental Dollar remained an open question well into the
1790s. Evidence is also presented to establish the exact time path of the retirement of
Continental Dollars between 1779 and 1790.
From 1775 through 1779 the U.S. Congress financed the American Revolution by issuing
fiat paper money—the Continental Dollar. The basic story of the Continental Dollar is familiar to
all. A lot were issued and hyper-inflation ensued. In 1779 Congress permanently discontinued
emissions and shortly thereafter abandoned paper money. In 1781 Continental Dollars ceased to
circulate as a currency and markets for Continental Dollars soon disappeared. “Not worth a
Continental” became a common derogatory phrase. Being worthless, they were trashed and
forgotten, producing no appreciable impact on subsequent public finance decisions.1
The post-1779 portion of this story, however, is not well documented and its veracity is
challenged here. A substantial body of heretofore ignored evidence is marshaled to show that the
disposition of the Continental Dollar both within Congress and among the public remained an
open, controversial, and unresolved question well into the 1790s. This uncertainty affected the
public’s decision to hold Continental Dollars as a speculative investment compared with trashing
them, trading them in the marketplace, or remitting them for taxes. This evidence is also used to
document the exact amount and time path of Continental Dollars remitted to the U.S. Treasury to
be burned between 1779 and 1790. A complete quantitative assessment of remittances has never
been done before. It reveals ongoing activity regarding the Continental Dollar throughout the
1780s and establishes the size of the Continental Dollar debt facing the Federal Government
during this period. This debt is used to explain how the Federal Government’s ability to

1

restructure its finances was constrained. For over a decade after 1779 the Continental Dollar
continued to be an important presence in shaping the emerging U.S. financial revolution.
Emission and Remittance of Continental Dollars, 1775-1790: The Quantitative Evidence
The time path of Continental Dollars emitted by Congress and still outstanding—net of
those remitted to the U.S. Treasury—is presented in Figure 1. Emissions began in June of 1775
and ended in November of 1779. Regarding net new emissions, $199,990,000 were emitted over
this period. All were still outstanding as of mid-1780. Regarding gross emissions or total
printings of Continental Dollars, Congress printed an additional $41,510,000 to be swapped onefor-one with already emitted Continental Dollars—replacing existing Continental Dollars that
were either too torn or ragged to continue in circulation or were under threat of being
counterfeited. Most of this currency swap took place between 1779 and 1781. Adding the
$41,510,000 issued for currency exchange to the $199,990,000 net new emissions yields
$241,500,000 gross emissions or total printings of Continental Dollars (Grubb, 2007b, 2008).
Separating gross from net emissions is important for interpreting the evidence on remittances.
[Place Figure 1 Here]
Taxes to pull Continental Dollars out of circulation were not initiated until after 1779.2
Before 1789, under the Articles of Confederation, Congress did not have the power to directly
tax the public and so could not directly redeem Continental Dollars from the public. Congress
therefore asked the states to accept Continental Dollars in payment of state taxes and then remit
them to Congress as part of the funding requisitions each state owed Congress. The states,
however, failed to provide the funds requested before 1780. In the fall of 1779 Congress
permanently discontinued emissions of Continental Dollars. On 28 June 1781 the Secretary of
Congress, Charles Thomson, restated the funding–requisition quotas each state owed Congress

2

with regard to remitting Continental Dollars. He indicated that $195 million Continental Dollars
were still outstanding at that time.3 These assigned quotas are listed in Table 1.
[Place Table 1 Here]
With the requisition act of 18 March 1780, Congress attempted to induce states to make
specie payments to Congress as part of their funding quotas and to reduce the quantity of paper
money outstanding from $200 million Continental Dollars to $10 million “Continental-State”
Dollars. Congress gave states a discount when requisitions were paid in specie (one Spanish
silver dollar being accepted in lieu of 40 Continental Dollars) and would allow states to issue one
Continental-State Dollar on their own account for every 20 Continental Dollars they remitted to
the U.S. Treasury to be burned. Under this scheme states removed between $31.8 and $41.4
million Continental Dollars from the public and remitted them to the U.S. Treasury between late
1780 and late 1781. This experiment collapsed by late spring of 1781 and was never revived.4
As the Continental-State Dollar experiment collapsed, Continental Dollars ceased to
circulate as currency (Grubb, 2007b). Being near worthless and given that organized markets for
trading in Continental Dollars soon disappeared, many have assumed that the remaining
Continental Dollars were simply trashed at this time, e.g. Breck (1843, pp. 15-16) concluded:
Two hundred million lost all value, and were laid aside. The annihilation was so complete
that barber-shops were papered, in jest, with the bills; and the sailors, on returning from
their cruise, being paid off in bundles of this worthless money, had suits of clothes made
of it, and with characteristic light-heartedness turned their loss into a frolic by parading
through the streets in decayed finery…
Similarly, Phillips (1866, p. 185) related the following story from a Tory newspaper in New
York, the Rivington’s Gazette, written on 12 May 1781:
The congress is finally bankrupt! Last Saturday a large body of inhabitants with
paper dollars in their hats by way of cockades, paraded the streets of Philadelphia,
carrying colors flying, with a dog tarred, and instead of the usual appendage and
ornament of feathers, his back was covered with the congress’ paper dollar. …was

3

directly followed by the jailor, who refused accepting the bills in purchase of a glass of
rum, and afterwards by the traders of the city, who shut up their shops declining to sell
any more goods but for gold and silver.
In another state, Ferguson (1961, p. 66) and Phillips (1866, p. 185) related that:
…the continental money was buried with honors. Its remains, deposited in elegant
coffins, were followed to the grave by a numerous concourse; an eloquent oration was
delivered narrating its services, as those of a former friend and benefactor. When the
obsequies were concluded, the orator, holding to view a specimen of a new emission
authorized by the state to replace the old continental, exclaimed “be thou also ready; for
thou shalt surely die!” – a prophecy soon fulfilled.
But were such stories just minor political theater and Tory propaganda representing trivial
amounts of Continental Dollars, or were they indicative of some mass orgy of destruction? The
evidence below suggests that it was trivial.5
The total amount of Continental Dollars taxed out of circulation or otherwise removed
from the public by the states, remitted to the U.S. Treasury, and burned between 1779 and 1790
is seldom discussed nor has the exact time series of outstanding balances of Continental Dollars
still at large after 1779 been tallied previously in the literature. Yet the existence of three
separate reports allows for the construction of such a series from direct evidence. On 14 January
1786 Joseph Nourse, the Registrar of the Treasury from 1781 to 1829, reported to Congress the
amount of Continental Dollars—face value—paid into the U.S. Treasury from May 1779 through
1785 by month, year, and source (JCC, v. 30, pp. 22-25).
In May of 1782, Michael Hillegas, Continental Treasurer under the administration of
Robert Morris, reported to state Governors a portion of the report given by Nourse to Congress
in 1786—the portion covering from 25 November 1780 through 23 February 1782 (Ferguson, et
al., 1980, v. 5, p. 139). Hillegas’ report is basically identical to Nourse’s report for the period
that the two overlap except that Hillegas identifies which of the remittances were just currency
swaps, i.e. those affecting gross but not net emissions (Grubb, 2007b, 2008).

4

Finally, on 11 May 1790 Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury, reported to
Congress the amount of Continental Dollars—face value—paid into the U.S. Treasury from
November 1780 through March 1789 by day, month, year, and state.6 With the exception of a
few minor omissions and discrepancies (noted below), the three reports are basically the same
for the periods when they overlap. This cross-corroboration gives confidence to the numbers
reported by each series when they do not overlap.
These series, slightly rearranged (put into chronological order), are reproduced in Table
2. The Hillegas report, being redundant, is not listed separately.7 Combining the three series
gives a continuous quantitative monthly series from May 1779 through March 1789 of the
amounts of Continental Dollars—face value—remitted by each state to the U.S. Treasury.
Eliminating the overlap or duplication between the series, yields a total of $153.5 million
Continental Dollars—face value—remitted to the U.S. Treasury and burned by 1790.
Interpreting this number, however, requires additional scrutiny.
[Place Table 2 Here]
The Hillegas report identifies the purpose of each remittance, something not done in the
Nourse and Hamilton reports. In particular, Hillegas identifies which remittances from the 20
May 1777 and 11 April 1778 emissions were being swapped dollar-for-dollar for the emission of
14 January 1779 (Grubb, 2007b, 2008). Comparing the entries in the Hillegas report with those
in the Nourse and Hamilton reports for the period when the three reports overlap indicates that
the Nourse report includes the remittance of Continental Dollars that were merely part of this
currency swap, whereas the Hamilton report deliberately excludes these remittances, see Table 2.
As such, the Nourse and Hillegas reports are counting remittances in reference to gross
emissions or total printings of Continental Dollars ($241,500,000) whereas the Hamilton report

5

is counting remittances in reference to net emissions ($199,990,000).8
By inference, the numbers in the Nourse report for the period before Hamilton’s report
commences must represent only remittances that were part of the currency swap and so are not a
reduction in net emissions. Whereas, the numbers in the Hamilton report must represent only the
remittances that were part of the quota of payments each state owed Congress, i.e. reductions in
net emissions outstanding. Figure 1 uses this interpretation of remittances.
This interpretation of how to count remittances is also consistent with the timing of
congressional legislation. The period over which bills from the 20 May 1777 and 11 April 1778
emissions could be exchanged for bills of the 14 January 1779 emission ran from the spring of
1779 through 1 January 1781. While most of the currency swap took place before that deadline,
some of the exchanged bills continued to trickle into the U.S. Treasury through 1781. The total
sums that were eligible for exchange were $41.5 million (Grubb, 2007b, 2008). Nourse’s
remittances through 1 January 1781 total $34.4 million and through April of 1781 total $39.9
million. The closeness of these totals, given that Nourse admits that his numbers are neither
comprehensive nor complete, is further indication that Nourse’s numbers, at least into late-1780,
include mostly the return of old Continental bills that were being swapped for new Continental
bills and not a reduction in the net amount of Continental Dollars emitted.
With the requisition act of 18 March 1780, states began to call in through taxes or other
means Continental Dollars in order to issue their own individual Continental-State currency.
Remittances of Continental Dollars under this scheme would not begin to roll into the U.S.
Treasury until later that year, which would be consistent with the commencement date of the
Hamilton report. This was a short-lived experiment ending by mid-1781 with a total of $31.8 to
$41.4 million Continental Dollars called in through this mechanism (Grubb, 2007b). Hamilton’s

6

total, starting in November of 1780, reaches these amounts by August and November 1781,
respectively—about when the experiment ended, see Table 2.9
The other sums remitted after 1781 were part of the ongoing requisitions paid by the
states to Congress under the 40 to 1 credit of Continental Dollars to specie dollars set by
Congress in March of 1780. Interestingly, both Nourse and Hamilton indicate that no Continental
Dollars were remitted to the U.S. Treasury between late 1783 and mid-1786. Apparently, once
the Revolution was over and independence was officially recognized with the Treaty of Paris,
states saw no need to keep remitting Continental Dollars to Congress. Only when it became clear
that there would be a reckoning of accounts between the states and the Federal Government, did
remittances of Continental Dollars pick up again—presumably as states positioned themselves
for credits with the Federal Government.10
By 1790 the total amount of Continental Dollars (face value) still outstanding was $80.5
million ($200 million of net new emission minus $119.5 million remitted through 1789 as
reported by Hamilton) or $88 million ($241.5 million of gross emissions minus $153.5 million of
gross remittances as the result of combining the Hamilton and Nourse reports), see Table 2.
Because Nourse admitted that his numbers were neither comprehensive nor complete, the $80.5
million will be taken as the better estimate.
Thus by 1790, 11 years after ceasing to issue Continental Dollars and seven years after
the end of the Revolution, Congress had managed to get the states to redeem in some manner and
remove from the public roughly 60 percent of the net new Continental Dollars ever emitted
($119.5 million / $200 million). By any measure, this was quite an accomplishment—a success
seldom noted in the literature—especially considering that 1785 through 1788 were depression
years for the U.S. economy and that Congress’ original legislation did not require redemption of

7

Continental Dollars before 1797 for those issued in 1779 (Grubb, 2007b; Holton, 2007).
The $80.5 million Continental Dollars estimated above that were still outstanding and
unredeemed in 1790 is consistent with and corroborated by other evidence. It is close to
Congress’ guess of $78 to $80 million still unredeemed and unfunded as of 1791, and it is close
11

to Hamilton’s implied estimate for 1789.

Congress’ guess of how many Continental Dollars

were exchanged for bonds at the 100 to 1 default rate set by the August 1790 Funding Act
(discussed below) was $6 million, leaving $72 to $74 million (face value) as a total loss, i.e.
12

never funded or redeemed.

Figure 2 combines the information in Table 1 and the Hamilton evidence in Table 2 to
chart the progress of each state in filling its quota of remittances of Continental Dollars.
Delaware was the first to completely fill its quota, doing so with a single payment on 7 January
1782. Massachusetts and New Hampshire also quickly filled their quotas, completing their
payments by late September 1782. After that only Rhode Island, with a single payment on 13
August 1787, completed its quota.13 Pennsylvania reached 90 percent of its quota by 1783, and
New York reached 80 percent in 1786. New Jersey reached just over 50 percent by 1783 but
made little progress thereafter. The other states, with the exception of South Carolina and
Georgia who recorded no remittances in the 1780s, made slow and intermittent progress but
never reached over 50 percent of their assigned quotas. No state is recorded as remitting more
than its assigned quota of Continental Dollars. This fact will be used below to help explain why
some people held onto Continental Dollars as a speculative investment rather than using them to
pay state taxes or trading them in the marketplace during this period.
[Place Figure 2 Here]
Congress adopted the new U.S. Constitution in 1789 and under its auspices restructured

8

its finances with the Funding Act of 4 August 1790. The act increased the default rate to 100
Continental Dollars being exchangeable for 1 dollar in Federal Government interest-bearing
bonds. It also, for the first time, made the default on the Continental Dollar irrevocably
permanent. The bonds were callable perpetuities that paid 6 percent annual interest, but with onethird paying no interest until 1800. Only $6 million, of the $80.5 million, Continental Dollars
still outstanding in 1790 were so exchanged between 1791 and 1797—when the exchange
program was discontinued.14 “The rest [$74.5 million] seems to have remained in the hands of
people who held it after the time fixed by the funding act, hoping that ultimately the notes would
be redeemed in full.” (Bullock, 1895, p. 138) They would be disappointed.
Post-1790 Agitation for Revising the Redemption of the Continental Dollar
The evidence presented here identifies $80.5 million Continental Dollars as still
outstanding in 1790, of which only $6 million would be exchanged for bonds in the early 1790s
at the 100 to 1 default rate set by Congress in 1790, basically traded in for next to nothing. But
what happened to the other $74.5 million Continental Dollars that were still outstanding? The
literature on the Continental Dollar assumes that they quietly vanished, that almost none were
left around by and after 1790 to be redeemed, and that there were no objections or controversies
to its final default in 1790. Some important yet rarely-considered evidence indicates otherwise.
After passing the Funding Act of 4 August 1790 Congress was bombarded with petitions
by holders of Continental Dollars asking Congress to revise its default rate and redeem
Continental Dollars at par or at rates better than 100 to 1. This can be deduced from the advice
given to Congress by the Secretaries of the Treasury—who universally and forcefully advocated
rejection of these petitions and recommended strict adherence to the 1790 Funding Act. On 22
November 1792, Alexander Hamilton reported to Congress:15

9

The SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, to whom were referred the several petitions
specified in the list herewith transmitted, respectfully submits the following report
thereupon:
These petitions seek indemnification upon various sums of paper money received
from the public during the late war, by the respective petitioners, on account of claims
arising upon transactions of that period.
There is no subject upon which the special interposition of the Legislature for
relief of particular individuals can be more delicate and dangerous, than that of
depreciation; the infinite multitude of cases, in which claims of this nature might, with
equal or nearly equal degrees of equity, be supported; the impossibility, from the
extraordinary circumstances of the times when those claims originated of during [doing]
general justice; the inextricable confusion and incalculable expense of an attempt to
redress all the grievances and hardships of that kind which unavoidably took place, afford
considerations of the most powerful nature for leaving every question of depreciation
where the rules and principles of settlement at the Treasury have left it.
…The magnitude and extreme delicacy of the matter in question appear to render
it advisable to adhere to the acts of limitation, as well as the rules of settlement at the
Treasury, in this particular, with peculiar caution and strictness.
Such was the policy of the United States in Congress assembled, and a
perseverance in that policy is recommended by a variety of weighty reasons.
Similarly, on 23 December 1795, Oliver Wolcott, Jr., Secretary of the Treasury,
submitted a report to Congress assessing the “…claims [against the United States] which have
not been admitted to be valid…” Class 7, of the 14 classes of claims, consisted of claims
“…founded on bills of credit issued by the authority of the late Government, commonly called
bills of the old emission [Continental Dollars]. For these Mr. Nicholson claims payment at par;
that is, one specie dollar for every dollar in paper. The only provision hitherto made for this
specie of paper is by the act of Congress of the 4th of August, 1790…” Wolcott listed over
$300,000 in Continental Dollars (face value) being claimed for payment at par—being the
claims presented by just three people. Similar petitions asking Congress to redeem ContinentalState Dollars were also made and rejected—see the reports of the Secretaries of the Treasury for
24 December 1795; 26 February 1798; and 25 January 1802.16 Apparently, the default enacted 4
August 1790 was neither uncontroversial nor quietly accepted.
But why were people petitioning Congress to revise the 1790 Funding Act? Why had

10

they held onto Continental Dollars for so long? Why was there no active market in Continental
Dollars? Were they laboring under some particular yet thwarted expectation of redemption?
Speculative Holding versus Trash Disposal of Continental Dollars after 1779
Continental Dollars began to depreciate sometime in 1776.17 Figure 3 shows this
depreciation rising at a slow and steady pace from 1777 through late 1778 with it accelerating
dramatically thereafter. Most of the depreciation occurred after Congress ceased issuing
Continental Dollars in 1779. Holders of Continental Dollars, however, may not have considered
this wartime depreciation loss to be permanent. Once the economy returned to normal peacetime
conditions, Continental Dollars might be redeemed by the government at face value.
[Place Figure 3 Here]
One reason for such a belief was that, unlike most colonial paper money, Continental
Dollars were written to be an explicit contractual obligation to redeem a specific sum of specie—
with such being printed on the face of the bill. For example, the following was printed on the $80
note: “The Bearer is entitled to receive EIGHTY Spanish milled DOLLARS, or an equal Sum in
Gold or Silver according to a Resolution of Congress of the 14th January, 1779” (Newman, 1997,
pp. 33-35, 59-68). This can be interpreted as the government setting a fixed exchange rate
between specie and Continental Dollars that would be honored when conditions allowed.
The paper money issued by the individual colonies before the Revolution was different. It
did not explicitly on its face promise redemption in specie, fix an exchange rate to specie, or
guarantee convertibility to specie.18 Colonial bills of credit were non-interest-bearing contracts
that the issuing government had agreed to accept at face value for payment of the taxes it levied.
If more of these bills existed than could be used to pay these taxes and the bills depreciated when
used in the marketplace that was just unfortunate for the bill holder. There was no contractual

11

obligation of the issuing colony to restore that value in the future even if conditions allowed.
Colonial bills of credit were true fiat paper money. The marked difference in the contractual
obligations stated on the Continental Dollar may have induced holders to regard it and its future
redemption differently than that of traditional bills of credit from the colonial era.
In 1798, the Secretary of the U.S. Treasury admitted that Continental Dollars were
contracts that had been violated, albeit by necessity. He said, “This unfortunate depreciation,
which operated upon all the paper money…issued during the war, necessitated the United States
to adopt principles relative to them which cannot apply in cases of ordinary contract…”19
a. The Stance in Congress over Future Redemption of Continental Dollars
The possible redemption of Continental Dollars at face value, or at better rates than
offered in the marketplace or by the states for tax payments, once the war was over was fostered
by statements in Congress. This in turn may have prompted some to hold on to their Continental
Dollars rather than remit, trash, or trade them. As early as 22 May and 2 September 1776 such
statements as “Whereas, the holders of bills of credit emitted by authority of Congress will be
entitled, at certain periods appointed for redemption thereof to receive out of the treasury of the
united colonies the amount of the said bills in spanish milled dollars, or the value thereof in gold
or silver…” were made by Congress. The periods appointed for redemption were left vague—to
be chosen by Congress in the future when conditions allowed.20
Hope of future redemption could also be taken from the language of the supreme law of
the land. The Articles of Confederation laid before Congress on November of 1777 said that “All
bills of credit [Continental Dollars] emitted…under the authority of Congress…shall be
deemed…a charge against the United States, for payment whereof the said United States and the
public faith are hereby solemnly pledged.” (JCC, v. 9, pp. 924-925) The U.S. Constitution

12

adopted by Congress in 1789 maintained this obligation. Article 6 of the U.S. Constitution states
that, “All Debts contracted…before the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against
the United States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.”
Congress often considered recommendations about the future disposition of the
Continental Dollar—though typically nothing definitive was decided. On 29 December 1778 a
motion was made in Congress “Whereas a report hath circulated in divers parts of America, that
Congress would not redeem the bills of credit issued by them…but would suffer them to sink in
the hands of the holder, whereby the value of the said bills hath…depreciated; and lest the
silence of Congress might give strength to the said report; Resolved, That the said report is
false…” (JCC, v. 12, pp. 1261-1264) On 14 June 1779 a report was submitted to Congress
recommending that the Treasury make up the difference in value in specie-denominated debts
paid in depreciated Continental Dollar at the depreciation rate current at the time the debt was
paid (JCC, v. 14, p. 732). And on 13 September 1779 the President of Congress, John Jay, issued
a public statement wherein he declared that “Having shewn that there is no reason to doubt the
ability of the United States to pay their debt…It must be evident to every man who reads the
journals of Congress, or looks at the face of one of their bills [Continental Dollars], that
Congress have pledged...the redemption of them…it is no more in their power to annihilate your
money than your independence, and that any act of theirs for either of those purposes would be
null and void.” (JCC, v. 15, pp. 1057-1060—italic added)
Congress permanently discontinued emitting Continental Dollars after November of 1779
(Grubb, 2008). On 18 March 1780, Congress gave states a discount when requisitions were paid
in specie by the states to Congress. The act stated, “That the several states continue to bring into
the continental treasury, by taxes or otherwise, their full quotas…as assigned…the 7th of

13

October, 1779… That silver and gold be receivable in payment of the said quotas, at the rate of
one Spanish milled dollar in lieu of 40 dollars of the bills [Continental Dollars] now in
circulation. That the said bills, as paid in…be not re-issued, but destroyed.” (JCC, v. 16, pp. 263265) While phrased as a discount, this act was widely regarded at the time as a “great and
deliberate breach of public faith” by Congress. In other words, Congress was viewed as partially,
though perhaps temporarily, defaulting on the Continental Dollar. This “discount” applied only
to state payments to Congress and would remain the rate at which Congress would credit the
states for the payment of their quotas (taxes) owed to Congress from 1780 through 1789.21 But
what would Congress offer to citizens who held Continental Dollars?
On 28 June 1780, Congress stipulated that on loans denominated in Continental Dollars
and made after 1 March 1778 the lender would receive 6 percent interest on what the specie
value of those Continental Dollars were at the time they were loaned. The resolution also
established a depreciation table for converting Continental Dollars at different dates received into
specie dollars. Late in the war, when goods were requisitioned or confiscated from the public,
either Continental Dollars, or seemingly more often, loan certificates denominated in Continental
Dollars were given as compensation—whatever the requisitioning officer had on hand.22 As
such, the public may have considered being given government loan certificates as opposed to
being given the actual paper money as largely irrelevant. The two instruments had a comparable
legal as well as moral standing with regard to congressional commitment. The implication of the
28 June 1780 resolution on loans was that Congress, once it was financially able, would redeem
Continental Dollars from the public at what its specie value was in the marketplace at the time it
was last received—at best commensurate with the bill’s issuing date.
On 26 August 1780 Congress again resolved that “…creditors…be entitled to receive the

14

just value of the sums due…according to the current value of continental bills of credit compared
with specie at the time the money became due…That all debts due to the United States for
monies [Continental Dollars] received…shall be paid according to the just value of the money
when it was received…” This position was repeated several times throughout the 1780s, such as
on 16 March 1781 and on 17 May and 3 June 1784. This position indicates that as long as
holders of Continental Dollars had received their Dollars before November 1779, they would be
entitled to a better rate of redemption than the 40 to 1 rate set by Congress in March of 1780 for
payments by the states to Congress and better than any of the rates current in the marketplace or
set by the states for payment of taxes in Continental Dollars at that time.23
On 12 April 1781 a proposal was laid before Congress which stated “…with respect to
the old Emissions [Continental Dollars], Congress may allow 20 years or more for the
redemption of it. The faith of the United States pledged by Congress upon issuing those Bills
will not be violated by Congress. … Some who have lost by depreciation will have an
opportunity of recovering their losses…” On 18 April 1781, a Congressional Treasury report
restated that Congress had promised on 10 April 1780 “…that as soon as the state of the public
finances would admit, they would make good to the line of the army…the deficiency of their
original pay occasioned by the depreciation of the currency…” (JCC, v. 19, pp. 380-381, 413)
By all accounts Continental Dollars ceased to circulate as a currency around May of
1781.24 This outcome was driven by the coincidence of several market forces that reduced
demand for Continental Dollars as a currency in the spring of 1781 (Grubb, 2007b). The
evidence here adds to these market forces pushing Continental Dollars toward non-circulation.
As illustrated in Figure 2, several states by the end of 1782, namely Delaware, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania, had completed or were near completing their quotas as

15

assigned by Congress for remitting Continental Dollars to the Treasury. Since no state remitted
more than its quota, once the quota was filled that state must have stopped accepting Continental
Dollars.25 For residents of such states still holding Continental Dollars, this meant that the
primary demander of their Continental Dollars had stopped accepting them. For some, the
transaction and exchange costs of moving their Continental Dollars to states with unfilled quotas
who were still accepting Continental Dollars for tax payments would have been too high to
justify such moves, thus reducing their value as a circulating currency.26
But more importantly, the evidence here indicates that by the spring of 1781 many
expected that Congress, when financially able, would redeem Continental Dollars in specie at
their market exchange value at the time when that Continental Dollar was last received. Given
the rapidly depreciating value of Continental Dollars to specie dollars in the marketplace,
illustrated in Figure 3, this expectation created the incentive to stop trading Continental Dollars.
For example, one Continental Dollar received in early 1778 would be expected to be redeemed
by Congress in the near future for about 0.25 specie dollars. If that exact same physical
Continental Dollar was transferred to someone else in the marketplace in early 1781, it would be
expected to be redeemed by Congress in the near future for only about 0.025 specie dollars. The
fall in expected redemption value was likely to be greater than any loss due to time discounting
(lost interest) from holding this claim. Clearly the incentive for many was to hold on to their
Continental Dollars and not trade or circulate them in the marketplace—unless they were under
extreme liquidity pressure to raise cash in specie.
Through the rest of the 1780s up to the Constitutional Convention, the disposition of the
Continental Dollar continued to be considered by Congress, but with no definitive action taken.
On 25 April 1781, Oliver Wolcott introduced a motion in Congress stating that the

16

…200,000,000 of dollars emitted [by Congress] before the 18th of March 1780 and
hereby intended to be redeemed…shall be paid in Spanish milled Dollars or other gold
and silver equivalent thereto, or in the Bills of credit emitted by Congress as aforesaid
[the Continental-State currency]. … that from and after the expiration of the aforesaid
twenty years if any of the said Bills of credit emitted by Congress before the 18th of
March 1780 and hereby intended to be redeemed, shall remain outstanding, the holder or
holders of such Bills shall be entitled to and shall be paid by the Treasurer of the United
States for the time being, the value thereof in gold and silver equal to Spanish Milled
Dollars, or in Spanish milled Dollars according to the nominal value declared in the said
Bills of credit, on demand…with Interest thereon. (JCC, v. 20, p. 439)
The motion was debated and rejected on 2 May 1781 (JCC, v. 20, p. 471).
Likewise, a motion proposed on 18 September 1782 that “Old Continental Money” be
credited to the states “…according to the current value thereof compared with Gold and Silver at
the time when such State had delivered over its proportion…” was referred to committee and not
acted on. On 22 May 1783 a motion was presented to Congress “…for calling in the old emission
bills [Continental Dollars], …and to give certificates to the possessors for the amount thereof in
specie at the rate of one silver dollar for seventy five continental dollars, bearing interest at the
rate of six per cent per annum…” (JCC, v. 23, p. 591; v. 24, pp. 357-358) This motion was also
referred to committee and not acted on.
On 17 May 1784 a “Grand Committee” of Congress submitted to Congress the following
resolution (written by Thomas Jefferson):
That all sums of Continental bills of credit paid by or to any State, …shall be credited or
debited in account according to the specie value of such bills at the time of payment, as
settled by the legislature of the same state…on which payments an interest shall be
allowed at the rate of six per centum per annum from the time of paiment.
That all such bills now in the treasury of any state, shall be credited to such state
at the value they bore in specie, at the time they were received by the State …
That all such bills now in the hands of individuals shall be redeemed at the same
rates… That the holders of such bills shall be at liberty to carry them to the loan officer of
the United States within their State, who shall give them in Exchange for the same, a
certificate expressing the sum in specie, which the United States owes in lieu thereof and
the time from which it bears interest…where the said bills were received before that day,
where received afterwards, the time of their actual receipt. The Loan officer shall require
from the holder, the best evidence of the time of his receiving them which the nature of

17

the case will admit…and giving thereto so much credit as in his conscience he shall think
it deserves; … These certificates shall be funded and paid as the other debts of the United
States. (JCC, v. 26, pp. 395-396)
This motion was also assigned to committee and not acted on.
Similarly, on 3 June 1784, another report by a different committee was submitted to
Congress that recommended, “That if bills of credit advanced to any State or person to be
expended for the use of the United States, shall have depreciated before the same were so
applied, the receiver shall not be charged with the depreciation, if satisfactory evidence be
given…that such bills had not been applied to any other use…” (JCC, v. 27, p. 541) This
proposal does not appear to have been acted on by Congress.
On 29 July 1785, regarding a motion to send commissioners out to the various states to
settle the accounts between the states and Congress, an amendment was proposed, and its
substance adopted, that said (JCC, v. 29, pp. 590-593):
Provided also, that nothing in this resolve contained, shall be construed to authorize the
commissioners…to settle or liquidate any demand against the United States, for any sum
or sums of continental bills of credit, emitted prior to the 18th of March, 1780, either in
the hands of individuals states respectively, or of their citizens, until the United States in
Congress assembled, shall have given a particular decision at what rate the same shall be
redeemed by the United States.
Petitions also came into Congress from time to time, such as that of David Woelper on 3
January 1786, requesting a new settlement with regard to the depreciation of Continental Dollars
from what the petitioner had accepted in a prior period. Congress stated that “the Committees of
Congress uniformly reported against a revisal of settled accounts.” (JCC, v. 30, p. 11—italics
added) As such, there was an incentive not to settle one’s account too soon.
In conclusion, what Congress would do about the Continental Dollar was left continually
undecided through the mid-1780s. Thus, hope of future redemption at better rates than in the
marketplace remained. In addition, the prominent expectation given by Congress was that

18

Congress, when financially able, would redeem Continental Dollars at their specie value in the
marketplace when last acquired. Given the rising depreciation rates in the marketplace, the
public’s incentive regarding Continental Dollars acquired prior to 1779 would be not to trade
them in the marketplace or use them to pay state taxes or trash them, but to hold them for future
redemption. For Continental Dollars acquired in the marketplace after 1779, it would be better to
use them to pay state taxes where possible. There was also an incentive not to rush to settle an
account too early, but to wait for better days. In part, these incentive-signals sent by Congress,
especially in 1780 and 1781, may help explain both why Continental Dollars ceased to circulate
as currency in the marketplace after mid-1781 and why some people in the 1780s used them to
pay state taxes while others held onto them as a speculative investment.
b. Statements and Advice from the Founding Fathers Regarding Future Redemption
Statements by some founding fathers also held out the possibility of redemption of
Continental Dollars by the Federal Government in the near future at face value or better rates
than were current in the marketplace. For example, Benjamin Franklin advised, in his essay Of
the Paper Money of America written while in Paris sometime between 1780 and 1784, that:
First, The Quantity of Bills [Continental Dollars] borrowed before the
Depreciation…The Principal of this Sum is considered as equal in Value to so many
Dollars of Silver as were borrowed in Paper, and will be paid in Silver accordingly.
Secondly, The Quantities of Bills borrowed in different Stages of the Depreciation
down to the present time. These Sums are by a Resolution of Congress to be repaid in
Silver according to the Value they were in Silver at the Time they were lent…Thus those
Lenders have their Property secured from the Loss by Depreciation subsequent to the
Time of their Loan. (Oberg, 1998, p. 232; see also Smyth, 1907, pp. 112-113)
Along a similar vein, Thomas Jefferson writing to James Madison from Annapolis on 25
April 1784 under the suspicion that future redemption would be at better rates than what
prevailed currently in the marketplace, reasoned thus (Boyd, 1953, v. 7, p. 120):
Would it not be well for Virginia to empower persons privately to buy up her

19

quota of old Continental money. I would certainly advise this were I not afraid that
possession of her quota on such easy terms would tempt her to refuse justice to the other
states on this matter. … If she would…do what is right, I should much wish to see her
adopt secret measures for the purchase. I think some states will do this, and I fear with
unjust views.
From Annapolis, Jefferson wrote again to Madison on 8 May 1784 and in answer to
Madison’s question “Has any resolution been taken by Congress touching the old Continental
Currency?” said:
That question has been debated by a grand Committee upwards of a month. They
yesterday came to the inclosed resolution. It was decided by only 6 votes against 5. I
think it will gain strength in the House. The Southern and middle states I believe are for
it, and I think one or two of the Eastern may perhaps come over. Yet there is far from
being a certainty of this. (Boyd, 1953, v. 7, pp. 123, 232)
Foreign observers also noted the possibility of a future redemption as well as the
uncertainty over its timing and manner. As one foreign observer put it on 4 May 1784, in
reference to the Continental Dollar, “At present there are many private Gentlemen holding large
sums of Paper money, that is to be called in. But when this will happen, at what rate it will be
redeemed, congress do not yet agree upon.” (Boyd, 1953, v. 7, p. 213)
On 3 June 1784 the Continental Congress received a committee report on settling the
accounts of the State of Pennsylvania with the United States that recommended:
That all monies or articles supplied by the United States to any particular State, shall be
charged to such State at their just value in specie, with an interest of six per cent per
annum, from the date of such supplies, until the final adjustment and payment of
account;…
That if bills of credit [Continental Dollars] advanced to any State or person to be
expended for the use of the United States, shall have depreciated before the same were so
applied, the receiver shall not be charged with the depreciation, if satisfactory evidence
be given to the Commissioner by such receivers, that such bills had not been applied to
any other use, (and were applied to the purpose designed, as soon as occasion required);
otherwise such receiver will be chargeable with such bills at their value when received…
(JCC, v. 27, pp. 540-545)
No vote is recorded as to whether Congress accepted or rejected the resolutions of this

20

committee. While directed only at the particular case of the State of Pennsylvania, the general
principle would appear to offer holders of Continental Dollars the expectation that this paper
money would be redeemed in specie at the Continental Dollar-to-specie exchange rate current
when the holders received their bills (with interest between then and final settlement). This was
Jefferson’s interpretation and the basis of his advice to holders of Continental Dollars.
In a series of letters to French correspondents in 1786 Jefferson, who was still in Paris at
the time, explained his current understanding of the likely redemption of Continental Dollars. On
3 June 1786, he advised (Boyd, 1954, v. 9, pp. 604-605):
It is six years since the paper money of New England has ceased to circulate as
money. It is considered at present as making a part of the National debt, and that the
holders of it will be entitled to receive from the public as much gold or silver as the paper
money would have bought at the time it was received by the holder with an interest of 6
per cent per annum. But as yet no precise arrangements have been taken for the paiment
either of principal or interest. Most of the subjects of France, having paper money, have
deposited it in the hands of the French minister or Consul at New-York, that paiment may
be demanded whenever it shall be provided by Congress. There are even speculators in
America who will purchase it. But they give much less than it is worth. As for myself I
do not deal in it.
On 11 July 1786 he explained that (Boyd, 1954, v. 10, pp. 127-128):
It is true that the United states, generally, and most of the separate states in
particular, are endeavoring to establish means to pay the interest of their public debt
regularly, and to sink it’s principal by degrees. But as yet their efforts have been confined
to that part of their debts which is evidenced by certificates. I do not think that any state
has yet taken measures for paying their paper money debt. The principle on which it shall
be paid I take to be settled, tho’ not directly yet virtually, by the resolution of Congress of
June 3, 1784, that is that they will pay the holder or his representative what the money
was worth at the time he received it, with an interest from that time of 6 per centum per
annum. …whether the money was… Continental money, or Virginia money;…—I advise
all foreign holders of paper money to lodge it in the office of their Consul for the state
where it was received, that he may dispose of it for their benefit the first moment that
paiment shall be provided by the state or Continent [Continental Congress].
On 6 November 1786 he explained further that (Boyd, 1954, v. 10, p. 509):
Congress have as yet come to no resolution as to the general redemption of paper
money. That it is to be redeemed is a principle of which there is no doubt in the mind of

21

any member of Congress, nor of any citizen of the United States. A Resolution of
Congress taken in a particular case, which stood on the same ground on which the general
one will stand, founds a presumption amounting nearly to certainty that they will pay the
holder of every bill what it cost him, or the persons whom he represents, at the time of
receiving it, with an interest of 6 per Cent. They have of course established no rules of
evidence as to the time of receiving the money.
And lastly, on 8 December 1786 he explained even further that (Boyd, 1954, v. 10, p. 584):
As to the paper money in your hands, the states have not yet been able to take
final arrangements for it’s redemption. But soon as they shall have gotten their finances
into some order, they will surely pay for it what it was worth in silver at the time you
received it, with an interest. The interest on Loan office certificates is I think paid
annually in all states; and in some of them they have begun to make paiments of the
principal. These matters are managed for foreigners by the Consul of their nation in
America, where they have not a private friend to attend for them.27
This material establishes, contrary to what often assumed in the literature, that the
disposition of the future redemption of Continental Dollars remained an open question
throughout the 1780s. Certainty over its future was continually avoided by Congress, though it
sent reasonable expectations that redemption would happen in the near future when Federal
finances were in better shape, and would happen, if not at face value, at least at a better rate for
those who received their Dollars prior to 1780, than the 40 to 1 rate set by Congress in 1780.
Such an expectation created an incentive to hold Continental Dollars, those received prior to
1780, for future redemption rather than to trade them in the marketplace or remit them in state
taxes. As such, the $80.5 million Continental Dollars still outstanding and unredeemed in 1790
(40 percent of the total emitted) should not be a surprising sum.
With the Funding Act of 4 August 1790, Congress committed to irrevocably defaulting
on the Continental Dollar. After 1790, however, Congress was continually presented with
petitions asking it to un-default the Continental Dollar. The Secretaries of the Treasury,
Alexander Hamilton and then subsequently Oliver Wolcott Jr. and Albert Gallatin, advocated a
strict hard line on not un-defaulting the Continental Dollar, and advised Congress to stick to the

22

default rate set by the 1790 Funding Act, i.e. to maintain the irrevocable nature of the default.
Why did they take this strict hard line in their advice to Congress?
Discrimination and the Reason for Irrevocable Default
In 1790, under the auspices of the new U.S. Constitution that allowed Congress to create
a direct tax revenue source for itself, Congress moved to fund (un-default) its obligations. How
to pay its obligations generated a contentious debate in Congress over whether to credit current
holders with the full face value of the obligation even if they had paid a pittance for it in the
marketplace earlier, or whether original holders of the debt should be given something to make
up for their loss when they were “forced” to sell the obligation at below face-value prices in the
pre-1789 marketplace. This issue is referred to as the debate over discrimination.28
With regard to interest-bearing debt obligations (bonds), Congress decided that current
holders would get full face-value—that is interest paid in specie, including arrears of interest, on
the full face value in the form of callable perpetuities—and original holders of the debt would get
nothing.29 With regard to non-interest-bearing obligations (the Continental Dollar), Congress
decided that original holders would get nothing, and current holders would get less than 1 cent
on the dollar of face value in the form of a required exchange for interest-bearing bonds.
The winning argument put forward for funding the interest-bearing debt at face value,
with no discrimination between original and current holders, was that the new U.S. Constitution
obligated the Federal Government to honor its prior obligations as originally contracted, i.e.
honor the face value, and that such was necessary for reestablishing the creditworthiness of the
government. Discrimination, besides being impractical, was at odds with honoring the obligation
as a contract that was transferable in the marketplace and upholding the negotiability of
government instruments (Taylor, 1950). But these arguments hold equally well for paying off the

23

Continental Dollars still outstanding at face value to the current holders.
The predominant expectation fostered by Congress throughout the 1780s was that the
redemption of the Continental Dollar would be at its specie value when last received by the
current holder. Such redemption, however, would be analogous to discrimination in funding the
bond debt, i.e. equivalent to giving current bond holders interest on only the market price of the
bond when last purchased as opposed to giving the current holder interest on the full face value
of the bond. It would be setting the issuer’s contractual obligation to the current holder of said
contract to be whatever the market value of the obligation was when last purchased or received
by the current holder rather than setting it to be the face value of the contract. If Congress denied
discrimination on its interest-bearing debt, consistency required that Congress also deny
redeeming Continental Dollars at their market value in specie when last acquired. Policyconsistency required that only Continental Dollars in the hands of their current holders could be
considered for redemption and only at either face value or at nothing at all. As argued elsewhere
(Grubb, 2007a), redemption at face value was outside the revenue capabilities and asset position
of Congress. Thus, nothing, or as close to nothing as one could get, had to be the choice in 1790.
With its new power to directly tax the public, Congress could have accepted Continental
Dollars in payment of the taxes it levied on the public after 1789, effectively un-defaulting this
debt. Instead, Congress decided in 1790 not to accept its Continental Dollars directly from the
public in payment of its taxes at any rate, because to do so would have substantially reduced
Congress’ specie revenues in the near term, and so undercut the credibility of its commitment to
funding its interest-bearing debt (payment of which was to be in specie).
Thus, the Continental Dollar had to remain unredeemed in 1790. Grubb (2007a) explains
how an irrevocable default on the Continental Dollar could be done at this juncture without

24

jeopardizing the Federal Government’s future creditworthiness. Adding to that explanation the
necessity of being consistent with its anti-discrimination position on funding its interest-bearing
debt helps establish that the actions of Congress regarding debt-funding in 1790 were rational,
coherent, and consistent, and not necessarily capricious or purely rent-seeking behavior.
Conclusion
The history of the Continental Dollar is important to understanding the U.S. financial
revolution. If nothing else, it influenced debate over monetary powers at the 1787 Constitutional
Convention (e.g. see Calomiris, 1988; Grubb, 2006, 2007a; Holton, 2007). This history,
however, has remained murky—especially regarding the redemption of the Continental Dollar
after 1779. The behaviors and motives of Congress and the public have been either ignored or
explained in such a way that they appear capricious and irrational. The evidence here turns their
motives and behaviors into those of rational, coherent, and consistent actors. It also documents
the exact time path and location by state of the redemption of Continental Dollars. The
continuing presence of the Continental Dollar well into the 1790s was an important consideration
and constraint on the Founding Fathers’ efforts to salvage the nation’s financial position.

25

References
American State Papers. Class III, Finance, Vol. 1. [Documents, Legislative and Executive of the
Congress of the United States, Vol. 5 (Washington: Gales and Seaton, 1832)].
American State Papers. Class IX, Claims, Vol. 1. [Documents, Legislative and Executive of the
Congress of the United States, Vol. {blank} (Washington: Gales and Seaton, 1834)].
Archives of Maryland, Vols. 1-72. (Baltimore, MD: Maryland Historical Society, 1883-1972).
Atack, Jeremy, and Peter Passell, A New Economic View of American History. New York: W. W.
Norton, 2nd edition, 1994.
Bezanson, Anne, Prices and Inflation during the American Revolution: Pennsylvania, 17701790. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1951.
Bolles, Albert S., The Financial History of the United States from 1774 to 1789, Vols.1-3. New
York: Augustus M. Kelly, 1969 [original 1884].
Boyd, Julian P., The Papers of Thomas Jefferson. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
Vols. 7-12, 1953-1955.
Breck, Samuel, Historical Sketch of Continental Paper Money. Philadelphia: John C. Clark,
1843.
Bronson, Henry, “A Historical Account of Connecticut Currency, Continental Money, and the
Finances of the Revolution,” Papers of the New Haven Colony Historical Society, 1, (1865), pp.
1-192 [New Haven, CT: Thomas J. Stafford, printer].
Bullock, Charles J., The Finances of the United States from 1775 to 1789, with Especial
Reference to the Budget. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1895.
Bullock, Charles J., Essays on the Monetary History of the United States. New York: Macmillan,
1900.
Carp, E. Wayne, To Starve the Army at Pleasure. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina
Press, 1984.
Calomiris, Charles W., “Institutional Failure, Monetary Scarcity, and the Depreciation of the
Continental,” Journal of Economic History, 48 (Mar. 1988), pp. 47-68.
Cooke, Ebenezer, Sotweed Redivivus: Or the Planters Looking-Glass. Annapolis, MD: William
Parks Printer, 1730.

26

Elliot, Jonathan, “Funding System of the United States and Great Britain,” House of
Representatives Document No. 15 (Vol. II. Executive Documents), 28th Congress, 1st Session,
Read on Dec. 16, 1843.
Ferguson, E. James, The Power of the Purse. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina
Press, 1961.
Ferguson, E. James, et al., eds., The Papers of Robert Morris, 1781-1784, Vols. 1-9. Pittsburgh,
PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1973-1999.
Garber, Peter M. “Alexander Hamilton’s Market-Based Debt Reduction Plan,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 35 (1991), pp. 79-104.
Gouge, William M., A Short History of Paper Money and Banking in the United States.
Philadelphia, PA: T. W. Ustick, 1833.
Grubb, Farley, “The U.S. Constitution and Monetary Powers: An Analysis of the 1787
Constitutional Convention and the Constitutional Transformation of the U.S. Monetary System,”
Financial History Review, 13, no. 1 (Apr. 2006), pp. 43-71.
Grubb, Farley, “The Net Worth of the U.S. Federal Government, 1784-1802,” American
Economic Review—Papers and Proceedings, 97, no. 2 (May 2007a), pp. 280-284.
Grubb, Farley, “The Continental Dollar: How Much Was Really Issued?” NBER Working Paper,
No. 13047, December 2007b [http://www.nber.org/papers/w13047].
Grubb, Farley, “The Continental Dollar: How Much Was Really Issued?” Journal of Economic
History, 68, no. 1 (Mar. 2008), forthcoming.
Harlow, Ralph Volney, “Aspects of Revolutionary Finance, 1775-1783,” American Historical
Review, 35 (Oct. 1929), pp. 46-68.
Holton, Woody, Unruly Americans and the Origins of the Constitution. New York: Hill and
Wand, 2007.
Hughes, Jonathan, and Louis P. Cain, American Economic History. New York: Pearson
Education Inc., 7th edition, 2007.
Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774-1789. Vols. 1-34. Washington D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1904-1937.
Newman, Eric P., The Early Paper Money of America. Iola, WI: Krause Publications, 1997 [4th
edn.].

27

Nourse, Joseph, “Amount of Continental Money Issued During the Revolutionary War and the
Depreciation of the Same,” House Document No. 107, 20th Congress, 1st Session, January 30,
1828. Washington D.C.: Gales & Seaton, 1828.
Oberg, Barbara B., ed., The Papers of Benjamin Franklin, Vol. 34. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1998.
Perkins, Edwin J., American Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700-1815. Columbus, OH:
Ohio State University Press, 1994.
Phillips, Henry Jr., Continental Paper Money: Historical Sketches of American Paper Currency,
Second Series. Roxbury, MA: W. Elliot Woodward, 1866.
Ratchford, B. U., American State Debts. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1941.
Scott, Kenneth, Counterfeiting in Colonial America. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 1957.
Sumner, William Graham, The Financier and the Finances of the American Revolution, Vols. 12. New York: Augustus M. Kelly, 1968 [original 1891].
Smyth, Albert Henry, The Writings of Benjamin Franklin, Vol. 9. London: Macmillan, 1907.
Syrett, Harold C., ed., Papers of Alexander Hamilton. New York: Columbia University Press,
Vols. 2-17, 1961-1972.
Taylor, George Rogers, ed., Hamilton and the National Debt. Boston: D.C. Heath and Company,
1950.
Tindall, George Brown, America: a Narrative History. New York: W. W. Norton (2nd edn.),
1988.
United States Congress, The Debates and Proceedings in Congress of the United States, Vols. 118. Washington, D.C.: Gales & Seaton, 1834-1856.
Walton, Gary M., and Hugh Rockoff, History of the American Economy. Mason, OH: SouthWestern, 10th edition, 2005.
Webster, Pelatiah, Political Essays on Nature and Operation of Money, Public Finances, and
Other Subjects. New York: Burt Franklin, 1969 [original 1791].

28

Fig. 1 The Continental Dollar, 1775-1790: Cumulative Outstanding
Totals Emitted and Removed—Face Value
Sources: See Grubb (2007b, 2008); Table 2; and the text.
Notes: The two-month unit intervals combine January with February, March with April, and so
on.

29

Fig. 2 Progress in Quota Fulfillment by States in Redeeming Continental
Dollars, 1780-1789
Sources: Tables 1 and 2.
Notes: See the text for construction. Square markers indicate that only a single payment was
observed for that state. Lines start at the first payment remitted for each state, respectively, and
chart the cumulative progress in fulfilling that state’s assigned quota (see Table 1). The twomonth unit interval counts January with February, March with April, and so on.

30

Fig. 3 The Depreciation of the Continental Dollar: 1775 through 1790
Sources: Bezanson (1951, p. 344); Boyd (1954, v. 10, pp. 42-43); Bullock (1895, p. 135); JCC
(v. 16, p. 264; v. 17, pp. 567-569); United States Congress (1834, v. 2, pp. 2243-2251); Webster
(1969, pp. 501-502). See also Grubb (2007b).
Notes: Bullock (1895, p. 134) reports the highest depreciation rate found in any state. The
Philadelphia price index is a 15 commodity weighted arithmetic index for prices in Continental
Dollars and stops in April 1781. The index as reported is divided by 100 to get the number
reported here. For the isolated exchange rates reported after 1781, see Bolles (1969, v. 1, pp.
117-146), Boyd (1954, v. 10, p. 26), Gouge (1833, II, p. 26), Phillips (1866, pp. 182-184),
Sumner (1968, v. 1, pp. 95-96), and Webster (1969, p. 502).
31

Table 1. Quota of Continental Dollars Assigned to Each State to be Redeemed
________________________________________________________________________
State
Quota Assigned
Quota Completed
________________________________________________________________________
New Hampshire
$5,200,000
September 18, 1782
Massachusetts
29,900,000
August 31, 1782
Rhode Island
2,600,000
August 13, 1787
Connecticut
22,100,000
New York
9,750,000
New Jersey
11,700,000
Pennsylvania
29,900,000
Delaware
2,210,000
January 7, 1782
Maryland
20,540,000
Virginia
32,500,000
North Carolina
13,000,000
South Carolina
15,600,000
Georgia
[unlisted]
____________
$195,000,000
________________________________________________________________________
Sources: Ferguson, et al. (1973, v. 1, p. 194); JCC (v. 15, p. 1150); Table 2.
Notes: The total amount of Continental Dollars that Congress thought it had emitted was $200
million—the last emission being 29 November of 1779, but due to an accounting error the actual
total was $199,990,000 (Grubb, 2007b, 2008). Presumably the unstated amount to be assigned to
Georgia reflects the difference between the $195 million listed above and the total Congress
thought it had emitted.

32

Table 2. Continental Dollars Paid by each State from 1779 through 1790 to the
Federal Government as Part of Their Tax Revenues and Currency Swaps
Owed to Congress That Were Examined, Counted, and then Burnt
By the U.S. Treasury (Face Value in Nominal Dollars)
________________________________________________________________________
Reported by Alexander
Year
Reported by Joseph Nourse, Registrar
Hamilton, Secretary of the
Month of the U.S. Treasury, 14 January 1786.
U.S. Treasury, 11 May 1790.
Day
From Whom Received
Amount Received From Amount
________________________________________________________________________
1779
May Delaware State Treasurer
224,524
Pay Master—General’s Dept.
233,098
Pennsylvania State Treasurer
166,000
June

New York—Loan Office
New Jersey—Loan Office
Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Delaware State Treasurer
Delaware—Loan Office
Pay Master—General’s Dept.
Board of War

1,841,856
768,466
73,600
150,003
157,894
24,851
83,233

July

Rhode Island—Loan Office
Rhode Island State Treasurer
New Jersey—Loan Office
Pennsylvania—Loan Office

746,372
195,018
483,444
537,401

Sept.

Massachusetts—Loan Office
Pay Master—General’s Dept.

6,635,550
15,335

Oct.

New Jersey—Loan Office

Nov.

New York—Loan Office

Dec.

Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Virginia—Loan Office

1,397,002
4,848,100

Connecticut—Loan Office
Connecticut State Treasurer

1,592,159
1,367,537

Feb.

Pennsylvania—Loan Office

6,220,313

Mar.

Rhode Island State Treasurer
Pennsylvania—Loan Office

8,238
1,445,914

1780
Jan.

554,505
5,130

33

Delaware—Loan Office
South Carolina—Loan Office

3,899
1,814,471

June

New Hampshire State Treasurer
New Hampshire—Loan Office
Pay Master—General’s Dept
Managers of the U.S. Lottery

200,000
501,522
8,893
184,513

Nov.

New Jersey—Loan Office
Maryland—Loan Office

949,430
115,117

25th
25th
Dec.
23rd
1781
Jan.
1st

New Jersey—Loan Office

New York—Loan Office

Feb.
13th

Pennsylvania—Loan Office

Mar.
23rd

New Jersey—Loan Office

Apr.

Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Virginia—Loan Office
Virginia—Loan Office

3rd
17th
May
15th
29th
30th
June
11th
11th
July

New Jersey
Maryland

949,430
115,117

New Jersey

237,840

New York

599,396

237,840

599,396
1,400,527
Pennsylvania
631,523
New Jersey

Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Virginia—Loan Office
New Jersey—Loan Office

New Hampshire—Loan Office
Massachusetts—Loan Office

1,400,527
631,523

2,599,987
105,433*
802,717
Pennsylvania
Virginia

2,599,987
802,717

Pennsylvania
Virginia
New Jersey

1,999,995
5,785,555
712,824

1,999,995
5,785,555
712,824

2,299,769
a
12,984,687
New Hampshire 2,299,769
a
Massachusetts 12,984,001

Massachusetts—Loan Office
Massachusetts State Treasurer

46,959*
821,152*

34

Aug.
2nd
4th

New Jersey—Loan Office
Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Pennsylvania—Loan Office

Oct.
6th

New Jersey—Loan Office

Nov.
6th

Massachusetts—Loan Office

1782
Jan.

7th
30th

Delaware—Loan Office
New York—Loan Office
New York—Loan Office
South Carolina—Loan Office

New Jersey—Loan Office

May

Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Delaware—Loan Office

June
3rd

Pennsylvania—Loan Office

July
30th

Pennsylvania—Loan Office

Aug.

Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Massachusetts—Loan Office

7th
31st

New Jersey
Pennsylvania

1,456,417
4,402,413

New Jersey

1,139,181

1,139,180
16,876,618
Massachusetts 16,876,618

Feb.
23rd

30th

1,456,417
28,323*
4,402,413

2,246,683
1,373,811
3,817*
221,387*
Delaware
New York

2,210,000
1,373,811

New Jersey

1,207,111

Pennsylvania

3,367,670

Pennsylvania

2,805,318

Pennsylvania

5,009,343

1,207,111
3,367,670
243,127
2,805,318
5,009,343
1,599,758
b
38,725
Pennsylvania 1,599,758
b
Massachusetts
387

Sept.
18th

New Hampshire 2,900,231

Nov.
22nd

Pennsylvania—Loan Office

Dec.

Pennsylvania—Loan Office

c

2,954,918
Pennsylvania

2,954,918

1,000,391
35

th

Pennsylvania—Loan Office

77,623

6
19th
1783
Jan.
20th
29th

Pennsylvania—Loan Office
Pennsylvania—Loan Office

Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania

1,000,391
77,623

Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania

47,535
331,369

New Jersey

392,833

47,535
331,369

Feb.
21st

New Jersey—Loan Office

392,833

July

New Hampshire State Commissioner

1784

None

None

1785

None

None

29,231

c

1786
June
9th

New York

2,759,217

July
2nd
25th

New York
Maryland

848,776
827,490

Aug.
2nd
22nd
22nd

New York
Maryland
Maryland

2,151,478
430,969
473,779

Sept.
5th
12th
16th
16th

Maryland
Maryland
Maryland
Virginia

151,417
26,650
132,929
2,880,720

Nov.
1st
9th

Virginia
Maryland

1,523,224
62,481

Dec.
7th
13th
29th

Connecticut
Maryland
Maryland

8,102,425
40,072
21,750

36

1787
Jan.
22nd

Maryland

July
5th

Virginia

2,048,160

Aug.
13th
17th

Rhode Island
New Jersey

2,593,353
99,516

Nov.
13th

Pennsylvania

857,827

1788
Mar.
28th

New York

172,677

Aug.
25th

Connecticut

1,049,060

Sept.
5th

Maryland

6,780,026

1789
Mar.
18th
Separate Sub-Totals:
Grand Combined Total (sans overlap):

__________
d
$111,435,353

89,905

North Carolina 5,066,861
__________
$119,462,370

$153,526,347

Continental Dollars Still Outstanding and Unredeemed as of 1790:
If currency emitted for currency swaps and the destruction of said swapped currency are
e
included in the totals— (241,500,000 – 153,526,347) = $87,973,653
If only net new emissions (sans currency swaps) and their removal
are considered—
(199,990,000 – 119,462,370) = $80,527,630
________________________________________________________________________
Sources: Derived from Joseph Nourse, Registrar’s Office, Board of Treasury, 14 January 1786
report as recorded in the JCC (v. 30, pp. 22-25); and Alexander Hamilton’s 11 May 1790 report
to Congress (American State Papers, 1832, Class III, Finance, v. 1, pp. 58-59; Elliot, 1843, pp.

37

73-76; United States Congress, 1834, v. 2, pp. 1544, 1566) “Schedule E. Statement of the sums,
in the old continental emissions, paid by the following States into the treasury of the United
States, on account of their several quotas of the requisitions of Congress, of March 18, 1780.”
Both sources record no payments by Georgia and no payments for the years 1784 and 1785.
Notes:
* Identified by Michael Hillegas, Continental Treasurer, in May of 1782 as being bills of the
20 May 1777 and 11 April 1778 emissions remitted as part of the authorized currency exchange
for new bills that occurred between 25 November 1780 and 23 February 1782 (Ferguson, et al.,
1980, v. 5, p. 139; Grubb, 2007b, 2008).
a

These appear to be the same entry. Which is correct and which is a typo is unclear.

b

These appear to be the same entry. Which is correct and which is a typo is unclear.

c

These might be the same entry, though that is not eminently clear. If they are, which is correct

and which is a typo is also not clear. For the purpose of calculating the “Grand Combined Total
(sans overlap)” they were counted as independent and separate entries.
d

Nourse indicated that his numbers were neither comprehensive nor complete. As such they

represent a lower bound of what was actually removed and destroyed in this period.
e

Because the number in note d above is a lower bound, this value is biased high.

38

Footnotes
1

See Atack and Passell (1994, pp. 71-72); Bezanson (1951, pp. 12, 344); Bolles (1969, v. 1,

p. 69); Breck (1843, pp. 15-16); Ferguson (1961, pp. 44, 66); Hughes and Cain (2007, pp. 78830; Phillips (1866, pp. 185, 245-251); Scott (1957, p. 262); Tindall (1988, pp. 226, 263-266,
275-277, 301-307); Walton and Rockoff (2005, pp. 126-127); Webster (1969, p. 502).
2

See Bolles (1969, v. 1, pp. 194-198); Bronson (1865, pp. 120-138); Bullock (1895, p. 129);

Ferguson (1961, pp. 30-35, 53, 64-65); Grubb (2007b); Harlow (1929, p. 67); Holton (2007);
Ratchford (1941, pp. 32-33, 37-38).
3

Ferguson, et al. (1973, v. 1, p. 194); Grubb (2007b); Journals of the Continental Congress

[JCC hereafter] (v. 2, pp. 103, 221-222; v. 3, pp. 457-459; v. 4, p. 339; v. 6, p. 1047; v. 14, p.
1013; v. 15, pp. 1019, 1053, 1150, 1171, 1324; v. 19, pp. 164, 411).
4

Ferguson (1961, pp. 51-52); Grubb (2007b); JCC (v. 16, pp. 263-265; v. 19, pp. 164, 411);

Ratchford (1941, pp. 37-38).
5

A common image offered today is that worthless Continental Dollars were simple smoked in

pipes (or used to light smoking pipes). So far, I have not been able to find any reference to said
actually from that era. This image may be a latter day myth based on a statement taken from a
poem about Maryland paper money in the 1730s (the only reference to using paper money to
light smoking pipes that I have found). See Cooke (1730, p. 8).
6

American State Papers (1832, Class III, Finance, v. 1, pp. 58-59); Elliot (1843, pp. 73-76);

United States Congress (1834, v. 2, pp. 1544, 1566).
7

The only major exception in the cross-corroboration is the May 1781 amount for Virginia

($5,785,555) which is missing from the Hillegas report. As such, the Hillegas report is not listed
separately in Table 2 since it is both redundant and incomplete relative to the Nourse report.

39

8

This conclusion is also consistent with the fact that when Nourse (1828) reported what the

total emission of Continental Dollars were to the 20th Congress he included the full authorization
of January 14, 1779 ($50 million) in his numbers without netting out bills that were exchanged
for the bills of the 20 May 1777 and 11 April 1778 emissions (Grubb, 2007b, 2008).
9

From July 1780 through 1781 Continental Dollars were being remitted to the U.S. Treasury

both as part of the Continental-State currency scheme and as part of the currency swap of the
emissions of 20 May 1777 and 11 April 1778 for the emission of 14 January 1779. The evidence
does not always distinguish the reason for each specific remittance. By November 1781,
however, total remittances across both the Nourse and the Hamilton reports, sans overlap or
duplication, were enough to fully account both for the $41.5 million currency swap and the $41.1
million remitted under the Continental-State currency scheme (Grubb, 2007b, 2008).
10

See Grubb (2007b); JCC (v. 22, pp. 83-86); and Table 1 above. See also Jefferson’s quote

below from 25 April 1784, and the discussion of the final reckoning in Ferguson (1961, pp. 205219, 224) and Perkins (1994, pp. 187-196).
11

See Elliot (1843, p. 12, item #3). Hamilton estimated the total National Debt (state and

national) to be $77,124,465 for 1789/1790 (Taylor, 1950, p. 1; Syrett, 1962, v. 6, pp. 85-87). In
this number Hamilton included $2 million Continental Dollars. Thus, Hamilton clearly regarded
Continental Dollars to be part of the National Debt. Hamilton also calculated the specie value of
Continental Dollars at the default rate of 40 to 1 set by Congress in 18 March 1780—
$80,527,630 million Continental Dollars outstanding in 1790 in face value converts to
$2,013,191 million in defaulted value. If Hamilton was not simply dividing $80 million
Continental Dollars by 40 to get $2 million Continental Dollars in defaulted value, then his $2
million statement is a mysterious curiosity. If he really meant that only $2 million Continental

40

Dollars in face value were still outstanding at the time, then his proposed default on the
Continental Dollar was an unnecessary and reckless act.
12

See Elliot (1843, p. 12, item #4); Sumner (1968, v. 1, p. 98); United States Congress (1834,

v. 2, pp. 2243-2251). Ferguson (1961, p. 67) says in regard to the mass of Continental Dollars
issued and outstanding prior to the 1790 default affirmation act, “Eventually the dead mass of
currency was drawn in by the states. A good part of it was scattered or destroyed, and in 1790
only about $6,000,000 remained in the hands of individuals.” Ferguson’s source for his $6
million number is Elliot (1843, p. 12). As such, Ferguson clearly misinterprets his source here.
The $6 million was the number estimated to have been actually exchanged at the 100 to 1 default
rate for bonds after 1790, not the amount outstanding at this date, which was estimated to be $78
to $80 million in the same source. In addition, in reference to 1780 and the withdrawal of old
Continental currency, Ferguson (1961, p. 181) also says that the “states absorbed nearly
$120,000,000.” This is clearly erroneous as it is inconsistent with all other evidence, and no
other source shows that much absorbed in 1780. If by chance Ferguson really meant that the total
absorbed by the states between 1780 and 1790 was $120 million, then he would be very close to
that estimated here in Table 2 and the evidence in his primary source (Elliot, 1843, p. 12, #3).
13

Interestingly, while Rhode Island has been universally reviled and tarred with the reputation

of being irresponsible with regard to monetary policies and seen as a poster child for badly
managed paper money schemes, on this one issue—the remittance of paper Continental Dollars
to the national government—it was one of the few responsible states.
14

See Elliot (1843, p. 12); Grubb (2007a); Newman (1997, p. 69); Sumner (1968, v. 1, p. 980);

Taylor (1950, p. 62); United States Congress (1834, v. 2, pp. 2243-2251).
15

American State Papers (1834, Class IX, Claims, v. 1, p. 55—italics added).

41

16

American State Papers (1834, Class IX, Claims, v. 1, pp. 172-181, 215, 250).

17

The first statement of depreciation of the Continental Dollar reported in Congress occurred

on 11 January 1776, with the next one—a more forceful statement—occurring on 14 January
1777 (JCC, v. 4, p. 49; v. 7, pp. 35-36; Phillips, 1866, pp. 44-46).
18

See Newman (1997). Exceptions include Maryland’s paper pound from 1767-1774 which

stated that it was redeemable in “bills of exchange payable in London, or Gold and Silver, at the
rate of four shilling 6 pence sterling per dollar…” Maryland had purchased with prior tax
revenue stock in the Bank of England and used the liquidation of said stock to redeem its money
in London at the stated rate. New Hampshire, New Jersey, and Rhode Island were at times also
exceptions. See Newman (1997, pp. 167-169, 225-235, 246-254, 378-389).
19

American State Papers (1834, Class IX, Claims, v. 1, p. 215).

20

JCC (v. 4, pp. 49, 339-340, 382; v. 5, p. 724).

21

See Archives of Maryland (v. 43, pp. 258-259); Bolles (1969, v. 1, pp. 97-98, 135-136);

Boyd (1953, v. 7, pp. 221-223); Bullock (1895, pp. 136-138; 1900, p. 72); Elliot (1843, pp. 7782); Ferguson (1975, v. 2, pp. 70-71); JCC (v. 16, p. 265; v. 23, pp. 560-561, 590); Phillips
(1866, pp. 160-166); Sumner (1968, v. 1, pp. 87-89); Webster (1969, p. 111).
22

See Carp (1984, pp. 68-73, 90, 97, 186); Ferguson (1961, pp. 39-40); Figure 3 above; JCC

(v. 15, pp. 1334-1336; v. 16, pp. 343-345; v. 17, pp. 566-569).
23

See JCC (v. 17, pp. 784-785; v. 19, p. 266; v. 26, pp. 395-396; v. 27, pp. 540-545).

Jefferson’s table of depreciation did not exceed 40 to 1 until after November of 1779, see Boyd
(1954, v. 10, p. 43) and Figure 3 above.
24

See Bezanson (1951, pp. 12, 344); Breck (1843, p. 16); Ferguson (1961, p. 66); Webster

(1969, p. 502).

42

25

For the case of Delaware which explicitly passed laws to stop the acceptance of Continental

Dollars by state officials after its quota was filled, see Grubb (2007b).
26

In many cases states would accept Continental Dollars in payment of their taxes only at

rates far above the 40 to 1 in specie set by Congress on 18 March 1780, such as at 75 to 1 set by
Pennsylvania (Bronson, 1865, pp. 128-136; Phillips, 1866, pp. 182-184; Sumner, 1968, v. 1, p.
95; Webster, 1969, pp. 171, 501-502).
27

See also Boyd (1954, v. 10, pp. 17, 26; 1955, v. 12, p. 61).

28

See Ferguson (1961, pp. 273-284, 297-302); Holton (2007, pp. 256-261); Perkins (1994, pp.

221-231); Taylor (1950, pp. 19-40).
29

The subtleties are a little more complex than portrayed, but that complexity is not relevant

to the story here. See Garber (1991).

43

