NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DIFFUSION OF WAL-MART AND ECONOMIES OF DENSITY
Thomas J. Holmes
Working Paper 13783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13783

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

The views expressed herein are solely those of the author and do not represent the views of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to for NSF Grant 0551062
for support of this research. I have benefited from the comments of many seminar participants. In
particular, I thank Glenn Ellison, Gautam Gowrisankaran and Avi Goldfarb for their comments as
discussants and Ariel Pakes for advice on how to think about this problem. I thank Junichi Suzuki,
Julia Thornton, David Molitor, and Ernest Berkas for research assistance. I thank Emek Basker for
sharing data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Thomas J. Holmes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DIFFUSION OF WAL-MART AND ECONOMIES OF DENSITY
Thomas J. Holmes
Working Paper 13783
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13783

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

The views expressed herein are solely those of the author and do not represent the views of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to for NSF Grant 0551062
for support of this research. I have benefited from the comments of many seminar participants. In
particular, I thank Glenn Ellison, Gautam Gowrisankaran and Avi Goldfarb for their comments as
discussants and Ariel Pakes for advice on how to think about this problem. I thank Junichi Suzuki,
Julia Thornton, David Molitor, and Ernest Berkas for research assistance. I thank Emek Basker for
sharing data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2008 by Thomas J. Holmes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density
Thomas J. Holmes
NBER Working Paper No. 13783
February 2008
JEL No. L11,L81
ABSTRACT
The roll-out of Wal-Mart store openings followed a pattern that radiated from the center out with Wal-Mart
maintaining high store density and a contiguous store network all along the way. This paper estimates
the benefits of such a strategy to Wal-Mart, focusing on the savings in distribution costs afforded by
a dense network of stores. The paper takes a revealed preference approach, inferring the magnitude
of density economies by the extent of sales cannibalization from closely-packed stores that Wal-Mart
is willing to sustain to achieve density economies. The model is dynamic with rich geographic detail
on the locations of stores and distribution centers. Given the enormous number of possible combinations
of store-opening sequences, it is difficult to directly solve Wal-Mart's problem, making conventional
approaches infeasible. The moment inequality approach is used instead and it works well. The estimates
show the benefits to Wal-Mart of high store density are substantial and likely extend significantly
beyond savings in trucking costs.

Thomas J. Holmes
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
holmes@econ.umn.edu

1

Introduction

Wal-Mart opened its first store in 1962 and today there are over 3,000 Wal-Marts in the
United States.

The roll-out of stores illustrated in Figure 1 displays a striking pattern.

(See also a movie of the roll-out posted at the web.1 )

Wal-Mart started in a relatively

central spot in the country (near Bentonville, Arkansas) and store openings radiated from
the inside out. Wal-Mart never jumped to some far oﬀ location to later fill in the area in
between. With the exception of store number one at the very beginning, Wal-Mart always
placed new stores close to where they already had store density.
This process was repeated in 1988 when Wal-Mart introduced the supercenter format.
(See Figure 2.) With this format, Wal-Mart added a full-line grocery store alongside the
general merchandise of a traditional Wal-Mart.

Again, the diﬀusion of the supercenter

format began at the center and radiated from the inside out.
This paper estimates the benefits of such a strategy to Wal-Mart, focusing on the logistic
benefits aﬀorded by a dense network of stores. Wal-Mart is vertically integrated into distribution: general merchandise is supplied by Wal-Mart’s own regional distribution centers,
groceries for supercenters through its own food distribution centers.

Over 80 percent of

what Wal-Mart sells goes through its distribution center network (as opposed to direct store
delivery by manufacturers or wholesalers).2

When stores are packed close together, it is

easier to set up a distribution network that keeps stores close to a distribution center. And
when stores are close to a distribution center, Wal-Mart can save on trucking costs. Moreover, such proximity allows Wal-Mart to respond quickly to demand shocks.

The ability

of Wal-Mart to quickly respond to demand shocks is widely considered to be a key aspect
of the Wal-Mart model. (See Holmes (2001) and Ghemawat, Mark, and Bradley (2004).)
Wal-Mart famously was able to restock it shelves with American flags on the very day of
9/11.
A challenge in estimating the benefits of density is that Wal-Mart is notorious for being
secretive–I am not going to get access to confidential data on its logistics costs. So it is
not possible to conduct a direct analysis relating costs to density. And even if Wal-Mart
were to cooperate and make its data available, the benefits of being able to quickly respond
to demand shocks might be diﬃcult to quantify with standard accounting data. Instead, I
pursue an indirect approach that exploits revealed preference. While density has a benefit,
1
2

A video of Wal-Mart’s store openings can be seen at www.econ.umn.edu/~holmes/research.html
See Ghemawat, Mark, and Bradley (2004).

1

it also has a cost, and I am able to make some progress in pinning down the cost. By
examining Wal-Mart’s choice behavior of how it trades oﬀ the benefit (not observed) versus
the cost (observed with some work), it is possible to draw inferences about how Wal-Mart
values the benefits.
The cost of high store density is that when stores are close together their market areas
overlap and new stores cannibalize sales from existing stores.

The extent of such canni-

balization is something I can estimate. For this purpose, I bring together store-level sales
estimates from ACNeilsen and demographic data from the Census at a very fine level of
geographic detail to estimate a model of demand in which consumers choose among all the
Wal-Mart stores in the general area where they live. The demand model fits the data well
and I am able to corroborate its implications for the extent of cannibalization with certain
facts Wal-Mart discloses in its annual reports.

Using my sales model, I determine that

Wal-Mart has encountered significant diminishing returns in sales as it has packed stores
close together in the same area.
I write down a dynamic structural model of how Wal-Mart rolled out its stores over the
period 1962-2005. The model is quite detailed and distinguishes the exact location of each
individual store, the location of each distribution center, the type of store (regular Wal-Mart
or supercenter) and the kind of distribution center (general merchandise or food).

The

model takes into account wage and land price diﬀerences across locations. The model takes
into account that while there might be benefits of high store density to Wal-Mart, there also
might be disadvantages of high population density–beyond high wages and land prices–as
the Wal-Mart model might not work so well in very urban locations.
Given the enormous number of diﬀerent possible combinations of store-opening sequences,
it is diﬃcult to directly solve Wal-Mart’s optimization problem. This makes conventional
approaches used in the industrial organization literature infeasible.

Instead, I use the

moment inequality approach outlined in Pakes, Porter, Ho, and Ishii (2006).

I consider

a set of selected deviations from what Wal-Mart actually did and determine the set of
parameters consistent with this decision. The procedure works well and I am able to bound
the importance of density economies. My estimates indicate that the benefits to Wal-Mart
of high store density are substantial and likely extend significantly beyond savings in trucking
costs.
An economy of density is a kind of economy of scale. Over the years various researchers
have made distinctions among types of scale economies and noted the role of density. For the
airline industry, Caves, Christensen, and Tretheway (1984) distinguish an economy of density
2

from traditional economies of scale as arising when an airline increases the frequency of flights
on a given route structure (as opposed to increasing the size the route structure holding fixed
the flight frequency per route). The analogy here would be Wal-Mart expanding by adding
more stores in the same markets it already serves (as opposed to expanding its geographic
reach and keeping store density the same). Roberts (1986) makes an analogous distinction
in the electric power industry. This paper diﬀers from the existing empirical literature in
three ways. First, there is a rich micro modeling with an explicit spatial structure. I don’t
have lumpy market units (e.g. a metro area) within which I count stores; rather I employ a
continuous geography. Second, I explicitly model the channel of the density benefits through
the distribution system, rather than have them be a “black box.” Third, rather than directly
relate costs to density, I use a revealed preference approach as explained above.
There is a large literature on entry and store location in retail.3
growing literature on Wal-Mart itself.4

There is actually a

This paper is most closely related to the recent

parallel work of Jia (2007).5 Jia estimates density economies by examining the site selection
problem of Wal-Mart as the outcome of a static game with K-Mart. Jia’s paper features
interesting oligopolistic interactions that my paper abstracts away from. My paper highlights
(1) dynamics and (2) cannibalization of sales by nearby Wal-Marts that Jia’s paper abstracts
away from.

2

Model

A retailer (Wal-Mart) has a network of stores supported by a network of distribution centers.

The model specifies how Wal-Mart’s revenues and costs in a period depend on the

configuration of stores and distribution centers that are open in the period. And the model
specifies how the networks change over time.
There are two categories of merchandise: general merchandise (abbreviated by g) and
food (abbreviated by f ). There are two kinds of Wal-Mart stores. A regular store sells only
general merchandise. A supercenter sells both general merchandise and food.
There are a finite set of locations in the economy. Locations are indexed by
Let d

0

= 1, ...L.

0

denote the distance in miles between any given pair of locations and . At any given

3

See, for example, Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) and Toivanen and Waterson (2005).
Recent papers on Wal-mart include: Basker (2005), Stone (1995), Hausman and Leibtag (2005), Ghemawat, Mark, and Bradley (2004)), and Neumark et al (2005), and Basker (2007).
5
See also Andrews, Berry, and Jia (2004).
4

3

period t, a subset BtW al of locations have a Wal-Mart. Of these, a subset BtSuper ⊆ BtW al

are supercenters and the rest are regular stores. In general the number of locations with
Wal-Marts will be small relative to the total set of locations and a typical Wal-Mart will
draw sales from many locations.
Sales revenues at a particular store depend upon the store’s location and its proximity
g
(BtW al ) be general merchandise sales revenue of store j at time
to other Wal-Marts. Let Rjt

t given the set of Wal-Mart stores open at time t. If store j is a supercenter, then its food
f
(BtSuper ) analogously depend upon the configuration of supercenters. The model of
sales Rjt

consumer choice will be specified below in Section 4 from which this demand function will
be derived.

In this demand structure, Wal-Mart stores that are near each other will be

regarded as substitutes by consumers. That is, increasing the number of nearby stores will
decrease sales at a particular Wal-Mart.
I abstract from price variation and assume Wal-Mart sets constant prices across all stores
and over time. In reality, prices are not always constant across Wal-Marts, but the company’s
Every Day Low Price (EDLP) policy makes this a better approximation for Wal-Mart than
it would be for many retailers. Let μ denote the gross margin. Thus for store j at time t,
g
(BtW al ) is sales receipts less cost of goods sold for general merchandise.
μRjt

In the analysis there will be three components of cost that will be relevant besides cost
of goods sold: (1) distribution costs, (2) variable store costs, and (3) fixed costs at the store
level. I describe each in turn.
Distribution Cost
Each store requires distribution services. General merchandise is supplied by a General
Distribution Center (GDC) and food by a Food Distribution Center (FDC). For each store,
these services are supplied by the closest distribution center.

Let dgjt be the distance in

miles from store j to the closest GDC at time t and analogously define dfjt . If store j is a
supercenter, its distribution cost at time t is
Distribution_Cost jt = τ dgjt + τ dfjt .
where the parameter τ is the cost per mile per period per merchandise segment (general or
food) of servicing this store. If j carries only general merchandise the cost is τ dgjt .
Note that the distribution cost here is a fixed cost that does not depend upon the volume
of store sales. This would be an appropriate assumption if Wal-Mart made a single delivery
run from the distribution center to the store each day. The driver’s time is a fixed cost and
4

the implicit rental on the tractor is a fixed cost that must be incurred regardless of the size
of the load. To keep a tight rein on inventory and to allow for quick response, Wal-Mart
aims to have daily deliveries even for its smaller stores.

So there clearly is an important

fixed cost component to distribution. Undoubtedly there is a variable cost component as
well, but for simplicity I abstract from it.
Variable Costs
The larger the sales volume at a store, the greater the number of workers needed to
staﬀ the checkout lines, the larger the parking lot, the larger the required shelf space, and
the bigger the building. All of these costs are treated as variable in this analysis. It may
seem odd to treat building size and shelving as a variable input. However, Wal-Mart very
frequently updates and expands its stores.

So in practice, store size is not a permanent

decision that is made once and for all but is rather a decision made at multiple points over
time. Treating store size as a variable input simplifies the analysis significantly.
Assume that the variable input requirements at store j are all proportionate to sales
volume Rj ,
Laborj = ν Labor Rj
Landj = ν Land Rj
Otherj = ν Other Rj .
Wages and land prices vary across locations and across time.
the wage and land rental rate that store j faces at time t.

So let wjt and rjt denote

Other consists of everything

left out so far that varies with sales, including the rental on structure and equipment in the
store (the shelving, the cash registers, etc.) The other cost component of variable costs is
assumed to be the same across locations and the price is normalized to one.
Fixed Cost
We might expect there to be a fixed cost with operating a store. To the extent the fixed
cost is the same across locations, it will play no role in the analysis of where Wal-Mart places
a given number of stores. We are only interested in the component of fixed cost that varies
across locations.
From Wal-Mart’s perspective, urban locations have some disadvantages compared to nonurban locations. These disadvantages go beyond higher land rents and higher wages that
have already been taken into account above. The Wal-Mart model of a big box store at a

5

convenient highway exit is not applicable in a very urban location. Moreover, Sam Walton
was very concerned about the labor force available in urban locations, as he explained in his
autobiography (Walton (1992)). We might expect, for example, that urban workers would
be less interested in joining in on the trademark Wal-Mart cheer (Give me a "W"...). Urban
locations are more susceptible to unions and Wal-Mart has been very up front about not
wanting unions in its stores.
To capture potential disadvantages of urban locations, the fixed cost of operating store
j is written as a function f (mj ) of the population density mj of the store’s location. The
functional form is quadratic in logs,
f (mj ) = ω 0 + ω 1 ln(mj ) + ω 2 ln(mj )2 .

(1)

A supercenter is actually two stores, a general merchandise and food store, so the fixed cost
is paid twice. It will be with no loss of generality in our analysis to assume that the constant
term ω0 = 0 since the only component of the fixed cost that will matter in the analysis is
the part that varies across locations.
Dynamics
Everything that has been discussed so far considers quantities for a particular time period. I turn now the dynamic aspects of the model. Wal-Mart operates in a deterministic
environment in discrete time where it has perfect foresight. The general problem Wal-Mart
faces is to determine for each period:
1. How many new Wal-Marts and how many new supercenters to open?
2. Where to put the new Wal-Marts and supercenters?
3. How many new distribution centers to open?
4. Where to put the new distribution centers?
The main focus of the paper is on part 2 of Wal-Mart’s problem. The analysis conditions
on the answers to 1, 2, and 4, in terms of what Wal-Mart actually did, and solves Wal-Mart’s
problem of getting 2 right. Of course, if Wal-Mart’s actual behavior solves the true problem
of choosing 1 through 4, then it also solves the constrained problem of choosing 2, conditioned
on 1, 3, and 4 being what Wal-Mart actually did.

6

Getting at part 1 of Wal-Mart’s problem–how many new stores Wal-Mart opens in a
given year–is far afield from the main issues of this paper. In its first few years, WalMart added only one or two stores a year. The number of new store openings has grown
substantially over time and in recent years they sometimes number several stores in one
week. Presumably capital market considerations have played an important role here. This
is an interesting issue, but not one I will have anything to say about in this paper.
Problems 3 and 4 regarding distribution centers are closely related to the main issue of
this paper. I will have something to say about this later in Section 7.
Now for more notation. To begin with, the discount factor each period is β. The period
length is a year and discount factor is set to β = .95.
As defined earlier, BtW al is the set of Wal-Mart stores in period t and BtSuper is the subset of
supercenters.

Assume that once a store is opened, it never shuts down. This assumption

simplifies the analysis considerably and is not inconsistent with Wal-Mart’s behavior as
it rarely closes stores.6

W al
al
al
Then we can write BtW al = Bt−1
+ AW
, where AW
is the
t
t

set of new stores opened in period t.

Analogously, a supercenter is an absorbing state,

Super
+ ASuper
, for ASuper
the set of new supercenter openings in period t.
BtSuper = Bt−1
t
t

A

supercenter can open two ways. It can be a new Wal-Mart store that opens as a supercenter
as well. Or it can be a conversion of an existing Wal-Mart store.
Let NtW al and NtSuper be the number of new Wal-Marts and supercenters opened at t,
al
and ASuper
. Choosing these values is defined as part 1
i.e. the cardinality of the sets AW
t
t

of Wal-Mart’s problem. These are taken as given here. Also taken as given is the location
of distribution centers of each type and their opening dates (parts 3 and 4 of Wal-Mart’s
problem).
There is exogenous productivity growth of Wal-Mart according to a growth factor ρt in
period t. If Wal-Mart were to hold fixed the set of stores and demographics also stayed the
same, then from period 1 to period t revenue and all components of costs would grow by (an
annualized) factor ρt . As will be discussed later, the growth of sales per store of Wal-Mart
has been remarkable. Part of this growth is due the gradual expansion of its product line,
from initially hardware and variety items to food, drugs, eye glasses and tires, etc.. The
part of growth due to food through the expansion into supercenters is explicitly accounted
for here. But expansion into drugs, eye glasses, tires, etc., is not modeled explicitly. Instead
this growth is implicitly picked up through the exogenous growth parameter ρt . The role ρt
plays in Wal-Mart’s problem is like a discount factor.
6

Wal-Mart’s annual reports disclose store closings that are on the order of two a year.

7

Super
al
al
al
A policy choice of Wal-Mart is a vector a = (AW
, ASuper
, AW
, ASuper
, ..., AW
)
1
2
1
2
T , AT

specifying the locations of the new stores opened in each period t. Define a choice vector a to
be feasible if the number of store openings in period t under policy a equals what Wal-Mart
actually did, i.e. NtW al new stores in a period and NtSuper supercenter openings. Wal-Mart’s
problem at time 0 is to pick a feasible a to maximize

max
a

T
X
t=1

⎡

X £ g
¤
(ρt β)t−1 ⎣
π jt − fjtg − τ dgjt +
j∈BtW al

⎤
i
X h f
π jt − fjtf − τ dfjt ⎦ ,

(2)

j∈BtSuper

where the operating profit for merchandise segment k ∈ {g, f } at store j in time t is
k
k
k
− wjt Laborjt
− rjt Landkjt − Otherjt
π kjt = μRjt

and where dkjt is the distance to the closest segment k distribution center at time t.

3

The Data

There are five main data elements used in the analysis.

The first element is store-level

data on sales and other store characteristics. The second is opening dates for stores and
distribution centers. The third is demographic information from the Census. The fourth
element is data on wages and rents across locations. The fifth is other information about
Wal-Mart from annual reports.
Data element one, store-level variables such as sales, was obtained from TradeDimensions,
a unit of ACNeilsen. This data provides estimates of store-level sales for all Wal-Marts open
as of the end of 2005. This data is the best available and is the primary source of market
share data used in the retail industry. Ellickson (2007) is a recent user of this data for the
supermarket industry.
Table 1 presents summary statistics of annual store-level sales and employment for the
3,176 Wal-Marts in existence in the contiguous part of the United States as of the end of
2005.7

(Alaska and Hawaii are excluded in all of the analysis.) As of this point in time,

almost two thirds of all Wal-Marts (1,980 out of 3,176) are supercenters carrying both general
7
The Wal-Mart Corporation has other types of stores that I exclude in the analysis. In particualr, I am
excluding Sam’s Club (a wholesale club) and Neighborhood Market stores, Wal-Marts recent entry into the
pure grocery store segment.

8

merchandise and food. The remaining 1,196 are Regular Wal-Marts that do not have a full
selection of food. The average Wal-Mart has annual sales of $70 million. The breakdown is
$47 million per regular Wal-Mart and $85 million per supercenter. The average employment
is 255 employees.
The second data element is opening dates of the four types of Wal-Mart facilities. The
table treats a supercenter as two diﬀerent stores: a general merchandise store and a food
store. There are two kinds of distribution centers, general (GDC) and food (FDC). Table 2
tabulates opening dates for the four types of facilities by decade. The appendix explains how
this information was collected. Note that if a regular store is later converted to a supercenter,
it has an opening date for its general merchandise store and a later opening date for its food
store. This is called a conversion.
The third data element, demographic information, comes from three decennial censuses:
1980, 1990, and 2000. The data is at the level of the block group, a geographic unit finer
than the Census tract. Summary statistics are provided in Table 3. In 2000, there were
206,960 block groups with an average population of 1,350. I use the geographic coordinates
of each block group to draw a circle of radius five miles around each block group. I take
the population within this five mile radius and use this as my population density measure.
Table 3 reports that the mean density in 2000 across block groups equals 219,000 people
within a five-mile radius. The table also reports mean levels of per capita income, share old
(65 or older), share young (21 or younger), and share black. The per capita income figure
is in 2000 dollars for all the Census years using the CPI as the deflator.8
The fourth data element is information about local wages and local rents.

The wage

measure is average retail wage by county from County Business Patterns. This is payroll
divided by employment. I use annual data over the period 1977 to 2004. It is diﬃcult to
obtain a consistent measure of land rents at a fine degree of geographic detail over a long
period of time. To proxy land rents, I use information about residential property values from
the 1980, 1990, and 2000 decennial censuses. For each Census year and each store location,
I create an index of property values by adding up the total value of residential property
within two miles of the store’s location and scaling it so the units are in inflation adjusted
dollars per acre. See the appendix for how the index is constructed. Interpolation is used to
obtain values between Census years. The Census data is supplemented with property tax
data on property valuations of actual Wal-Mart store locations in Iowa and Minnesota. As
discussed in the appendix, there is a high correlation between the tax assessment property
8

Per capita income is truncated from below at $5,000 in year 2000 dollars.

9

valuations of a Wal-Mart site and the property value index.
The fifth data element is information from Wal-Mart’s annual reports including information about aggregate sales for earlier years.

I also use information provided in the

“Management Discussion” section of the reports on the degree to which new stores cannibalize sales of existing stores. The specifics of this information are explained below when
the information is incorporated into the estimation.

4

Estimates of Operating Profits

This section estimates the components of Wal-Mart’s operating profits.

Part 1 specifies

the demand model and Part 2 estimates it. Part 3 treats various cost parameters. Part 4
explains how estimates for 2005 are extrapolated to other years.

4.1

Demand Specification

Conditioned on shopping at some Wal-Mart, presumably a consumer will tend to shop at
the Wal-Mart closest to home. Nevertheless, for various reasons, some consumers will shop
at other Wal-Marts. For example, a particular consumer may pass a Wal-Mart on the way
to work and it may be more convenient to shop there than the Wal-Mart closest to home.
To allow for substitution possibilities such as this, the various Wal-Marts in the vicinity of a
consumer are assumed to be diﬀerentiated products. A discrete choice approach is employed,
following common practice in the literature.
For a given location , let n denote the population of location

and let m be the

population density at . In the empirical work a location will be a Census Block Group and
the population density measure will be the number of people residing within a five mile
radius of the Block Group.
Let y j denote the distance in miles between location and store location j. Define B̄ W al
to be the set of Wal-Marts in the vicinity of the consumer’s location, defined to be those
locations within 25 miles,
©
ª
B̄ W al = j, j ∈ B W al and y j ≤ 25 .
(The time subscript t is left out here because the time period is held fixed in this part of the
paper.)
10

In the model, the shopping decision for general merchandise is separated from the shopping decision for food. In general, we expect that there would be some complementarity–
once a consumer is in the store to buy a lawn mower, the consumer might also buy food
for dinner. I ignore this issue in part because I don’t have good data to get a handle on
the issue. (In particular, I don’t have a clean breakdown between the two segments in my
store-level data.) I have no reason to believe that abstracting from such a complementarity
biases my results in a particular direction.
I explain the purchase decision for general merchandise; the food purchase choice problem
is analogous. Consider a consumer at a particular location . The consumer has a budget
λg for spending on general merchandise.

The consumer makes a discrete choice between

buying general merchandise from the outside alternative (labeled j = 0) or from one of the
Wal-Marts in B̄ wal (assuming B̄ wal is nonempty).
If the consumer chooses the outside alternative 0, utility is
u0 = b(m ) + z α + ε0 .

(3)

The first term is a function b(·) that depends upon the population density m at the
consumer’s location .
population density areas.

Assume b0 (m) ≥ 0; i.e., the outside option is better in higher
This is a sensible assumption as we would expect there to be

more substitutes for a Wal-Mart in larger markets for the usual reasons. A richer model of
demand would explicitly specify the alternative shopping options available to the consumer.
I don’t have suﬃcient data to conduct such an analysis so instead specify the reducedform relationship between b(m ) and population density.9 The functional form used in the
estimation is
b(m) = α0 + α1 ln(m) + α2 (ln(m))2
where
mj = max {1, mj } .
The units of the density measure is thousands of people within a five mile radius.

(4)
By

truncating m at one, ln(m) is truncated at zero. All locations with less then one thousand
people within five miles are grouped together.10
9

One way that the recent empirical literature in industrial organization has been making progress is by
estimating policy functions and equilibrium relalationships directly rather than the underlying structural
parameters, e.g. Bajari, Benkard, and Levin (2007).
10
This same truncation is applied throughout the paper.

11

The second term of (3) allows demand for the outside good to depend upon a vector z of
location characteristics that impact utility through the parameter vector α. In the empirical
analysis, these characteristics will include the demographic characteristics of the block group
and income.
The third term is a logit error term. Assume this is drawn i.i.d. across all consumers
living in the block group .
This explains utility of the outside alternative. Now consider the utility from buying at
a particular Wal-Mart j ∈ B̄ W al . It equals
u j = −h (m ) y j + xj γ + εj ,

(5)

for h(m) parameterized by
h(m) = ξ 0 + ξ 1 ln(m).
The first term of (5) is the disutility of commuting y j miles to the store from the consumer’s
home.

The coeﬃcient h (m ) can be interpreted as a transportation cost per mile.

The

specification allows the transportation cost to depend upon population density. The second
term of (5) allows utility to depend upon other characteristics xj of Wal-Mart store j. The
other store characteristic included in the empirical analysis is store age. In this way, it is
possible in the demand model for a new store to have less sales, everything else the same.
This captures in a crude way that it takes a while for a new store to ramp up sales. The last
term is the logit error εj . A consumer who finds store j a convenient place to stop on the
way home from work can be interpreted as a consumer with a high value of εj .
Using the standard logit formulas, the probability that a consumer at location

find’s

Wal-Mart j to be be the best option for the consumer’s general merchandise needs is
pgj =
for

exp(δ j )
P
,
[exp (δ 0 )] + k∈B̄W al exp(δ k )

δ0

≡ b(m ) + z α

δj

≡ −h (m ) y j + xj γ.

12

(6)

The model’s predicted general merchandise revenue for store j is
Rjg =

X

g

{ |j∈B̄ }

λg × pgj × n .

In words, there are n consumers at location

(7)

and a fraction pgj of them are shopping at j

where they will each spend λg dollars.
Spending on food is modeled the same way.
f

the spending λ per consumer.

The parameters are the same except for

The formula for food revenue Rjf at store j is analogous

to (7). Even though the parameters for food are the same as for general merchandise, the
probability pfj a consumer at

shops at j for food will diﬀer from the probability pgj the

consumer shops for general merchandise.

This follows because the set of alternatives for

f

food B̄ is in general diﬀerent from the set of alternatives B̄ g for general merchandise.

4.2

Demand Estimation

Given a vector θ of parameters from the demand model, we can plug in the demographic
data and obtain predicted values of general merchandise sales R̂jg (θ) for each store j from
equation (7) and predicted values of food sales R̂jf (θ).
The data has all commodity sales volume for each store.

Call this Rj .

General

merchandise is all items sold at a regular Wal-Mart. So for regular stores, Rj = Rjg , by
definition. For supercenters, all commodity sales volume includes general merchandise and
food, Rj = Rjg + Rjf .
Let η j be the diﬀerence between log actual sales and log predicted sales for store j. For
regular stores this is
al
= ln(Rj ) − ln(R̂jg (θ)).
ηW
j

For supercenters, this is
η Super
= ln(Rj ) − ln(R̂jg (θ) + R̂jf (θ)).
j
al
and η Super
are i.i.d. normally distributed measurement erAssume the discrepancies η W
j
j

ror. (The store-level sales figures in the TradeDimensions data are estimates so certainly
measurement error is an issue.) The model is estimated using maximum likelihood and the
coeﬃcients are reported in Table 4 in the column labeled “Unconstrained Model.”
13

The extent that new stores cannibalize the sales of existing stores will make a big difference in the subsequent analysis. So our first order of business is to assess how well the
demand model is doing in getting this right. Fortunately, Wal-Mart has provided information that is helpful in this regard. Wal-Mart’s annual report for 2004 disclosed (Wal-Mart
Stores, Inc. (2004, p. 20)),
“As we continue to add new stores domestically, we do so with an understanding
that additional stores may take sales away from existing units. We estimate that
comparative store sales in fiscal year 2004, 2003, 2002 were negatively impacted
by the opening of new stores by approximately 1%.”
This same paragraph was repeated in the 2006 annual report with regards to fiscal year 2005
and 2006. This information is summarized in Table 5.11
To define the model analog of cannibalization, for each vector θ of model parameters,
first calculate what sales would have been in a particular year to preexisting stores if no
new stores had opened in the year and if there were no new supercenter conversions. Next
calculate predicted sales to pre-existing stores when the new store openings and supercenter
conversions for particular year take place. Define the percentage diﬀerence to be the cannibalization rate for that year. This is the model analog of what Wal-Mart is disclosing.
Table 5 reports the cannibalization rate for various years using the estimated demand
model.

The parameter vector is the same across years.

What varies over time are the

new stores, the set of pre-existing stores and the demographic variables.12

The demand

model–estimated entirely oﬀ of the 2005 cross-section store-level sales data–does a very
good fitting the cannibalization rates reported by Wal-Mart. For the years that Wal-Mart
disclosed that the rate was “approximately one”, the estimated rates range from .67 to 1.43.
It is interesting to note the sharp increase in the estimated cannibalization rate beginning
in 2002. Evidently, Wal-Mart reached some kind of saturation point in 2001. Given the
pattern in Table 5, it is understandable that Wal-Mart has felt the need to disclose the extent
of cannibalization in recent years.
In what follows, the estimated upper bound on the degree of density economies will be
closely connected to the degree of cannibalization. The more cannibalization Wal-Mart is
willing to tolerate, the higher the inferred density economies. The estimated cannibalization
11

Wal-Marts fiscal year ends January 31. So the fiscal year corresponds (approximately) to the previous
calendar year. For example, the 2006 fiscal year, began February 1, 2005. In this paper, I aggregate years
like Wal-Mart (February through January), but I use 2005 to refer to the year begining February 2005.
12
To obtain demographic characteristics between Census years, I interpolate as discussed below.

14

rates of 1.38, 1.43, and 1.27 for 2003, 2004, 2005 are certainly “approximately one” but one
may worry that these rates are on the high end of what would be consistent with WalMart’s reports. To explore this issue further, I estimate a second demand model where the
cannibalization rate for 2005 is constrained to be exactly one. The estimates are reported
in the last column of Table 4.

The goodness of fit under the constraint is close to the

unconstrained model, although a likelihood ratio test leads to a rejection of the constraint.
In the interests of being conservative in my estimate of an upper bound on density economies,
I will use the constrained model throughout as the baseline model.
A few remarks about the remaining parameter estimates.

Recall that λg and λf are

spending per consumer in the general merchandise and food categories. The estimates can
be compared to aggregate statistics. For 2005, per capita spending in the U.S. was 1.8 in
general merchandise stores (NAICS 452) and 1.8 in food and beverage stores (NAICS 445)
(in thousands of dollars). The aggregate statistics match well the model estimates (λg = 1.9
and λf = 1.9 in the constrained model, λg = 1.7, λf = 1.6 in the unconstrained model),
though we would not expect them to match exactly.13
The parameter estimates reveal that, as hypothesized, the outside good is better in more
dense areas and that utility decreases in distance travelled to a Wal-Mart. To get a sense
of the magnitudes, Table 6 examines how predicted demand in a block group varies with
population density and distance to the closest Wal-Mart. (The table is constructed with the
constrained model but things look very similar with the unconstrained model.) The table
reports the probability that a consumer shops at Wal-Mart for general merchandise. For
the analysis, the demographic variables in Table 3 are set to their mean values. There is
assumed to be only one Wal-Mart (two or more years old) in the vicinity of the consumer (i.e.
within 25 miles) and the distance to this Wal-Mart is varied.

Consider the first row, where

distance is set to zero (the consumer lives right next door to a Wal-Mart) and population
density is varied. The negative eﬀect of population density on demand is substantial. A
rural consumer right next to a Wal-Mart shops there with a probability that is essentially
one.

At a population density of 50,000 this falls to .72 and falls to only .24 at 250,000.

In a large market there are many substitutes; even a customer right next to a Wal-Mart is
not likely to shop there. While per capita demand falls, overall demand overwhelmingly
13
On one hand, the general merchandise category includes Saks Fifth Avenue which is not likely to be in
the same spending budget with a Wal-Mart. On the other hand, the general merchandise category does not
include the electronics giant Best Buy; a large portion of this merchandise would be in the same spending
budget with Wal-Mart. Both of these categories are relatively small (the electronics sector is less than a
fifth of the general merchandise sector) so perhaps it is not a surprise that my estimate of λg is so close to
U.S. per capita spending in this category.

15

increases in large markets. A market that is 250 times as large as an isolated market may
have a per capita demand only a fifth as large, but overall demand is 50 times as large.
Next consider the eﬀect of distance holding fixed population density.

In a very rural

area, increasing distance from 0 to 5 miles has only a small eﬀect on demand. This is exactly
what we would expect. Raising the distance further from 5 to 10 miles has an appreciable
eﬀect, .98 to .57, but still much demand remains. Contrast this with higher density areas.
At a population density of 250,000 an increase in distance from 0 to 5 miles reduces demand
on the order of 80 percent while the eﬀect of such a change in a very rural market would be
miniscule. This is what we would expect.
Demand varies by demographic characteristics in interesting ways.

Wal-Mart is an

inferior good in that demand decreases in income. (This is the same thing as saying the
coeﬃcient on per capita income for the outside good is positive.)

Demand for Wal-Marts

is lower among blacks and young people.
The only store characteristic used in the demand model (besides location) is store age.
This is captured with a dummy variable for stores that have been open two or more years.
This variable enters positively in demand. So everything else the same, older stores attract
more sales.

4.3

Variable Costs at the Store Level

In the description of the model, the required labor input at the store level was assumed to be
proportionate to sales. To get a sense of the plausibility of this assumption, Figure 3 provides
a scatter plot of square footage of each store along with sales per employee of each store in
2005. Also plotted are the fitted values of a locally-weighted regression. At the bottom
end of the size distribution, there is evidence of increasing returns. But things flatten out
and there is roughly constant returns over most of the store size distribution. The weighted
average over all stores is $277 thousand dollars in sales per employee. Equivalently, there
are 3.61 store employees per million dollars of annual sales. I use this as the estimate of the
fixed labor coeﬃcient, ν Labor = 3.61. To covert this into a cost of labor at a particular store,
the coeﬃcient is multiplied by average retail wage (annual payroll per worker) in the county
where the store is located. Table 7 reports information about the distribution of labor costs
across the 2005 set of Wal-Mart stores. The median store faces a labor cost of $20,700 per
worker. Given ν Labor = 3.61, this translates into a labor cost of 3.61 × 20, 700 per million in
sales or equivalently 7.5 percent of sales. The highest labor costs can be found at stores in
16

San Jose, California where wages are almost twice as high as they are for the median store.
An issue that needs to be raised about the County Business Patterns wage data is measurement error. Dividing annual payroll by employment is a crude way to measure labor
costs because it doesn’t take into account potential variations in hours per worker (e.g. parttime versus full-time) or potential variations in labor quality. The empirical procedure used
below explicitly takes into account measurement error.
Turning now to land costs, the appendix describes the construction of a property value
index for each store through the use of Census data. As discussed in the appendix, this index
along with property tax data for 46 Wal-Mart locations in Minnesota and Iowa are used to
estimate a land-value/sales ratio for each store. The distributions of this index and ratio
are reported in Table 7. Perhaps not surprisingly, the most expensive location is estimated
to be the Wal-Mart store in Silicon Valley (in Mountain View, California) where the ratio
of the land value for the store relative to store sales is estimated to be 65 percent.

The

rental cost of the land, including any taxes that vary with land value, is assumed to be 20
percent of the land value. So for the median store from Table 7 (the Wal-Mart in Cleburne,
Texas), this implies annual land costs of about half a percent of sales (.5 ≈ .2 × 2.4). It

is important to emphasize that this rental cost is for the land, not structures. (Half of a
percent of sales would be a very low number for the combined rent on land and structures
and equipment.) The rents on structures and equipment are separated out because these
should be approximately the same across locations, as least as compared to variations across
stores in land rents. The cost of cinderblocks for walls, steel beams for roofing, shelving,

cash registers, asphalt for parking lots, etc., are all assumed to be the same across locations.
So I now turn to those aspects of variable costs that are the same across locations. I
begin with cost of goods sold. Wal-Mart’s gross margin over the years has ranged from .22
to .26. (See Wal-Marts annual reports.) To be consistent with this, the gross margin is set
equal to μ = .24.
Wal-Mart has reported over the years operating selling, general and administrative expenses that are in the range of 16 to 18 percent of sales. Included in this is the store-level
labor cost discussed above that is on the order of 7 percent of sales and has already been
taken account of. Also included in this cost is the cost of running the distribution system,
the fixed cost of running central administration and other costs I don’t want to include as
variable costs. I set the residual variable cost parameter ν other = .07. Netting this out of
the gross margin μ yields a net margin μ − ν other = .17.
between μ and ν other is irrelevant, only the diﬀerence.
17

In the analysis, the breakdown

The analysis so far has explained how to calculate the operating profit of store j in 2005
as

´
¡
¢³ g
f
− LaborCostj,2005 − Landrent j,2005
+ Rj,2005
π j,2005 = μ − ν other Rj,2005

(8)

where the sales revenue comes from the 2005 demand model and labor cost and land rent
are explained above. The next step is to extrapolate this model to earlier years.

4.4

Extrapolation to Other Years

We have a demand model for 2005 in hand but need models for earlier years.

To get

them, assume demand in earlier years is the same as in 2005 except for the multiplicative
scaling factor ρt introduced above in the definition of Wal-Mart’s problem (2). For example,
the 2005 demand model with no rescaling predicts that, at the 1971 store set and 1971
demographic variables, average sales per store (in 2005 dollars) is $31.5 million.

Actual

sales per store (in 2005 dollars) for 1971 is $7.4 million. The scale factor for 1971 adjusts
demand proportionately so that the model exactly matches aggregate 1971 sales. Over the
1971 to 2005 period, this corresponds to a compound annual real growth rate of 4.4 percent.
Wal-Mart significantly widened the range of products it sold over this period (to include
tires, eyeglasses, etc.).

The growth factor is meant to capture this.

The growth factor

calculated in this manner has levelled oﬀ in recent years to around one percent a year. WalMart has also been expanding by converting regular stores to supercenters. This expansion
is captured explicitly in the model rather than indirectly though exogenous growth.
Demographics change over time and this is taken into account. For 1980, 1990, and 2000,
I use the decennial census for that year.14 For years in between I use a convex combination
of the censuses. For example, for 1984 there is .6 weight on 1980 and .4 weight on 1990,
meaning 60 percent of the people in each 1980 block group are assumed to be still around
as potential Wal-Mart customers and 40 percent each 1990 block group consumers have
already arrived as of 1984. This procedure keeps the geography clean, since the issue of how
to link block groups over time is avoided.

(Block group definitions do not stay constant

across census years, but this poses no problem whatsoever with the continuous approach to
geography taken here.)
14

I use 1980 for years before 1980 and 2000 for years after 2000.

18

5

Preliminary Evidence of a Tradeoﬀ

This section provides some preliminary evidence of an economically significant tradeoﬀ to
Wal-Mart.

Namely, the benefits of increased economies of density come at the cost of

cannibalization of existing stores. This section puts to work the demand model and other
components of operating profits compiled above.
Consider some Wal-Mart store j that first opens in time t. Define the incremental sales
k,inc
of store j to be what the store adds to total Wal-Mart sales in segment k ∈ {g, f } in
Rj,t

its opening year t, relative to what sales would otherwise be across all other stores open that

k
that year. For a later
year. The incremental sales of store #1 opening in 1962 equals Rj,1962
k,inc
k
≤ Rj,t
,
store j, however, the incremental sales are in general less than store j’s sales, Rj,t

because some part of the sales may be diverted from other stores. Using the demand model,
k,inc
for each store.
we can calculate Rj,t

Table 8 reports that the average annual incremental sales in general merchandise across
all Wal-Mart stores in the year the stores opened is $36.3 million (in 2005 dollars throughout).
Analogously, average incremental sales in food from new supercenters is $40.2 million. (Note
conversions of existing Wal-Marts to supercenters count as a store openings here.) To make
things comparable across years, the 2005 demand model is applied to the store configurations
and demographics of the earlier years with no multiplicative scale adjustment ρt .

In an

analogous manner, we can use (8), to determine the incremental operating profit of each
store at the time it opens. The average incremental profit in general merchandise from a
new Wal-Mart is $3.1 million and in food from new supercenters is $3.6 million. Finally, we
can ask how far a store is from the closest distribution center in the year it is opened. On
average a new Wal-Mart is 168.9 miles from the closest regular distribution center when it
opens and a new supercenter is 137.0 miles from the closest food distribution center.
Incremental sales and operating profit can be compared to what sales and operating
profit would be if a new store were a stand-alone operation. That is, what would sales and
operating profits be at a store if it were isolated so that none of its sales are diverted to or
from other Wal-Mart stores in the vicinity? Table 8 shows for the average new Wal-Mart,
there is a big diﬀerence between stand-alone and incremental values, implying a substantial
degree of market overlap with existing stores.

Average stand-alone sales is $41.4 million

compared to an incremental value of $36.3 million, approximately a 10 percent diﬀerence.
Two considerations account for why the big cannibalization numbers found here are not
inconsistent with the one percent cannibalization rates reported earlier in Table 5. First,

19

the denominator of the cannibalization rate from Table 5 includes all pre-existing stores,
including those areas of the country were Wal-Mart is not adding any new stores. Taking
an average over the country as a whole understates the degree of cannibalization taking
place where Wal-Mart is adding new stores. Second, stand-alone sales include sales that a
new store would never get because the sales would remain in some existing store (but would
diverted to the new store if existing stores shut down).
Define the Wal-Mart Age of a state to be the number of years that Wal-Mart has been
in the state.15 The remaining rows in Table 8 classify stores by the Wal-Mart age of their
state at the store’s opening. Those stores in the row labeled “‘1-2” are the first stores in
their respective states. Those stores in the row labeled “21 and above” are opened when
Wal-Mart has been in their states for over 20 years.
Table 8 shows that incremental operating profit in a state falls over time as Wal-Mart
adds stores to a state and the store market areas increasingly begin to overlap.

Things

are actually flat the first five years at 3.5 million in incremental operating profit for general
merchandise.

But it falls to 3.3 million in the second five years and then to 2.9 million

and lower beyond that.

An analogous pattern holds for food. This pattern is a kind of

diminishing returns. Wal-Mart is getting less incremental operating profit from the later
stores it opens in a state.
The table also reveals a benefit from opening stores in a state where Wal-Mart has been
there for many years. The incremental distribution center distance is relatively low in such
states.

It decreases substantially as we move down the table and to states with higher

Wal-Mart ages. The very first stores in a state average about 300 miles from the closest
distribution center. This falls to less than 100 miles when the Wal-Mart age of the state is
over 20 years. There is a tradeoﬀ here: the later stores deliver lower operating profit but
are closer to a distribution center.

The magnitude of the tradeoﬀ is on the order of 200

miles for one million in operating profit. This tradeoﬀ is examined in a more formal fashion
in the next section and the result is roughly of this order of magnitude.
As argued in Section 2, the fixed cost of operating a store may be higher in high density
areas. The comparisons in Table 8 control for variable costs across locations but not fixed
costs that depend upon population density. Table 9 runs the regression analog of Table 8
with a control for population density that is quadratic in logs, following the specification
of the fixed cost (1). In addition, fixed state eﬀects are included in the regression. The
15

For the purposes of this analysis, the New England states are treated as a single state.
Delaware and the District of Columbia are also aggregated.

20

Maryland,

idea is to hold fixed population density and determine how incremental profit varies within a
state depending on whether a store is an early opener or a late opener in the state. Adding
controls for population density and state fixed eﬀects makes little diﬀerence. For example,
the diﬀerence between the 11-15 group and the 1-2 group is .63 in the regression and .6=3.5
- 2.9 in the raw data. These diﬀerences between early openers and late openers are highly
statistically significant.

6

Bounding Density Economies

There remain three parameters to pin down, θ = (τ , ω 1 , ω 2 ), all relating to density of one
form or another. The τ parameter is the coeﬃcient on distance between a store and its
distribution center.

It captures the benefit of store density.

relate to how fixed cost varies with population density.

The parameters ω1 and ω 2

They are the coeﬃcients on log

population density and its square in the fixed cost specification (1).
As discussed in the introduction, the cost of distance τ includes the physical costs of
moving goods.

It is also intended to capture the idea when a store and its distribution

center are far apart, the Wal-Mart model of quick response to demand shocks does not work
so well. It would be diﬃcult to directly measure the indirect ways that distance impedes the
Wal-Mart way of doing business. Analogously, while it is certainly possible to take account
the higher land prices and higher wages in big cities (and I do this), it is diﬃcult to directly
measure some of the disadvantages alluded to earlier of implementing the Wal-Mart model
in big cities. So rather then try to estimate these parameters through direct measurement,
the approach taken here is to infer the parameters from the way Wal-Mart behaves.

6.1

The General Method

The revealed preference approach taken here generates a set of inequalities.

A bounds

estimation strategy (see Manski (2003)) is a natural way to extract information from the set
of inequalities implied by choice behavior. In my implementation of this strategy, I follow
Pakes, Porter, Ho, and Ishii (2006) (Hereafter PPHI).
Recall that action a denotes a particular choice of Wal-Mart, a particular feasible solution
to problem (2). Let a0 denote the choice Wal-Mart actually made. For each policy a, let
Π(a) be the present value at date t = 1 of operating profits from general merchandise and

21

food over all stores and all time periods given policy a,

Π(a) ≡

T
X
t=1

⎛

(ρt β)t−1 ⎝

X

πgjt (a) +

j∈BtW al (a)

X

j∈BtSuper (a)

⎞

π fjt (a)⎠ .

Analogously, let D(a) be the present value of all distribution miles.

(9)

This is the same as

the formula for Π(a) except the distribution distance dkjt (a) of store j in year t in segment
k replaces the operating profit π kjt (a). Similarly, let F1 (a) be the present value of the (log)
population density for each store and year and let F2 (a) be the present value of the square of
(log) population density. (Recall specification (1) for how fixed cost varies with population
density.) Then rewriting (2), the value to Wal-Mart of choosing policy a, given a vector of
density parameters θ = (τ , ω1 , ω2 ), is
v(a, θ) = Π(a) − τ D(a) − ω 1 F1 (a) − ω2 F2 (a).

(10)

Let θ0 be the true parameter. The policy a0 chosen by Wal-Mart solves problem (2). Hence
at θ0 ,
v(a0 , θ0 ) ≥ v(a, θ0 ), for all a 6= a0 .
Or
∆v(a, θ0 ) ≥ 0,
for
∆v(a, θ) ≡ v(a0 , θ) − v(a, θ).

(11)

We can decompose this as
∆v(a, θ) = ∆Π(a) − τ ∆D(a) − ω1 ∆F1 (a) − ω 2 ∆F2 (a).
In the econometrics to follow, the error term will arise on account of measurement error.
Recall that operating profit in market segment k at a particular store j in period t given
some policy a can be written in the form
k
k
k
− wjt ν labor Rjt
− rjt ν land Rjt
.
π kjt = (μ − ν other ) Rjt

22

As explained in Section 4, there is measurement error in the wage and land-rent measures.
So the observed store operating profit is
¡
¡
¢
¢
k
k
k
− wjt + εwage
− rjt + εrent
,
ν labor Rjt
ν land Rjt
π̃ kjt = (μ − ν other ) Rjt
jt
jt
wage
g
and εrent
is mean zero and independent of Rjt
,
for measurement error εwage
jt . Assume εjt
jt
f
, dfjt , F1,jt and F2,jt .
dgjt , Rjt

Make the analogous assumption on εrent
jt .

Aggregate across

stores and time like in (9) to get the present value of observed operating profits Π̃(a) for
each action. Substitute this into the analog of (10) to get the observed value ṽ(a, θ) under
policy a given θ. Let ∆ṽ(a, θ) be the observed diﬀerence in value between the chosen policy
a0 and some other policy a. It can be written as
∆ṽ(a, θ) = ∆Π(a) − τ ∆D(a) − ω 1 ∆F1 (a) − ω 2 ∆F2 (a) + η a ,

(12)

for η a = εa0 − εa , and
εa ≡

T
X
t=1

⎛

(ρt β)t−1 ⎝

X

j∈BtW al (a)

⎞
¡ wage
¢
⎠.
εjt ν labor + εrent
jt ν land Rjt (a)

(13)

To ease the notational burden, let ya = ∆Π(a), xa = (∆D(a), ∆F1 (a), ∆F2 (a))0 .and θ =
(τ , ω 1 , ω 2 ). Then
∆ṽ(a, θ) = ya − xa θ + η a .

(14)

Given the assumptions made on εwage
and εrent
jt , the composite measurement error η a is mean
jt
zero and independent of xa . Note that at the true parameter θ0 ,
ya − xa θ ≥ 0, for all feasible a.
Consider a set of feasible deviations defined in a manner that is unrelated to the measurement error η a . Let there be N such sets indexed by i and let Ai denote the i-th set.
Let wa,i ≥ 0 be weighting variables. Define the basic moment for each i by
mi (θ) =

X

wa,i ∆ṽ(a, θ).

a∈Ai

23

(15)

Next consider more complicated moments that are derived from interactions. Let xka be
the k-th element of xa and suppose a lower bound xk exists so that xka ≥xk for all a. Define
z ka ≡ xka − xk ≥ 0.
Analogously, suppose an upper bound x̄k exists so that xka ≤ x̄k for all a. Define
z̄ak ≡ x̄k − xka ≥ 0.
For each i define the interaction moments by
mki (θ) =

X

a∈Ai

m̄ki (θ) =

X

a∈Ai

wa,i ∆ṽ(a, θ)z ka , k ∈ {1, 2, 3}

(16)

wa,i ∆ṽ(a, θ)z̄ak , k ∈ {1, 2, 3}

The z ka and z̄ak are valid instruments because they are uncorrelated with the measurement
error. If we think about ∆ṽ(a, θ) as a kind of residual, the use of the interaction moments
here is analogous the familiar moment conditions for OLS, 0 = (Y − Xb)0 X.

There are N basic moments (one for each set Ai ) and 6 additional interaction moments

(see (16)) for each basic moment for a total of 7 × N moments. Stack the moments in a

vector M(θ) and index the moments by h. At the true parameter θ0 ,
E[Mh (θ)] ≥ 0, for all h.

(17)

The set of θ satisfying these moment inequalities is the identified set. To estimate this set,
find the values that satisfy the sample analog of the moment inequalities. If no such values
exist, then, following PPHI, take the value of θ closest to satisfying the inequalities.
particular, let the estimate of the identified set solve

θ̂ = arg min

7N
X

Mh− (θ)2

h=1

for
Mh− (θ) = min {Mh (θ), 0} .
24

In

In the estimation below, there exists a parameter region in which all 7N moment inequalities
are satisfied. It is still necessary to specify what happens when there is no solution satisfying
all the inequalities, because the issue comes up while simulating the standard errors.
The focus of the estimation is bounding the distribution cost parameter τ .

A lower

bound τ̂ lower is obtained by minimizing τ over the set of feasible θ = (τ , ω 1 , ω 2 ).

The

feasible θ satisfy the sample analogs of (17) as well as the restrictions ω 1 ≥ 0 and ω 2 ≤ 0
(so the fixed cost (1) is weakly concave in log population density). An upper bound τ̂ upper

is obtained similarly. Linear programming techniques are employed.

6.2

Specifics of Method

Like Bajari and Fox (2005) and Fox (2005), I restrict attention to pairwise resequencing, i.e.,
deviations a in which the opening dates of pairs of stores are reordered. For example, store
#1 actually opened 1962 and #2 opened 1964. A pairwise resequencing would be to open
store #2 in 1962, store #1 in 1964 and to leave everything else the same.
Three classes of deviation sets are constructed.16
1. Store-Density Decreasing. Begin with the set of stores that open when the Wal-Mart
age of their states is ten or more (i.e., there is at least one store in the state that is
at least ten years old).

For each such store j, find the set of stores, indexed by j 0 ,

that (i) are opened three or more years after store j and (ii) open in a diﬀerent state
when the Wal-Mart age of that state is less than or equal to four years. Flipping the
opening of j and j 0 , this is set A1 .
2. Store-Density Increasing. Begin with the set of stores that open when the Wal-Mart
age of their states is five or less. For each such store j, find the set of stores, indexed
by j 0 , that (i) are opened three or more years after store j and (ii) open in a diﬀerent
state when the Wal-Mart age of that state is more than ten years and (iii) if the timing
of the two is flipped then the present value of distribution miles is higher under the
actual policy by 150 (∆D > 150). Flipping the opening of j and j 0 , this is set A2 .
3. Population-Density Changing. Define store locations by population density groupings
in 1990. Let grouping 1 be locations with “less than 15” (thousand people within
16

The opening of a general merchandise store and a food store are considered two diﬀerent opening events.
In cases where a supercenter opens from scratch rather that a conversion of an existing Wal-Mart, there are
then two opening events. In all the pairs considered, a general merchanside opening is paired with another
general merchandise opening, and a food opening with another food opening.

25

five miles), grouping 2 be “15 to 40”, grouping 3 be “40 to 100”, and grouping 4 be
“over 100.” Take pairs of stores opening more than two years apart in the same state
in diﬀerent population density groupings. Flip the order. The various combinations
result in 6 diﬀerent sets of deviations A3 − A8 .
With Store-Density Decreasing deviations, instead of adding yet another store j in a
state where Wal-Mart has already been in for over ten years, an alternative store j 0 that
would have been one of the early stores in a another state is opened in its place. And store
j doesn’t open until store j 0 would have opened. With this kind of deviation, there is less
cannibalization at the cost of more distribution miles, since the j 0 store will tend to be far
from the distribution network at this early date.

That the deviation was not optimal to

pursue helps provide information on a lower bound τ̂ lower on the importance of distribution
miles. Analogously, the second set of deviations goes in the other direction reducing store
density, providing information helpful for pinning down an upper bound τ̂ upper . The third
category defines sets of pairwise perturbations based on population density that are intended
to provide information about the parameters ω 1 and ω2 that govern how the fixed cost varies
with population density.

6.3

Estimates

The set of Store-Density Decreasing deviation has 240,000 elements that involve reordering
pairs of store opening dates that satisfy the given criteria. Calculating the terms of (12)
for each pair is a lengthy process because the sales model is calculated at the block group
level and there are so many block groups and often many Wal-Marts to be considered for
each block group.

To reduce computation costs, a random one-third sample was taken

of the A1 and A2 deviation sets.

There are not as many deviations involving reordering

within the same state, so for the A3 through A8 deviations (the population-density changing
deviations), all elements of the sets were included in the analysis.
Table 10 reports summary statistics for each deviation set. The third column reports the
mean value of ∆Π̃(a) for each set. As explained earlier, this is the mean measured present
value operating profit diﬀerence from following the actual policy rather than the deviation.
Note that the units of ∆Π̃(a) are such that if a store opening in 1992 is interchanged with
store opening in 1997, then it is the present value as of 1992 of (inflation adjusted) operating
profits.

Analogously, ∆D is the present value of the diﬀerence in year-distribution miles

from doing the actual rather than a deviation (as of 1992 if it is a 1992/1997 switch).
26

Looking at Store-Density Decreasing deviations (type 1), we see that the mean measured
present value diﬀerence from doing the actual rather than the deviation is -$3.8 million. The
negative value means that on average Wal-Mart was losing operating profit by doing what
it did rather than a deviation. So random deviations to disperse stores raises the present
value of profits by $3.8 million.

But note these deviations come at a cost, since mean

∆D = −1740, i.e. present value year-distribution miles are higher by 1,740 on average.
Next consider Store-Density Increasing deviations (type 2).

By following the actual

policy a0 rather than deviate this way, Wal-Mart enjoyed ∆Π = 4.8 more in operating
profits then it would on average obtain from these deviations.

But if it deviated in this

way, store-year distribution miles would have declined on average by 1,201, so again there is
a tradeoﬀ, but in a diﬀerent direction.
For now, ignore the fixed cost from population density by assuming ω 1 = 0 and ω 2 = 0.
We can then use the first two moment inequalities to bound τ . Since Wal-Mart chose a0 ,
the expected value of the first moment inequality must be nonnegative at the true τ ,
E[M1 ] = E [∆Π1 ] − τ E [∆D1 ]
= −3.8 + τ 1740
≥ 0
This implies that
τ ≥ τ̂ lower =

3.8
= .0218( $million) = $2, 180.
1740

(18)

This says that the cost of one store distribution mile (per year) is at least $2,180. Analogously, we can use type 2 deviations to derive an upper bound of
τ ≤ τ̂ upper =

4.8
= .0400($million) = $4, 000.
1201

These findings are intriguing but incomplete as they don’t take into account the population density components of fixed costs (∆F1 and ∆F2 ).

Note that by doing the actual

policy a0 rather than the type 1 or type 2 deviations, Wal-Mart tended to stay out of higher
population density locations longer (∆F1 , the diﬀerence in present value log population density from doing a0 , is negative). If Wal-Mart is putting weight ω1 > 0 on this, then this
is another reason why Wal-Mart was willing to give up operating profits by doing a0 rather
then deviate in the type 1 way. Inequality (18) gives all of the credit to τ in getting moment
27

equality one to hold.

If we increase ω 1 , we can lower τ and the moment inequality still

holds. Analogously, increasing ω 1 puts slack into E[M2 ] permitting an increase in τ̂ upper .
Now if we are free to pick any ω 1 and ω 2 , then moments 1 and 2 would put no restriction
on τ . This is where moments 3 through 8 come in. With these deviations, the stores being
flipped are in the same state so the impact on distribution miles is minimal, as can be seen
in the ∆D column in the table. These deviations do change population density and so put
discipline on the choice of parameters ω1 and ω2 .
Table 11 presents the results of moment inequality estimation when the full set of constraints is imposed. (There are eight basic moments plus 6 interaction moments for each for
a total of 56 = 8 × (1 + 6) moments.) The linear programming problem of minimizing or
maximizing τ subject to the constraints is solved. The exercise is conducted with all store

openings and then a breakdown by whether the early opening store in the deviation pair was
opened after 1990 or before. The period after 1990 is particularly interesting because that
is when supercenters began to open. The estimated range is narrowest for this later period,
with a lower bound of $1,780 and an upper bound of $5,190.
For each estimation, four sets of 95 percent confidence intervals are reported. The first
two sets follow PPHI’s procedure for the linear case and the reader should refer to PPHI for
specifics. Set 1 corresponds to what PPHI call the inner approximation. It is constructed
by first simulating draws from the empirical distribution of the four components of each
of the 56 moments. (Note each moment (17) is a linear combination of four components
with coeﬃcients (1, −τ , −ω1 , −ω2 )). Next the full linear programming estimation over all
56 constraints is implemented with the simulated data, for both the lower bound and the

upper bound. Table 11 reports the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the estimated bounds across
the simulations.

Set 2, the outer approximation, is simulated for the lower bound as

follows. Simulate moment components as in set 1. Then take the estimated lower bound
θ̂lower = (τ̂ lower , ω̂1,lower , ω̂2,lower ) and the simulated components to create “fitted values.”
Add a simulated error to the fitted values and estimate a lower bound on θ, using only the
moments that were binding in the calculation of the original θ̂lower .17 As explained in Ho
(2007), the outer confidence interval (Set 2) is asymptotically conservative.

In all three

cases, the 2.5 percentile of the lower bound estimate is lower for Set 2 than Set 1, while the
97.5 percentile of the upper bound is higher for Set 2 than Set 1. The notable point to be
made about the confidence intervals is that the 2.5 percentiles of the lower bound confidence
region are of similar magnitude as the point estimates of the lower bounds. Likewise, the
17

Luttmer (1999) discusses a related approach that focuses on the binding moments.

28

97.5 percentiles of upper bound confidence regions are of similar magnitude as the point
estimates of the upper bound.
The PPHI confidence interval theory assumes the error terms are independent across
deviations. This assumption is not valid here. The error term arises here from store-level
measurement error; two alternative deviations may involve the same store and therefore share
a common error component. Put in another way, the estimates are based on the 160,000
deviations listed in Table 10. But these are constructed from pairs of 5,000 store openings
(general merchandise and food) so there are at best 5,000 draws underlying the analysis, not
160,000. A formal asymptotic theory for this case has not been developed. To get a sense
of the importance of the issue, the following exploratory simulation exercise was conducted.
(The description here is brief; see Appendix B for details.) For each simulation, a bootstrap
sample of deviations was drawn. A lower bound was estimated using the simulated data with
only the binding moments as in Set 2. Analogously, an upper bound was estimated with the
binding moments. Each deviation was given an error term drawn in two ways. In the first–
used to create Set 3–the errors terms were drawn independently for each deviation. In the
second–used to create Set 4–the error terms were drawn at the level of each store, so two
deviations with a common deviating store do not have independent error terms. Sets 3 and
4 are otherwise created the same way. Of course, the confidence intervals when dependence
is taken into account (Set 4) are wider than when it is not (Set 3). In particular, the 2.5
percentile for the lower bound with the 1990s data goes from $1,640 to $940, while the 97.5
percentile for the upper bound goes from $5,250 to $5,520. Nevertheless, it is encouraging
that the estimates remain the same order of magnitude, despite the vast diﬀerences in the
underlying number of independent draws.

7

Discussion of Estimates

In the previous section, the tightest interval for the estimate of τ is obtained for the sample
of store openings in the 1990s where the lower bound on τ is $1,780 and the upper bound is
$5,190. The unit of τ is a distribution mile year. If a store were right next to a distribution
center rather than 100 miles away, over the course of a year, the savings would be at least
$178,000 and no more than $519,000. If all 5,000 Wal-Mart stores (here supercenters are
counted as two stores) were each 100 miles further from their distribution centers, costs
would go up almost a billion dollars at the lower bound estimate.

29

To get a sense of the direct cost of trucking, I have talked to executives in the discount
industry and have been quoted a marginal cost estimate of $1.20 per truck mile for “in house”
provision.

If a store is 100 miles from the distribution center (200 miles round trip) and

if there is a delivery every day in a year, then the trucking cost is $1.20*200*365=$85,400.
This is less than half of the lower bound and sixteen percent of the upper bound. I conclude
the value of proximity extends well beyond savings in trucking.

The diﬀerence between

the lower bound $178,000 and the direct trucking figure of $85,400 leaves much room for
Wal-Mart to place a high valuation on the ability to quickly respond to demand shocks. My
industry source on trucking costs emphasized the value of quick turnarounds as an important
plus factor beyond savings in trucking costs.
A second perspective on the τ parameter can be obtained by looking at Wal-Mart’s choice
of when to open a distribution center (DC). An in-depth analysis of this issue is beyond the
scope of this paper but some exploratory calculations are useful. Recall that problem (2)
held fixed DC opening dates and considered deviations in store opening dates. Now hold
to be the
fixed store opening dates and consider deviations in DC openings. Denote topen
k
inc
to be DC k’s incremental contribution in year t to reduction
year DC k opens. Define Dk,t

in store-distribution miles. This is how much higher total store-distribution miles would be
in year t if distribution center k were not open in that year. Assume there is a fixed cost
φk of operating distribution center k in each year.

Optimizing behavior implies that the

,
following inequalities must hold for the opening year t = topen
k
inc
φk ≤ τ Dk,t

(19)

inc
φk ≥ τ Dk,t−1

The first inequality says that the fixed cost of operating the distribution center in year topen
k
must be less than the distribution cost savings from it being open.18 Otherwise, Wal-Mart
can increase profit by delaying the opening by a year. The second inequality states that the
fixed cost exceeds the savings of opening it the year before (otherwise open it a year earlier).
inc
inc
changes gradually over time then (19) implies φk ≈ τ Dk,t
holds approximately
Now if Dk,t

at the date of opening. (Think of this as a first-order condition.)

inc
statistic across distribution centers. The
Table 12 reports the mean values of the Dk,t

statistic is reported for the year the distribution center opens, as well as the year before
18

There is also a marginal cost involved with distribution. But assume this is the same across distribution
centers. So shifting volume across distribution centers doesn’t aﬀect marginal cost.

30

opening and the two years after opening. For example, to calculate this statistic in the year
before opening, the given DC is opened one year early, everything else the same, and the
incremental reduction in store miles is determined. I also report how the mean number of
stores served varies when the DC opening date is moved up or pushed back. At opening,
the mean incremental reduction in store miles of a distribution center is 5,809 miles and the
DC serves 52 stores. The later the DC opens, the higher the incremental reduction in store
miles and the more stores served. This happens because more stores are being built around
it.
inc
provides an
If we knew something about the fixed cost, then the condition φk ≈ τ Dk,t

alternative means of inferring τ . A very rough calculation suggests a “ballpark” fixed cost
inc
when DCs open equals 5,809 miles,
of $18 million a year.19 Since the mean value of Dk,t

we back out an estimate of τ equal to
τ̂ =

$18 million
φ
= $3, 098.
=
inc
meanDk,t
5, 809

This is roughly midway between the lower bound estimate $1,780 and the upper bound
estimate of $5,190.

It is encouraging that these two approaches–coming from two very

diﬀerent angles–give consistent results.20

8

Concluding Remarks

This paper examined the dynamic store-location problem of Wal-Mart. Using the moment
inequality approach outlined in PPHI, the paper was able to bound a preference parameter
relating to the benefits Wal-Mart obtains when stores are close to distribution centers. The
paper illustrates the power of this type of approach in getting a sensible analysis out of what
would otherwise be complex and likely intractable.
While the analysis is rich in many dimensions–notably in its fine level of geographic
detail and in the way it incorporates numerous data objects–it has limitations.
19

One

Distribution centers are on the order of one million square feet. Annual rental rates including maintenance and taxes are on the order of $6 per square foot, so $6 million a year is a rough approximatation for
the rent of such a facility. A typical Wal-Mart DC has a payroll of $36 million. If a third of labor is fixed
cost, then we have a total fixed cost of $18=$6+$12 million.
20
An intriguing pattern in Table 12 is that the mean miles saved at opening for food operations is approximately half that for general merchandise. If the fixed cost of these kinds of operations are similar, this
suggests that the mile cost is twice as high for food then general merchandise. Given issues of perishability,
this is plausible, and warrants further study.

31

limitation is that all economies of density are channeled through the benefits of stores being
close to distribution centers. Economies of density can be potentially enjoyed through other
channels, including: management (it is easier for upper-level management to oversee a given
number of stores when the stores are closer together); and marketing (satisfied Wal-Mart
customers might tell their friends and relatives on the other side of town about Wal-Mart–
this benefits Wal-Mart only if it has a store on the other side of town). A caveat then is
that my estimate of τ may be picking up some economies of density from management and
marketing. I have chosen to focus on distribution both because (1) I can measure it (i.e. the
locations of distribution centers) but can’t measure management and marketing activities
and (2) my priors tell me distribution is very important for Wal-Mart. My findings in the
previous section with DC opening dates that were consistent with my baseline findings are
particularly helpful here. DC openings should be unrelated to management and marketing
sources of economies of density.
A second limitation of the paper is that it leaves out oligopolistic interaction. Motivated
by the seeming constancy of Wal-Mart’s location behavior over several decades and across
market segments (general merchandise and food), I have taken a decision-theoretic approach
as a first step.

As a second future step, I am very interested in expanding the analysis

to incorporate oligopolistic interaction with K-Mart and Target.

The moment inequality

approach appears very promising for this purpose.
Wal-Mart has attracted much attention and various interest groups, particularly labor
unions, have attempted to slow its growth, e.g. by trying to get local governments to use
zoning restrictions to block entry of stores. These kinds of policies limit store density. The
analysis here is not at the stage where it is possible to run a policy experiment to evaluate
the welfare eﬀects of limiting Wal-Mart’s growth. Among other things, that would require
uncovering how such limits would impact Wal-Mart’s DC network and (except briefly at the
end of the paper) this has been held fixed in the analysis. Nevertheless, the estimates of
this paper suggest any policy that would substantially constrain store density–that in turn
had the eﬀect of reducing DC density–would result in significant cost increases.

32

Appendix A: Data
The selected data and programs used in the paper are posted at
www.econ.umn.edu/~holmes/research.html.
opening dates are posted there.

In particular, data on facility locations and

The store-level sales and employment data used in this

paper can be obtained from TradeDimensions.
Facility Locations and Opening Dates
The data on facility locations and opening dates and other data for the project is posted
at www.econ.umn.edu/~holmes/research.html.
The data for Wal-Mart stores were constructed as follows. In November 2005, Wal-Mart
a file which listed for each Wal-Mart store the address, store number, store type (supercenter
or regular store) and opening date. This data was combined with additional information
posted at Wal-Mart’s web site about openings through January 31, 2006 (the end of fiscal
year 2006). The opening date mentioned above is the date of the original store opening,
not the date of any later conversion to a supercenter.

To get the date of supercenter

conversions, I used two pieces of information. Wal-Mart’s website posts information about
store openings 2001 and after and conversions are announced as store openings. To get the
dates of conversions taking place before 2001, I used data collected by Emek Basker (see
Basker (2005)) based on published directories.
The data on Wal-Mart’s food distribution centers (FDC) are based on reports that WalMart is required to file with the EPA, as part of a Risk Management Plan.21 (The freezers
at FDCs use chemicals that are potentially hazardous.) Through these reports, all FDCs
are identified.

The opening dates of most of the FDCs were obtained from the reports.

Remaining opening dates were obtained through a search of news sources.
Data on Wal-Mart general distribution centers (GDC) that handle general merchandise
were cobbled together from various sources including Wal-Mart’s annual reports and other
direct Wal-Mart sources, Mattera and Purinton (2004) and various web and news sources.
Great care was taken to distinguish GDCs from other kinds of Wal-Mart facilities such as
import centers and speciality distribution centers such as facilities handling internet purchases.
The longitude and latitude of each facility was obtained from commercial sources and
manual methods.
In the analysis, I aggregate time to the year level, where the year begins February 1
21

The EPA data is distributed by the "Right-to-Know Network" at http://www.rtknet.org/.

33

and ends January 31 to follow the Wal-Mart fiscal year. January is a big month for new
store openings (it is the modal month) and February and March are the main months for
distribution center openings. New January-opened stores soon obtain distribution services
from new February-opened DCs.

To be conservative in not overstating the number of

distribution store miles, I assume that the flow of services at a DC begins the year prior to
the opening year. Put diﬀerently, in my analysis I shift down the opening year of each DC
by one year.
Wage Data
The wages are average retail wage in the county containing the store. (Payroll divided
by March employment.)

The source is County Business Patterns (1977, 1980, 1985, 1990,

1995, 1997, 2000, 2002, 2004) with interpolation in intervening years and years with missing
values.

For 2000 and beyond the NAICS definition of the retail sector does not include

eating and drinking establishments. For 1997 and earlier, the SIC code definition of retail
does include eating and drinking and these are subtracted out for these years.
Property Value Data
For each store location and each Census year, I created an index of residential property
value as follows.

I identified the block groups within a two-mile radius of the store and

called this the neighborhood. Total property value in the neighborhood was calculated as
the aggregate value of owner-occupied property plus one hundred times monthly gross rents
of renter-occupied property. This was divided by the number of acres in a circle with radius
two miles and the CPI was used to convert it into 2005 dollars.
County property tax records were obtained from the web for 46 Wal-Mart locations in
Minnesota and Iowa. (All stores in these states were searched, but only for these locations
could the records be obtained.)

Define the land-value/sales ratio to be land value from

the tax records as a percent of the (fitted) value of 2005 sales for each store. For these 46
stores, the correlation of this value with the 2000 property value index is .71. I regressed
the land-value/sales ratio on the 2000 property value index without a constant term and
obtained a slope of .036 (standard error of .003). The regression line was used to obtain
fitted values of the land-value/sales ratio for all Wal-Mart stores.

Appendix B
Simulation Exercise for Set 3 and Set 4 Confidence Intervals
This appendix discusses the procedure used to construct the Set 3 and Set 4 confidence
intervals in Table 11. In the PPHI procedure, random draws take place at the level of a
34

moment which aggregates deviations. In what I do here, I need to make draws at the level
of a deviation, because I need to use the store information to connect the error structure of
deviations that share stores. So the first step in a given simulation is to take a bootstrap
sample of deviations. For example, there are 163,061 deviations used for the whole sample,
so a bootstrap sample of 163,061 deviations is drawn from this. An error term η a is drawn
for each of the bootstrap deviations a as will be explained. Define ỹlower,a = xa θ̂lower + η a ,
where θ̂lower = (τ̂ lower , ω̂1,lower , ω̂2,lower ), for τ̂ lower in Table 11 and ω̂j,lower the value of ω j
where the minimum τ̂ lower is obtained.

The procedure of estimating the lower bound is

applied to the simulated data points (xa , ỹlower,a ), imposing only the moment inequalities
that are binding in the estimate of θlower , analogous to the PPPI outer approximation. The
analogous procedure is applied to the upper bound.
Now I explain the draws of η a . For each deviation a, a store i opening earlier than some
j switches with j. It is convenient here to call this deviation ij instead of a and to let η ij
be the error term. Suppose we focus on a binding moment k. Then for this moment
¤
£
Ek zk,ij (yij − xij θ + η ij ) = 0

£
¤
for instrument zij . Now since E η ij |yij ,xij = 0,

£
¤2
¡
¢¤2
£
E zk,ij η ij ≤ E zk,ij yij − xij θ + η ij

Or

£
¡
¢¤2
E
z
−
x
θ
+
η
y
k,ij
ij
ij
ij
min
E[η ij ]2 ≤ ζ 2 ≡
2
{k, binding moments}
E[zk,ji
]
2

2

Let ζ̂ be the sample analog of ζ 2 . To be conservative, let ζ̂ be an estimate of σ 2η = E[η ij ]2 .
2

For Set 3, the η ij are drawn i.i.d. from N(0, ζ̂ ). For Set 4, for each store i, draw εi i.i.d.
2

from N(0, 12 ζ̂ ). Then define η ij ≡ εi − εj .

35

References
Andrews, Donald W.K., Steven Berry, and Panle Jia, (2004) “Confidence Regions for Parameters in Discrete Games with Multiple Equilibria, with an Application to Discount
Chain Store Location,” Yale University working paper.
Bajari, Patrick, Benkard, C. Lanier., and Jonathin. Levin, “Estimating Dynamic Models of
Imperfect Competition” Econometrica, Vol. 75, No. 5, 1331—1370 (September, 2007).
Bajari, Patrick, and Jeremy Fox (2005), “Complementarities and Collusion in an FCC
Spectrum Auction,” University of Chicago Working Paper
Basker, Emek,“Job Creation or Destruction? Labor-Market Eﬀects of Wal-Mart Expansion” Review of Economics and Statistics 87:1 (February 2005) 174-183
Basker, Emek, “The Causes and Consequences of Wal-Mart’s Growth, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21:3 (Summer 2007) 177-198.
Bresnahan and Reiss, "Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets" Journal of Political Economy v99, n5 (Oct 1991):977-1009.
Caves, Douglas W. ; Laurits R. Christensen; Michael W. Tretheway, “Economies of Density
versus Economies of Scale: Why Trunk and Local Service Airline Costs Diﬀer,” The
RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 15, No. 4. (Winter, 1984), pp. 471-489.
Ellickson, Paul E., “Does Sutton Apply to Supermarkets?" Rand Journal of Economics.
Spring, 2007
Fox, Jeremy, (2005), “Semi and Nonparametric Estimation of Multinomial Discrete Choice
Models Using a Subset of Choices,” University of Chicago Working Paper
Ghemawat, Pankaj, Ken A. Mark, Stephen P. Bradley,(2004) “Wal-Mart Stores in 2003,”
Harvard Business School Case Study 9-704-430.
Hausman, Jerry and Ephraim Leiptag, (2005) "Consumer Benefits from Increased Competition in Shopping Outlets: Measuring the Eﬀect of Wal-Mart,” MIT working paper.
Ho, Katherine (2007), “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market” NBER
Working Paper #11822.

36

Holmes, Thomas J., "Barcodes lead to Frequent Deliveries and Superstores," Rand Journal
of Economics Vol. 32, No. 4, Winter 2001, pp 708-725.
Jia, Panle, “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of
the Discount Retailing Industry" MIT Manuscript, 2007
Luttmer, Erzo G.J., “What Level of Fixed Costs Can Reconcile Consumption and Stock
Returns?," Journal of Political Economy, 1999, Vol. 107, No. 5, pp. 969-997
Mattera, Philip and Anna Purinton, (2004) “Shopping for Subsidies: How Wal-Mart Uses
Taxpayer Money to Finance Its Never-Ending Growth,” manuscript, Good Jobs First
Manski, C (2003), Partial Identification of Probability Distributions, Springer: New York
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Stephen M. Ciccarella, Jr. "The Eﬀects of Wal-Mart
on Local Labor Markets" NBER Working Paper No. W11782 November 2005
Pakes, Ariel, Jack Porter, Kate Ho, and Joy Ishii, “Moment Inequalities and Their Application,” Harvard working paper, November, 2006.
Roberts, Mark J. “Economies of Density and Size in the Production and Delivery of Electric
Power Mark, Land Economics, Vol. 62, No. 4. (Nov., 1986), pp. 378-387.
Stone, Kenneth E., “Impact of Wal-Mart Stores on Iowa Communities: 1983-93,” Economic
Development Review, Spring 1995, p. 60-69.
Toivanen, Otto and Michael Waterson (2005), "Market Structure and Entry: Where’s the
Beef?" Rand Journal of Economics, Vol 36, No. 3,
U.S. Bureau of the Census, County Business Patterns, (1977, 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, 1997,
1998, 2000, 2002, 2004).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Summary File 3, Census of Population and Housing, (1980,
1990, 2000).
Vance, Sandra S. and Roy Scott, Wal-Mart: A History of Sam Walton’s Retail Phenomenon,
Simon and Schuster Macmillan: New York, 1994.
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (1971-2006). Annual Report.
Walton, Sam (1992) Made in America: My Story New York: Doubleday

37

Table 1
Summary Statistics of Store-Level Data
(End of 2005, Excludes Alaska and Hawaii)
Store Type
All
Regular Wal-Mart
SuperCenter
All
Regular Wal-Mart
SuperCenter

Variable
Sales
($millions/year)
Sales
($millions/year)
Sales
($millions/year)
Employment
Employment
Employment

N

Mean

Std. Dev

Min

Max

3,176

70.5

30.0

9.1

166.4

1,196

47.0

20.0

9.1

133.9

1,980

84.7

25.9

20.8

166.4

3,176
1,196
1,980

254.9
123.5
333.8

127.3
40.1
91.5

31.0
57.0
31.0

812.0
410.0
812.0

Source: TradeDimensions Retail Database.
Table 2
Distribution of Wal-Mart Facility Openings by Decade and Opening Type
General Merchandise
(Including Supercenters)
Decade
Open
1962-1969
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999
2000-2005

Food Store
(Part of Supercenter)

General Distribution
Centers

Food Distribution
Centers

Opened
Cumulative Opened Cumulative Opened Cumulative Opened Cumulative
this
this
this
this
decade
decade
decade
decade
15
15
0
0
1
1
0
0
243
258
0
0
1
2
0
0
1,082
1,340
4
4
8
10
0
0
1,130
2,470
679
683
18
28
9
9
706
3,176
1,297
1,980
15
43
26
35

Source: See Appendix.

Table 3
Summary Statistics for Census Block Groups

N
Mean population (1,000)
Mean Density
(1,000 in 5 mile radius)
Mean Per Capita Income
(Thousands of 2000 dollars)
Share Old (65 and up)
Share Young (21 and below)
Share Black

1980
1990
2000
269,738 222,764 206,960
0.83
1.11
1.35
165.3

198.44

219.48

14.73
0.12
0.35
0.10

18.56
0.14
0.31
0.13

21.27
0.13
0.31
0.13

Source: Summary File 3, Census of Population and Housing (1980, 1990, 2000)

Table 4
Parameter Estimates for Demand Model
Unconstrained

Constrained (Fits
Reported Cannibalization)

1.686
(.056)

1.938
(.043)

1.649
(.061)

1.912
(.050)

.642
(.036)

.703
(.039)

-.046
(.007)

-.056
(.008)

-8.271
(.508)
1.968
(.138)
-.070
(.012)
.015
(.003)
0.341
(.082)
1.105
(.464)
.563
(.380)

-7.834
(.530)
1.861
(.144)
-.059
(.013)
.013
(.003)
.297
(.076)
1.132
(.440)
.465
(.359)

.183
(.024)

.207
(.023)

Ν
SSE

.065
(.002)
3176
205.117

.065
(.002)
3176
206.845

R2
ln (L)

.755
-155.749

0.753
-169.072

Parameter
λg

Definition
General Merchandise Spending per
person (annual in $1,000)

λf

Food spending per person
(annual in $1,000)

ξ0

Distance disutility (constant term)

ξ1

Distance disutility (coefficient on
population density)

α

Outside Alternative
valuation parameters
constant
ln(mbar)
ln(mbar)2
Per Capita Income
Share of block group black
Share of block group young
Share of block group old

γ

σ2

Store-specific parameters
store age 2+ dummy

measurement error

Table 5
Cannibalization Rates
From Annual Reports and in Model
Year
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

From Annual
Reports
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1
1
1
1
1

Demand Model
(Unconstrained)
.62
.87
.55
.67
1.28
1.38
1.43
1.27

Demand Model
(Constrained)
.48
.67
.40
.53
1.02
1.10
1.14
1.00*

*Cannibalization Rate is imposed to equal 1.00 in 2005.
Source: Estimates from the model and Wal-Mart Stores, Inc (2004, 2006)

Table 6
Comparative Statics with Demand Model
(Uses Constrained Model)
Distance
(miles)
0
1
2
3
4
5
10

1
.999
.999
.997
.995
.989
.978
.570

Population Density
(thousands of people within a 5 mile radius)
5
10
20
50
100
.989
.966
.906
.717
.496
.979
.941
.849
.610
.387
.962
.899
.767
.490
.288
.933
.834
.659
.372
.206
.883
.739
.531
.268
.142
.803
.615
.398
.184
.096
.160
.083
.044
.020
.011

250
.236
.172
.123
.086
.060
.041
.006

Table 7
Distribution of Variable Input Costs
(Percentiles of Distribution are Weighted by Sales Revenue)
Estimated 2005 Labor Costs
Quartile

Store Location

Minimum
25
50
75
Maximum

Pineville, MO
Litchfield, IL
Belleville, IL
Miami, FL
San Jose, CA

Annual Payroll
per Worker ($)
12,400
19,300
21,000
23,000
37,900

Wages as
Percent of Sales
4.5
7.0
7.6
8.3
13.7

Estimated Land-Value/Sales Ratios (Expressed as a Percent)
Quartile

Store Location

Minimum
25

Lincoln, ME
Campbellsville,
KY
Cleburne, TX
Albany, NY
Mountain
View, CA

50
75
Maximum

Index of
Residential
Property Value
Per Acre ($)
1,100

Land-Value as
Percent of Sales
.0

32,100
67,100
137,300

1.2
2.4
5.0

1,800,000

65.0

Table 8
Incremental and Stand-Alone Values of New Store Openings
(All evaluated at 2005 Demand Equivalents)
Part A: General Merchandise (New Wal-Marts including supercenters)

N
All
By State’s
Wal-Mart Age
at Opening
1-2
3-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21 and above

3,176

Incremental
Distribution
Incremental
Center
Incremental Operating
Distance
Sales
Profit
(miles)
36.3
3.1
168.9

288
614
939
642
383
310

38.0
39.5
37.6
36.1
32.9
29.5

3.5
3.5
3.3
2.9
2.8
2.4

343.3
202.0
160.7
142.1
113.7
90.2

Standalone
Sales
41.4

38.7
41.5
40.9
42.2
41.2
44.4

Standalone
Operating
Profit
3.6

3.6
3.7
3.6
3.4
3.5
3.6

Part B: Food (New supercenters)

N
All
By State’s
Wal-Mart Age
at Opening
1-2
3-5
6-10
11-15
16-20

1,980

202
484
775
452
67

Incremental
Incremental Distribution
Center
Incremental Operating
Sales
Profit
Distance
40.2
3.6
137.0

42.4
42.7
41.0
36.7
30.1

3.9
4.0
3.6
3.2
2.8

252.9
171.2
113.5
95.3
94.0

Standalone
Sales

Standalone
Operating
Profit
44.8
4.0

3.9
4.1
4.0
3.9
3.5

4.0
4.2
4.0
3.9
3.5

Table 9
Incremental Operating Profit Regression
2005 Demand Equivalents
Includes State Fixed Effects
General
Merchandise

Food

State’s Wal-Mart
Age at Opening
3-5

-0.04
(.05)

-0.10
(.07)

6-10

-0.30
(.05)

-0.60
(.07)

11-15

-0.63
(.05)

-1.10
(.08)

16-20

-0.76
(.06)

-1.35
(.12)

21 plus

-1.32
(.06)

log population
density

5.78
(.18)

6.39
(.31)

(log population
density)2

-0.26
(.01)

-0.28
(.01)

.51

.50

R2
N

3176

1980

Table 10
Summary Statistics Deviations by Type
Deviation Description
Type

Sample
Number

~
ΔΠ
(in millions
of 2005
dollars)

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8

Mean Values

ΔD
(miles)

ΔF1
(log
popden)

ΔF2
(log
popden2)

Store-Density
Decreasing

83,625

-3.8

-1,740.3

-2.1

-13.1

Store-Density
Increasing

17,999

4.8

1,201.5

-4.8

-37.7

Population-Density
Changing
Group 4 to Group 3
Group 3 to Group 2
Group 2 to Group 1
Group 1 to Group 2
Group 2 to Group 3
Group 3 to Group 4

5,579
8,226
12,176
10,182
12,110
13,164

1.6
4.4
5.0
-2.2
1.0
2.7

-9.9
25.0
-64.3
-53.3
-89.7
-28.1

3.6
3.5
3.2
-3.5
-4.0
-4.9

34.8
26.6
17.4
-19.8
-29.9
-47.3

Table 11
Estimated Bounds on Distribution Cost τ
Units are Dollars per Mile Year
(95 Percent Confidence Intervals in Parentheses Constructed Four Ways)
Sample of
Perturbations
Used for
Estimate
All Openings
(N=163,061)

Lower Bound

Upper Bound

724
#1(700,4810)
#2(530,910)
#3(700,740)
#4(550,910)

6712
#1(2940,6990)
#2(5560,8880)
#3(6620,6800)
#4(6120,7290)

Openings 1990
and beyond
(N=48,558)

1780
#1(1820,4180)
#2(1730,1830)
#3(1640,1910)
#4(940,2630)
590
#1(570,4660)
#2(420,760)
#3(560,620)
#4(330,850)

5190
#1(1950,5310)
#2(4370,7930)
#3(5140,5250)
#4(4850,5520)
8330
#1(6800,9180)
#2(7000,13660)
#3(8180,8510)
#4(7340,9350)

Openings
before 1990
(N=114,503)

Table 12
Mean Incremental Miles Saved and Stores Served for Distribution Centers
Across Alterative Opening Dates Including Actual

One Year
Prior to
Actual
All Distribution Centers
(N = 78)
Mean Incremental Miles Saved
Mean Stores Served
By Type of DC
Regional Distribution Centers
(N = 43)
Mean Incremental Miles Saved
Mean Stores Served
Food Distribution Centers
(N = 35)
Mean Incremental Miles Saved
Mean Stores Served

Actual
Year
Opened

One Year
after Actual

Two Years
After Actual

4439
24

5809
52

6719
58

7145
63

6144
37

7709
69

8698
76

8866
79

2332
7

3462
32

4275
36

5020
43

Figure 1
Diffusion of Wal-Mart Stores and General Distribution Centers
1970

1975

1980

!

!!
!

!

!!

!!

"

!

!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!!
! !!!!
! !
!
!
!
! !
! ! ! !! !! !
!!
!! ! !
!! !
! !! ! !!
! !!! ! !
! ! ! !!
! !
!
!
! !!
! !! ! !
!
!
!
! !
!
!! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !!! !
!
!
! !
!
!
! !
! !! ! ! !
!!
! ! ! !!!
! !! !!!
!
! !!!!
!
!! !
!!
! !! !!
! !!
! !
!!
!! ! !
!
!
!
!!
!!
! !!! !
! ! !
! ! ! !
!
! ! ! !!! ! !
! !
!! !
!
! !!
!!
!
! !!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!!! !
! !
!!!
!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
! !!
!
! ! ! !! !
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !! ! ! !!
!
!!
!
! ! !
! !
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
! ! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!
!
!
!
!! !
! !
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
! !
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!!
!
! !!! ! ! !
!
!
!
! !! !
!! !!
!
!! !
! ! !!
! ! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!!
!!
! !
!!
! !
!
! !
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
! ! !

!
!
!

!!

!

!
! !
!
!

!

!

!!

!
!
!!
!

"

!

"

"

"

!

1990

1985

1995
!
!
! ! !
!
!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!
! !! !
!
!
!
! !
!
! !
!
! !
!!
!
!!
!
!
! !
! ! ! !
!
!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
! ! !! ! !!
!
!
! ! ! !!
! !
!
!
!!
! ! !
!!!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !! !
!
!! !
! ! ! !!
!!!!! !
! !
!!
! !!
! !
!!
!
!! ! !! !! !!! ! !
! !
! !! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
! ! !! !
!
! !!
!
!
!
! ! !
! ! !
!
!! !
!!
!! ! !
!!!
! !
!
!
!
!!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
! !! !
! !! !
!
!!
!!
!
! ! !! !!
! ! ! ! !! ! !
! !! !! !!!! ! !!!
! !
!
!
!
!
!! ! !
!
!
! !! !!
! !
!
!
! !!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! ! !! ! ! !! !
!
!
!!
!
!
! ! !
!!
!! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!! ! !!
!
!!! ! !! !!!!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !
!!
!!! !!!!! !
! !! !!!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!! ! !! !
!
! ! ! ! ! ! !! !!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! ! ! !! ! !!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! ! ! !! ! !!
!
!
! ! !!!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!
! ! !!! ! ! !
! !!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! !
!
!!
!
!!
! ! ! !! ! ! ! !! !
!
!
!
! !
! !! !
!
!!
!! !!
!
!
!!!
!
! !!
!
!
! !
! !!!!
! !!
!!
! ! !
! !!
! !!
! ! !!
!!
! !! !!! !! ! !! !! !
!
!
!!
!! !! !
!!
!
! !!! ! ! !
! !!
!! !
! ! !
!!
!! !
!
! ! !!
! !
!
! ! ! !!!! !
!
! ! ! ! !!! ! ! ! !!!!
!
! ! ! !! ! !
! ! !!! ! ! ! !
!
! ! ! ! !!!!! !!
!
!!
! !!
!
! ! !!! !! ! ! ! !
! !
!!! ! !!
!
! ! ! ! !!!!! ! !!
! ! !! !
!
! ! !!!!!
!
! !!
! !!! ! !
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! !
! ! !! ! ! ! ! !
!
!! ! ! ! !
! !
!
!!!
!
!! !
! ! !!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!! ! !!
! ! !!
!! ! ! ! !! !
!
!
!
!!
! ! !!!!
!
!
!
!
!! !
! !!
!
! ! ! !!! ! ! !
!!! ! !!
!! ! ! !
! !! !! !! !
!
! ! !!
!!
!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! ! !!
! !!!! ! !!
!!!!!
! !!
!
! ! !!! !
!
!
!
!
!!!! ! ! !! !
!
! !
!
!!!
!! ! ! ! ! !!
!!!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!!!
!
! !!!
! !
!!! !!
! ! !! ! !
!
!
! !
! ! !! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! ! ! !! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!
! ! !! !!! ! !!
! ! ! !!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
! !
!
!!
! !!! ! ! ! ! !
!
!!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !
!
!
! ! ! ! ! !!
! ! !!!
! !! ! ! !
!
!!!
!
!!
!
! !! !
!
!
!!
!!
! !!
!!
!
! ! ! !!
!!! ! ! !!
!
!! !
! !
!
!
! !!!
! !! !
!!
!
!!
!!
!
!
! !! !
! ! !
!
!
! ! !! !! !
!
!! !
!!
! !
! ! ! !
!
!
!
!!
! ! !!!
!
! ! !! !
! !
!!
!
! ! ! !
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
! !
! ! !!
!!!
!
! !
!
!
! !!
! !
! ! ! !!!
!
!!
!
!!!!
!
! !
!
!
! !
!! !
! ! ! ! !!
!
! !!
! !
! ! !
! !!!! ! ! !
!!
!
! !!
! ! !!
! !! !
!
!
!! !! !! ! ! !
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!! ! !
!
!!! !!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!! !!! ! ! ! !
!
!!!
! !!
!
!
!!!!!!
!!
!
!! !
! !!
!!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!! !
! ! !! ! ! ! !!!!!
!! !
!
!
!
!!!!
!!
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! ! !!
!
!!!!!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!! !
!!!
!!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

"

!
!
!

"

!
!
!
!

!
!
!
!

"

"

!
!

!
!
!

!
!!

!
!

!

!

!

!
!

"

!

!
!
!
!

!

!

"

!
!
!!
!
! !

"

"

"

!

!

"

!

!
!
!

!

!

!

!!
!

"

!
! !
!
!

!
!

!

!
!

!

!

!
!

!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!!

!

!
!
!

!

!

!

!
!

!
!
!
!
! !!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!

!

!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!

!

!

!!

"

!

!!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!
!!!
!!
!!

!
!
!

!
!!
!
! !

!

!

!!

!

!

"

!

!

"

" "

"

"

! !
!

!

!

!

!

!

"

!

"
!!

!
!

!

!!

!

!

!

!

!
!! !
!
!
!!
!
! !
!
!!
!
! !!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
! !
! !!!
!
!
! ! ! !
!
! ! ! !
! !! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !
!!!
!
! !! !! ! ! !!!
!
!!! ! !
!
! ! ! !!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!
! ! !!
!!
! !
!!!!!!
!
!
! ! ! !
!!!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!!
!!
! !!
! !
!
! !!! !
!!!!!
!
! ! !! ! ! !
! !
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !!
! !!
!
!!
!
!
! !!
!!
!
! ! !!
!
! !
! !
!
! ! !
!
!
!!
!
!!
! !
!
!!
! ! !!
! ! ! ! !!
! !!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!! !! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! ! !!!
! ! !!
!! ! ! !!! ! !!!
! !
!! !
!
!
!
! ! !!
! ! !
!
!!!
!
! !
!
! !!
!
! !!!!!
! !
! !!
!
!
!
! ! !! ! ! !
! ! !!!
!
! !
!! !
!
! !
!
!!
!! ! !
!
!! !! ! !
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! !! ! !!
!
!! !
!!
!! ! !
! !!
!
!
!!
!
!
!! !! !
!
!
!! ! ! !
! ! !! !
!!!!! !
!
!!
!
! !!
!
!! !!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!!!!!
!!
!
!
!!!
! ! ! !!!
!
! !
!!!!
!! !
!! !!!! ! !!
! !!
!! !
!
!
!!
! ! !! !! ! !
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!!!
!
!
!
! !!
! !!
! !!! ! !! !! !!
! ! ! !!!! !
!! !
! !!!! !!! !!!
!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! !!! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! ! !
!!!!
! ! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !!! ! !
!
!
! ! ! !
!
! ! ! !
!
!
!
!!
!! !
!!
!!
! !! ! !
!!!
!
! !!
!
! !! !!! !!
! !
!
!!! ! !!
!
! !!
! ! ! ! ! !!!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!! !! !
!!
!!!!
!!
!
!
!! ! !
!!
!
!
!
! ! ! !!
!
!
! !
!! !
!! !
!
!
! ! !!
!
! !!
!! !!!
!!
!
!
! ! ! !! !
! ! ! ! ! !! !
! ! !! !
!
!!
!
! !
!!! ! ! ! ! !!
!!
! ! !
!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!
! !
! ! !
! !
! !
!
! !
!!!
!
! !! !
! ! ! ! !! ! ! !! !! ! !! !
!
!!! !! !
!
!
!
!!!
!
! ! !
!! !
!! !
!
!
! ! !!
!
!!
! ! !!!!!
!
!!! !
!
!
!!! ! ! ! !! !! ! ! ! !!
!!!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!! ! !! ! !
!
!
! ! ! !
! ! !! !
! ! !!!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!!!
!!!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! !!
! !! !
!
!
!
! !
!! ! !!
!!
!!
!!
!! !! !
!
!
! ! !
!
!
! !! !
! ! !
!!!
!! !
! !! !
! !
!
!
! ! ! !
!!! !
!
!
!! ! ! ! !
! ! !!!
!
! !! !!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
! !!
!!
! !
! !!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! !
!
! !!
!!
!! ! !! ! ! !! ! ! !!!
!
!
!
! ! !! !
!
! !!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !!
!! ! ! !!! !!
!
!! ! ! !
!
! !!
! !! !! ! !
!
! ! ! !!! !
!! ! ! !!
!!
!
!
!!!!! !
!!
! ! ! ! !!
!
! !!! ! ! !!
! !! ! ! !!!
! !!!
!
!!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
! ! !!
!
!!!
! !! ! !
!
!
! ! ! !!!! ! !
!
! ! !! ! ! ! ! !! ! !!! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
! !!
!!
!!!
!!
!! !
!
! !
! !!
!
!
!
! !
! !! !!! !
!
!
!
! !!
! !! ! ! !!!!!
! ! !! !
!!
! ! !! !! !!
!!
!! !! ! !! ! ! !
!!
!!!
! ! ! ! !!!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
! !! ! !! ! !
!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
! ! !!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! !!
! ! !
! !
!
!
!!
! !!
! !!!
! ! ! ! !!!!! ! ! !!! !
!!
!
! ! ! ! ! !!!
! ! !!
!! !
!
! !!
!
!
!
! ! ! !!
!
! !! ! !
!!
!! ! !
!! !! ! !!
!
!
!
!!!
! ! ! ! ! !!
!
! !!
!!
!
! ! !!! !
!
!
!!
!!
!!
!
!
!!
!!
!
! ! !! !
! ! ! ! ! !!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!! !
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! !
!!! !
!! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! ! !
!! ! ! !!!
! !
!!
!
!
!
! !!
!
! ! !! ! !!
!
!
!!
! ! !
!!
!!
!
!
!
!! !
!! !
!
!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! !!
!! ! !! ! ! ! !!!
! ! ! !!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! ! ! ! !!!
! !
! !!!
! !
!
!
! !!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!! ! ! ! !! ! ! ! ! !
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! ! !!
!
! ! ! !!
!
!
!
! !! !
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
!!
!!
! !
!!
!!
!
! ! ! !!
! !!
!
!
!! !
! !!!
! !! !
!!
!
!!
!! ! !
!
!
! ! !
! !! !
!
!
!
!
! ! !! !! !
!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!
! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
! !
!
!
! !!
!
! !!
!
!!
! ! !!
!
!
! ! !
!
!
!! !
!
!
! !!
! ! !!!
!!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!! ! !
!!!!!
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !!!
!!
!
!
!
! ! !
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!! ! ! !
!!
!
! !!
!
!! ! !!
!
!
!! !
!
!
! ! !
! !!! !
! !
! ! ! !
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!!
!!! !!! !!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!! ! ! !!
!
!!! !!
!
!
!
!
!!! !
!
!!!!
! !!! ! ! ! !
!
!
! !!
! !
!
!
!!!!!!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!!
!!!
!!
!
!
!! ! ! !
!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!! !
! ! !!
!
! !! !
!!!!!! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
! ! ! !! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !!
!!! !
!
!!!!
!!
!
! !
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!!!!
!! !
!

!

!
!
!
!!

"

!

!

!
!

!

!
!
!
! !!
!
! !
!
!
! ! !!!!!
!
!! ! !
!
!
! !
!
!!!!! !
!! !
!
! !
!
!
! ! !
!!
!
!!
!
!
!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!
!! !!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!

!

!!

!

"

"

"

"

"" "

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

!
! !
!
!!
!!
!
!

!

!

!
!

!

!
!
!
!
!

!
!

!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!! !!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!

! !
!

!

!
!!

"

!

!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!! !
!

!
!

!

!
!

!

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"
"

!
!

!
!
!
!
!
! ! !

"" "

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

! !
!!!
!
!
!!!
!

2005

!

!
!

!
!

"

"

!
!

!
!

!
!

!

!

!!!
!
!
!
!!!

!

!

"

"

"

2000
!

"

"

!!
!
!
!!

!
! !!
!!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!! !! !
!!
!

""

!

!

!

"

!

!

!

!

!

!

"

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!!! !
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !
! ! ! !
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
! ! !
!!
! ! ! !
! !! !!! ! !!!
!
!
!!! ! !
!
! !
!
! !!
!!
! !!!
! !!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !!
! !! !!
!!! !
! ! !!! ! ! !
!!!
! !
! ! !!
!!!
!!!
!! !
!
! !!
!
!!
! !
! !! ! !
!
! ! ! !!!! !
! ! ! !! !
!
!
!
! !!!
!! ! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!!
! ! !!!!!
!!
! !
!
! !
!
!!
!
! !
!!
!
!
! !
!
!
! !!
!!!
!
!!
!
! ! !! ! ! ! ! !
!
! ! !
!! !
!!!
!
!
!!! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!!
!!! !!!
! !!
!
!
! !!
! !
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!!
! !
!
!
!
! ! !! !
! !! !!
! !
! ! !!
! !!
! !! !!
!
! !! !!! !
!!!
!
!
!!
! !!
!! !
!
!
!!
!!
! !
!! ! !
!!
!!
!!!!!! ! !!
!
!
! !!
!!
! !! ! !! !! !!! ! ! ! !!!!! ! ! !! ! ! !
!!!! !! ! ! !!!
!! !
!
!!
!
!
! ! ! ! !
!
! ! !! ! !! ! !
! ! !!! ! !
!
! ! !!
!
! !! ! ! !
!
!
! ! !
!
! !!
!
! ! !
!!
!!! !! !
! ! !!
!
!
!!!
!!
! ! !! ! !
!!!!!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
! !!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! !
! ! ! !!
! !! !
!
!!
! !
!!
! ! !! !! !!!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !! ! !
!
! !
!
! !!!!!! !!!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!! !! ! !! !!
!
!
! !! !!
! !!
! !!
!! !
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !!
!
!
!! ! !
!
! ! !! !
!
!
! ! !
! ! ! !!
!
! !
!! !
! !!!
!! !!!!
!
!!!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
! !
! !!!
!! !!
!!!!! !
! !
! !!!
! !! !
!
!!!
!!
!
!!!
!
!!!!
!
!!
! ! !!
!
!! !
! ! ! ! !! !! !!! !
!
!
!!!!
! ! !!
! !! ! !
! !! !
!
! !! !!! !
!
! !! !
! !!!!
!!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! ! ! !! ! !
! ! !!!
!
!
!
! !
!!
! ! !!! ! !! ! ! ! !
!! !
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!!
! !!! !
! !!!
! !! ! !! ! ! ! !! !
!
!
!
!! !
!
! !!!
! !
!!
!!
!! !
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!! ! !!
! !! ! ! !! !
! ! !!!! !!!!!!
!! !
! !!
! !! !!
!
! !! ! ! !
!
!!
!! !! ! !!! ! !! !
!
!!!! ! ! !
! !!
! !!
!
!
! !!
!
!!!
! ! !!
! !!!!! ! ! ! !
!
! !
! !!
!!
!
!!!
! ! ! !!!! !
!!! ! ! ! !!!!
!
!
! !! !!
!
!! !!! !
!!
! ! !!! !!!!! ! !!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!! !
! !!! !!
! ! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!! !! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!! !! ! ! ! !
!
! ! ! ! !! !!! ! !!!!!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!! !
! !!
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !!!!
! ! !!
!! !! ! ! !! !
!!
!
!
! !!!!! ! ! !! ! !!!!
!
!!
!
!
!! !
! !!
!
! !!
! !! ! !!! ! ! !
! !! !
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!!! !
!
! !! !!! ! !!
! !
! !
! ! ! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!!!!
! ! !! ! !
!!
!!!
!
!
!! ! ! !
!
!
! ! !!! ! ! !!
!
!! ! !
!!
!
! ! !!
!
!
!!!
!
! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !!! !
!
! ! !
!
!! ! !!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !
!
!! !
!! !! ! !! ! !
! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !!
! !
! !! !! !!! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!
! !!! ! ! ! ! !
!!
!
!!
! !!
!
!!
!
!
!
!! ! !
!
!! ! !
!
! ! !! ! !!
! ! !!!
!!
! !! ! ! !
!
!!
!
! !!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!!! !! !
!
!! !!
! !! !
!
!! !
!!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
! ! ! !!
!
!
! ! ! ! !! !
! ! !!! !! !
!
!
!!
! !
! ! !!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!!
! ! !!!
! !
! !! !
!!
!
! ! ! !
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
! !
! ! !!
!!!
! !
!
!
!
! !!
!!
!
!!
! ! ! ! ! ! !!!
!!!!
!
!
! !
!
!!! !
! !! !!
! !
!
! ! ! ! !! !!! ! !!! !!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! ! ! ! !
!!
!!
!
!
! !! !
!!!!
!!!
!
!
!!
!!
! ! !! !
!
!! !
!
!! !!!!
!
! !
!!
!!! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!! !
!
!
!! !!! ! ! ! !
!
! !!
!! !
!!
!
!
!
!!!!!!
!
!! !
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!
! ! !!! ! ! ! !!!!!
!! !
!!
!
!!! !
!!!!
!!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! ! !!
!!!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! ! !
!
!
!!!!
!
!
! !!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!

!

!
!
! !!
!
! !
!
!
! ! !!
!
!! ! !
! !
!
!!! !
!!
!
! !
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!!
!
!

!

!

!

!

!

! !

!

!
!
!

!

!

!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!!
! !
!
!
! !
!! !
!
! !
!
! !
!!
! !
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !! !
!
!
! ! !!
!! !
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!!
!! !!! !
!!
!
!
! !!!!
!!! ! ! ! !! !
!
! !!!
! !! !
!!!!
!
!!!
!! ! !! !
! !!
! ! !! ! !! !
!
!
!
!
! ! !! ! !!
!
! !! ! ! !
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! ! !
! ! !!!
! ! !
!
!
!
! !
!
! !!
!
! ! ! !! !
!
!!
! ! ! ! !! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!! ! !
! !!
! !!!!
! !!
! ! !!
! ! ! !!
!
!!
!!! !!
!
! !!! !
! !! !
!
!
!! !
! ! !! !!
!
! !
!
!
! ! ! ! !! ! !! ! !!!! ! !
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!! !
! ! ! !!
! !
!
! !
!! !
!!!!! ! !!
!! !
! ! !!!! !!
! !! !!
! !
!!
!! !
!
!
! !! ! !! ! ! ! ! !
!!! !
!
! ! !! !! ! !
!! !
!!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !! !! !
! !
! !!
!
!
! !!
! !!
! !! !! ! !
! !! ! ! !
!
! !! !
!
!!! !
!!
!
! !!
! !! !
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!! ! !!!!! ! !
! !!
!!!! ! !
! !
! !!
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
! ! !!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
! !! ! ! ! !
!
!
!!! !
! ! ! !! !
!
! ! ! ! ! !!!
!
!
! ! !! !!!
! ! !!
!
! ! !
!
! !
!
!!
!
! !!
!!! !!! ! !
!
!
!!
!!
! ! !! ! ! !
!
! ! !! !!! ! ! ! !!
!
!
!!
! ! !!
!!! !
!
! !!
!
!
!!
! !
!
! !! !! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
! !
!
!!!
! ! ! !
!
!
! ! !!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !! !! ! ! ! !
! !! !! ! ! !
! !
!
!
! !!
! !
!
! !!!
!!
! ! !!
!!
!!
!
!
!! !
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!! !
! !
!
! !!
!!
!! !
! !!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !
! !!
! !!
! !
!
! ! ! !! !
!!!
!!
!
!!
!
! !
!
!
!!!
! !!!!
!
!
!
!

!
!

!

!
!
!

!!

!

!

!

!

!
!
!

!

!!
!
! !!
!

!

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

!

!!
!
!

!
!
!

!

! !
!
!
!

"
!

!
!

!
!

!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!
!!

!

"

!

!

!

!
!
!

!

! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

"

!

!

!

!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!! ! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!! !!
!
! !
!
!
!! ! !
!!
!
!
! ! ! !
! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! !
!
!
!
! ! ! !
!!
!
! ! !! !! !
! !!!!!
!
!!
! ! !!
!!
!! !
!
!
! !! !
!!!!
! ! !!!!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
! !!! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!!!
! !
! !
!
! !
!
!!!
!
!
!
!!!!
!
!!
!
! !!
!!
!
!!!
! !!!!!
!!
! ! !!!
! !
!
!!
! ! !!
!!!!
!
!
! ! !!!
!
! !!!
!!
! !! !!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !!
!
!
!!
!!
!!!!
! ! ! ! ! !!
! ! ! !!! !
!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!
! !! !
!!
!
! !!
!
!!
!!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
!
!!!! !
!
!
!
!
! !! !!
! !!
! ! !!
!!
!! ! !!!
!!
!!!!!
! !
!!
!
!!!
!
!
!! !
! ! !!!!
! ! !
!
!!!
!
! !!
! !
!
!!
!!!
!!! ! !!!
! !!!!!!
!!!
!!
! ! ! !
!
!
!
!!
!! ! ! !! ! !
!
!! !
!
!
!!
!!!!
!
!
! ! !! ! !!
!
!!!
!
!!!
!
!!!
!
!
!
! !!!! !! ! !
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
! !!!!!
!
!
!!! ! ! ! !! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!!!
!
!
! ! !! !
!
!!! ! ! !
! !
! ! ! !!! !!
!
!!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!!
!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!!!
!!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!! ! ! !! ! ! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!!!!
!
!! !
!
!
!!!!!
!! !
!
! !!
!!!! !
!! ! !!!!!
!
!
!!
!! !!!! ! ! ! !! ! ! !! !! ! !
!
!
!
!!
!!!
!
! !!!
!
!
! !!!
!
!!!!
! !!! ! !! !! !!! ! ! ! !!!
! ! ! !!!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!!
!! !
!! ! ! !
!
!!!! !
!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! !!!
!!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! ! ! !
!! ! !
!
! !!
!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
! !!!
!
!! ! !
! !
!
!
! ! !
!!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !! ! !! !
!!
!!
!
! !
!
!
!
! !
!
! !! ! ! !!!!!! !
!!
! !!!
! !
!
!! ! !!
!
! !!
!
!!
!
! ! ! !!!
!
! !
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!!!
!!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!!!
!!
!!
!!
!! ! !
!
!
!!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!!!
!
!
!
!!!
!! !! ! ! !
!
! !! !
!
!! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! ! !! !
! ! !! !
!
! !! !! !! ! ! !!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !
!
! !
! !! !!
! !
! !
!
!
!! !
!
!!
!
! !!
! ! ! ! !! ! ! !! !! ! !! !
!
!!!! !! !
!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!! !
! ! !
!! !!!
!
!!
! !!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!! ! ! ! !! !! ! !!! !!
!
!
!!
!
!!
! !! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !
!
!!
! !
!
!!
!
! !!
! ! ! !
!
!!
!! !
!
!!!
!!
!!
!
! !!
!
!!!
!!
! ! !
!
!
!!
!!
! ! ! ! ! ! !!
! ! !!! ! ! ! !!! ! !
!
! !! ! !
!
!!
! ! !!! !!!!!!!!
!
! !
! ! !! !!! !
!!
! ! ! ! !! !
!!!
! !
!
!
! !
!
!
! !
!
!
!! ! !
! ! !!!
! !! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
! !
!
!
!
! ! !
!!
! !
!
! !
! !!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! !
!
!! ! !! !
! ! !!! ! !
! ! ! !! ! ! ! !! !
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!! !!
!!!
!!
!
!
!
!! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!!! !
!!!!!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !
! !!! !!!!
! !! !
!! ! !
! ! ! !!!!!
!!
!
!!!! !!
!!!!!!!
!
!!
! ! !!
!!
!
! !!! ! ! !!
! !! ! !!!!!
! !!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!!! ! ! ! !!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !!!! !
! !! !
!!
! !! ! ! ! ! !! ! !!!! ! !
!!! ! ! ! !!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
! !!! !
!!
!!
! ! ! !!
!
!! !
!! !
! !!!!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!!! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !!
! !!!
!
! !! ! !
!!
! ! ! !!!!!
!! !!! ! !!!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! ! !!!!!
!
! !!
!
! ! !! !! ! ! !!!
!
!
! ! !!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! !! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
! !!
! ! !!! !
!!
! !
! !! !
! !!!
!!
!
!!
! !
!!
!
! !!
!
!
!
! !! !
!
!
! ! ! ! !!!! ! ! ! !
!
! !
!
!!
!! !! ! !!
! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! ! !
!!
!!!!
!
! !!
! !!! ! !
!
!!!! !
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
! ! !! !
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! ! ! ! !!! ! !!
!
!
!
!! ! !
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
! !
! !!
!
! !
!! !
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !! ! !!!
! !
!
!!
!!
! ! !
!
!
! !
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!! !! ! ! ! ! ! !
!! !! ! !! ! !
!
! ! ! ! ! ! !!
!
! !
!
! !
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !!
! ! ! ! !!!
! !
! !
! !
! !!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!! ! !
!
! ! ! ! ! !!
!
! ! !!!
!
!
!
! !
!
! !
!
!
!
!
! !!
!!
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! ! !! !!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!
!! !
!!
!
!!
! ! ! !!! ! ! !
!
!! !
! !!
!
! !
! !
! !!!
!
!
!
!!
! ! ! !!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
! !! !
!
! ! !! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !
!!
!
!
!
!
! !! !
! !!
!
!
!
! ! ! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! !
!
! !
! ! !!
!!
!
! !
!
!
!
! !!
! ! ! ! !!!
!
!!
!! ! !
!!
!!
!
!!!
!
!
!
! ! !!
!
! !
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!
! !!
! !
!
! ! !
! !!!
!
!
!
! !!
!! !!
!
!!
! !!
!
! !! !
!
!! ! ! !! !
!
! !!! !
! !
! !!
!
! !
!! !!
! !!!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!!
! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!! !!!!!
!
!!! !!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!!!! ! !
!
!
!!!!!! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
! !
!! !
!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!! ! !
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !!
!!!!
!
! !
!! !! !
!
!
!! !
!
!!!
!
!
!
!! !!
!
! ! ! !! ! ! !
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! !
!
!
! !!
!
!! !
!
!!!
!!!
!
! !
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!!
!! !
!
!
!

!! !
!

"

!

!

" "

"

"

! !
!

!

!

!

"

!

"
!
!
!

!
!

!

!

!
!
!

!

!!

!

!

!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !!
!
! ! !!
!!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!!!
! !
!
!
!!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!

!

!

!
!
!
!
!!

"

!

!

!

!

!
!
!

!
!

!
!

!

!

!
!

!!!
!

!

!
!
!
! !!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !!!!!
!!
!
! !! !
!
!!
!!
!
!
!!!!!! !
!!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!

Legend

!

!
!
!

!
!
!!

!

!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!!
!
!!

"

!

!

!
!
!!
!
! !

!

"

"

"

"

"
" "

"

"" "

"

"

"

"
" "
"
"
"

"

"

" "
"

"

"

"

"

!

"
"

!

Wal-Mart Store

"

General Distribution Center

Figure 2
Diffusion of Supercenters and Food Distribution Centers
1995

1992

1990

!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!

!
!

!

!
!

!
! !
!

!

!

!
!

!

!
!
!

!
!!
!
!
!

!

"

!

!!
!

!!

!

!

!

!

!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!

"

!!

!

!
!

!
!
!!

!
!

!

!
!
!
!
! ! !
! ! !
! !!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!

"

!
! !

!

!

!
!

!

!
!
!!

"

!

!
!!
!

!
!!
!

!
!

!
!!

!

! !
!
!
!!

!

!

!

"

!

!!

!
!

!
!

!

!

!
! !

!

!
!

!

!

!

!
!
!

!!

! ! !
!

!

!! !

!

!
!

!

"

!

! !
!

!

!!

!
!
!
! ! ! !
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!!
! !
!
!
!

!

!

! !

!
! !
!
!

!
!

!

!

!

!
!
!

!
!!
! !
!

!
!

!
!

!

!

! !
!
!

!

!

!
!

!
!

!!
!!!

!

! !
! !

2000

1997

2002
!
!

!

!

!
!
!
!

!!

!

! !

!
!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

! !
!
!
! !
!
! !
!
!
!
! !
!! !
!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
! !
! ! ! !
!
! ! !!! ! !
!
! !
!! !
!
! ! ! !!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !!! !
! ! !
! !!
!
!
!
! ! !! ! !
!
!
!
! !
!!
!
!
! !
!
!

!

!
!

!

!
!

"

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!
!

"
!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!!
!
! ! !! !!
! ! !
! !! ! !!
!!
!
!!
!!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !
!! !
!
!!
! ! !
!
!
! !
!!
! !
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!
! !!!
!
!
!!
!
! !!! ! !!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
! !! !
!
!
!
!!
! !
!
! !
! !
!
! !
!
!
!
! !
!
! !
!
! ! !
!
!
!!!
!
! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!! !
!
!!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!!

!

"

!!

!

!
!!
!

"

"

!!
!

!

!

!

!

!

"
!

!
!

!

!

!

!!
!!

"

!

!
! !
!!!
!
!
!

"

!

"

"
"
"

! !
!! !

!

!

"

!

! !
!

!
!
!
!!

!
!

!
! !!
!
!
!!
! !! !
!
!
! !!

!

"

!

!

!

"

"

!
!

!
!
!
! !!
!
! !
!

!
!

!

!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!
!
! !
!
!
!!
!
! !! !
!!!
!
! !!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
!
!
!
! !
! ! !
!!
! ! !
!
!
! !
!
! ! !!
! !
!
!
!
! !
!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!
!
! !
!
! !!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! !
! !
!
!!
!! !
! !
! !!
! ! ! !
! !! !
!! ! !
!
!!
!
!
!! !
!
!! !
!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!!! ! !
!
!
!
!!
! ! !! ! !
! !! !
! !!
!
!
!! ! ! !!!!
!!
!
! !! ! !!!!!!
!
!! !!
!!
!
! ! !
! !!
!
!!
!
!
!!
! ! ! ! !!
!
!
! ! !
! !!
!!!!
!
! !!
!!!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! ! ! ! !
!
!! !
! !
!
!! ! !
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
! ! ! !! !
!
! ! !!
!! !
!
! !
! ! !
!
!! !! !! ! ! !
!
!
!! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !
!!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!!!
!
!
!! ! !! !! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! !! !! !
!
! ! !!
!
!! ! !
!
!
!
!!
!! !! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! ! !
!
!
!!
!
!! ! !
!
! ! ! !
!
!
!! ! !
!
!
!
!!!
! !
!!
!
!!
!!
!! !
! !!
! ! !!!
!
!
! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !!! !
!
!!
!! ! !
!!! !!
! ! !!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!!
!! ! !
!! !
!!
!! !
! !! !
!
! !
!
!
!!!
!
! !! ! !
!
!
!!
! !! ! !! ! !!! ! !
!!!
!
!!!!!!!!
!
!
!
!
! ! !! !
!
!
! !
!
!
! ! !
!
!
! !
! !
! ! !
!
! !! !!
! !
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !
!
!
! !!
! !
!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !!
! !
! !
!
!
! !
!!
! !
!!
!
!
!
!!!! ! ! !!!!!!! !! !!
!! ! ! ! !! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! !
!
!
! !!
! ! !! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! !!
!
!
!
! !!!
!
! !
!
!! !
! !
!!!
!! ! ! ! !!
!! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
!!!!
!
! ! ! !! ! ! ! ! !
!!
!
! !
!
! ! ! !!
! !
!
! !
!!
!!
!
!
!!
! !
!
! ! !!! !
! ! ! !!
! ! !!!
!
!
! !!
!! !!!
! ! !! ! ! !
!!
! !
!! !!!
!!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! ! ! !! ! ! !!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
! !!
!
!
! ! !!
! !! ! ! !!!
!!
!
!
! ! ! !!!!
!!
! !!
!
! !
! !!!
!
! !!
!!
!
! !
!!
!! ! ! !
!!!!
!! !
! ! !!
!
! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!!!!! !
! !! ! !
! !!
!
! !!
! !
!!! ! ! ! ! ! !
! !
!
!!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!!!!
!
!
!!
!!!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
! !
! !!!! !
!
! !!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
! ! !!
!!
!!! !
! !!!
! ! ! ! !
!
!
! !!
!
! !
! ! !
!!! ! ! !! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !!
! ! !! !
! !! !! ! !
!!
!!
! !
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
! !
! !! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !
!
!
!!
!
! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!!!!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!!
! ! !
!! !!
!
!!
!!
!
!!
!! !
! !!
!
! !
! ! !
!
! !!!!
!
! !!
!
!!
!
!
!!
! !
!
!
! !
!
!
! ! !
!
!
! ! !! !! !
!
!
!!
! ! !
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
! ! !
!
!
!
! !! !
! !
!
! ! !!!
!!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!!
!!
!!!
!!
!!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
! ! !!
!!
! ! !
!
! !!!! !
!
! !!
!! ! !!
!!
! !
!
!
!! ! ! !
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!! !!!!!
!! !
! !
!!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!!
!
!
!!!!!! !
!
!
!
!! !!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!!!! !!
!
!! !
!
! !
!
!!!! !!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!!!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!
!!
!!!!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
! !
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
! !! !
!! !
!
!! !
!
!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!

!
!
!
!
!

!

!
!

!

!

!
!!

!
!

"

!

!

"

!

"

"

!
! !

"

"

"

"
""
"
"

"

"

"

"
"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"
"

"

!
!!

" "

"

"

!
!

"

!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!!

!

!

"

!
!
!
!

!

!

"

"
""
"
"

"

"
"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"
"

"

!
!

! !
!
!! !
!! !
!
!
! !!
!!

!
!!
!!
! !!

!

Supercenter

"

Food Distribution Center

" "

"

"

! !

!
!

!

"

!
!
!
! !!!
!!
!!

! !!

!

!

"

!

"

!

!

!

!

!
!

!

!!

!

!

!!

"

!

!
!
!

!
!
!
!!
!

!

!
!
!

!

!

!

!
!

!

"

!

!

!

"

!

!

!
!

!

!!

"

!
!
!
!
!
!

!

Legend

!
!

!!
!!!!
!!!
!

!

"

!!

"

!

"

!

! !
!

!

!

!
!! !
!!
!
!
!
! ! !
!!

!

!

!

!

!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!

!
!

!
! !!!!
!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !
!
! !
!
! !
!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!! !
!
! !
!
!
!
!!!!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
! !!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! ! !!! ! !!
! !!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
! ! ! !!
!
! !!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!! ! !
!!
!
!
! !
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!!
!!
!!!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!
!! !!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
! !
!
! !
!
!
!
!! !! !
! !
!! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!! !
! !!
! !
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!!
!
!!
!
! !!!! ! !
!
! !!
! ! !! !
! ! !!! !
!
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!!
! ! !!
!!
! !
!!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!!! !
! !
! !
!
!
!
! !
!
! ! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
!
! !!
!
! !
! !!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
! ! !! !
!
!!
!
!
!
!! !!
! ! !
! !!
!
!
!!
! !
!!
! !
!!
! !
! !!
!
!! !!
!! ! ! !!
!
!!
! !!! !
!
!
! !!
! !
!
! ! ! ! !!
!! !
!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!! !
! !
!
!
! !
!
!!
! ! !
!
! !!
!
! ! !!! !
!
!
!!! !
! !!
! !!
! !
!!
! !
!!
!
!
! !
!!
!
!!
!
!
!! ! ! ! !
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!! ! !!
!
!
!!
!
! ! !
!
! ! !!
!!
!
!
!!
!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! !!!
!
! !
!
! !!
!! ! ! !
!
!!!
! !
!
! !!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
! ! ! ! ! !!!!
!
! !!
!! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!!! !
! !
!!
!
!! !!
!!
!
!
!
! !! ! !
!!! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! !! !
!
!
!
!
!!!!
!
!! !
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!!
! ! ! ! ! ! !!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!! ! ! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!!
!!!!
!
!
!! !! !
!
!
!
! !!!!
!
! !!!
!!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !! ! !
! ! ! !
!!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!
! !
!!!
!
!
!!
!
! !
!
!
!! !
!!
!! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! !!
!
! !
!
!! !
! !!
!
!!
! ! !
!!
! !!
!! ! !!! !!!! ! !!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!! !
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!!
!!
!
!
!!
!!!!! !
! !!
!!
!!
! !
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !
!!
!!
!!!
!
!
!!! !!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!
! !!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !
!!
!!
!!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
! !
!! !!
!
!

"
!
!

"

"

!
!
!

!

!

!
!
! !
!
!
!!
!
!

"

"

!

!

!
!

!

!

"

"

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!
!!

2005
!

!
!

"

! !
! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

"

"

"

!! !
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
!
! !
!
!
!
!!!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!!
!
!
! !
!
!
!!
!!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
!!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
! !
!
!! ! !
!
!
! !!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!! !! !
! !
!
!!
!!
!
!
!! !
!! !
! !
!
!
!
! ! !
!! ! !
!
! ! !! ! ! !
! ! !!!
! ! !! !
!
!
!
!
! !!
!! !
!
!
!!
!
!
! !!
!
!
! ! ! !
!!!
!
!!!!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
! !!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! !
!!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !!
! ! ! !
!
!
!!! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!! ! !
! !!
!
!! ! !
!
!
! !!
! !!
! !! ! !
!!
!
! !
!
!! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!!! ! ! !
!
!
! !! !
!
!
!! ! !
! !
!
!
!
!!
!
!! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !
!!
!
!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! !!!!
! !
!
! !!
!! ! ! !
!
!!!
! !
! !!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! ! ! !!! !
!
! ! ! !
! !!
!!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
!
!! !
!
! !! !
!! !!
!
!
!
!
!!
! !! !! !
!
!
!!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! ! !
!
! !
!
!
!!
!!
!
!!! ! !
! !!
!
! !!
!
!
! !!
!!
! ! !
!
! ! !!
!
!
!
!
! !!!
! !!!
!
!!!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!!
! !
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!
! !
!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
! ! !
!!
!
!!! ! !!
! !
!
!!
!!! ! ! ! !!! ! ! !
! ! !
!!
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!!
! !!
! ! !! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!
!
!!!
! !
!
!!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
! !
!
!
!!! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!!
!
!
!!!
!
!

!

!
! !
!
!
!
!

"

!
!

!

!

!
!

!
!

!
!
!
!

!

!
!
!

!
!

!!

!

!

!

!
!

!

"

"
"

Figure 3
Sales per Employee as a Function of Square Footage of Store

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Sales per Employee v. Store Size

50

100

150
sqft thousands

Sales per Employee
(thousands of dollars)

200

250

Fitted Values
(thousands of dollars)

