                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   BUSINESS CYCLE ANALYSIS AND
                    EXPECTATIONAL SURVEY DATA


                         Victor Zarriowitz


                      Working Paper No. 1378




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 198)4




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper # 1378
                                                   June 1984


                            Business Cycle Analysis
                                         and
                           Expectational Survey Data


                                   ABSTRACT



     What is the role of foresight, and the significance of the lack of

foresight under uncertainty, in the theory of business cycles? What relevant

evidence on these questions can be extracted from the survey data on agents'

expectations and experts' forecasts? Th provide some answers, the recent work

in this area is reviewed in the perspective of economic and doctrinal   his-.

tory. The address proceeds from (1) a discussion of the expectational aspects

of modern business cycles theories and (2) a critique of the currently domi-

nant approaches to (3) a summary of the evidence and (4) some illustrations

and implications for further analysis. Of the conclusions drawn, perhaps the

most general one is that expectations matter a great deal but are not all—

important. They may be rational in the sense of effectively using the limited

available knowledge and information, but they are also diversified and not

always self—validating or stabilizing.

                                               Victor Zarnowitz
                                               Professor of Economic and Finance
                                               University of Chicago
                                               Graduate School of Business
                                               1101 East 58th Street
                                               Chicago, IL 60637
                                               (312) 962—7130
                BUSINESS CYCLE ANALYSIS AND (PECTATIONAL SURVEY DATA



     This    paper is part of a project in progress, which attempts to survey the

recent work on business cycles in historical perspective. It concentrates on

one set of phenomena in the complex story of this main form of economic insta-

bility and its interpretations: What is the role of foresight and the lack

thereof under uncertainty in the theory of business cycles? What is the

evidence from survey data on expectations and forecasts? The subject is broad

and the work is far from finished, but some provisional results seem worth

reporting.

     The paper has four substantive parts. Section 1 discusses the expecta—

tional aspects of modern business cycle theories. Section 2 reviews the

criticisms of the treatment of expectations. Section 3 summarizes the

evidence. Section 4 provides some illustrations from my own empirical work.


                 1.   Expectations in the Theory of Business   Cycles

     The "Konjunkturgebundenheit" of contemporary economic thinking, i.e., its

dependence on whether prosperous or depressed business conditions prevail, is

in itself an arqument in favor of the importance of the "psychological factor"

(Haberler, 1964, p. 471 n.) Of the classics of business cycle literature,

Pigou (1927, esp. chs. VI and VII) is most prominently associated with the

theory that, under uncertainty, interdependent expectations of businessmen

generate widespread errors of optimism in expansions and of pessimism in

contractions. It is well known but still noteworthy that, for all their

differences, Keynes (1936, esp. chs. 11, 12, 15 and 22) shared with Pigou the

emphasis on these processes of error diffusion, discovery, and reversal. Later

much further attention was given to the role of attitudes and expectations in

business decisions (Hart, 1940; Shackle, 1949), consumer behavior (Katona,
                                     -2—




1951; Juster, 1964), and the "contagious" cumulative processes of the business

cycle (J6hr 1952). Recently, strigel (1981) examined the results of the Ifo

business outlook surveys from a similar point of view.

    During business expansions, most series on output, employment, real

income, and spending, etc., increase so that "good news" dominate and their

cumulation fosters optimism; during business contractions, the opposite

happens. This is simply a consequence of the persistence and pervasiveness of

the fluctuations and not necessarily a source. To he possibly invalid and

provoke disagreement, a theory of the "psychological" type must argue that

errors of excessive optimism (pessimism) play a major independent part in

generating booms (slumps). Thus, prospective profits are being overestimated

for some reason in certain periods and such errors spread and grow until dis-

covered in the markets for the "overproduced" goods and replaced for a time by

similarly infectious and partly self-validating underpredictions. For the

classics, access to more and better information on industry fortunes would help

reduce individual forecast errors and their cumulation; for Keynes, this could

not help much, since there is little knowledge on which expectations of the

future yield from investment could draw.1

     The first generation of formal theoretical models of cycles in aggregate

output slighted the expectational factors. This is true of the stochastic,

linear, and stable models (Frisch, 1933) and the deterministic, nonlinear, and

unstable ones (Hicks, 1950). But soon a reaction set in against the theories

of the latter type. The dangers of volatile market psychology, investment

collapse, etc., no longer loomed large in the midst of worldwide expansion and


     1Such knowledge is "usually very slight and often negligible" and so the
expectations "being based on shifting and unreliable evidence . . . are
subject to sudden and violent changes" (Keynes, 1936, pp. 149 and 315). Cf.
Alfred Marshall, Money, Credit, and Commerce, Macmillan, London, 1923, pp.
260—261, and Pigou, op. cit., pp. 66—69.
                                      —3—



growing prosperity, even though "Keynesian" ideas were still ascendant. There

was renewed recognition of the plurality of causes and diversity of elements in

the individual business cycles (Duesenberry, 1958). New influential theories

cast expectations in prominent roles and at the same time imputed much more

stability to the private sector than Keynes and his early followers did. The

permanent income and life cycle hypotheses made consumption forward—looking

rather than merely reactive, broadly wealth—dependent rather than income—

constrained (Friedman, 1957; Ando and Modigliani, 1963). The evolution of the

investment function also pointed to the importance of longer—term expected

("permanent") output (Eisner, 1978, ch. 4), while relying as well on relative

price variables such as the rental costs of capital (Jorgenson, 1963). All

these developments reduced the perceived significance of the accelerator—

multiplier interaction and the associated cumulative movements making for

instability.

     The original monetarist theory which challenged Keynesian economics in the

1960s asserts that changes in the supply of money are the main determinant of

changes in nominal income. The long—run version of this hypothesis reduces to

the old quantity theory of how trends in money produce trends in prices, but

there is much less clarity and agreement about the nature and direction of the

money—income relation in the short run. Here one critical element is a

relatively stable demand function for real money balances. The other is lags

in wage and price adjustments, which arise because expectations are taken to be

"adaptive," that is, backward—lookinq and involving gradual learning from, and

correction of, past errors. Given both these conditions, autocorrelated dis-

turbances in the form of alternating sequences of high and low monetary growth

rates produce, via changes in expected relative prices and rates of return,

fluctuations in aggregate demand and real economic activity, i.e., business
                                     —4—




cycles or growth cycles. The critical monetary impulses are treated as exogen—

ous and mainly policy induced. The "feedback" influence from business activity

to monetary growth is not analytically developed and integrated into a theory

of how money, prices, and real factors interact in the short run. Instead,

this is an essentially exogenous and monetary theory (Friedman and Schwartz

1963 a and b).

     Under adaptive expectations (AE) short—term money changes are implicitly

viewed as unanticipated and so are for some time the associated price changes.

For example, people will tend to underestimate the rising prices caused by a

sudden acceleration of monetary growth and hence overestimate their real money

balances. This will induce portfolio adjustments in response to the altered

relative prices or yields on a broad range of assets and then more transitory

spending on goods and services to liquidate the extra amounts of "redundant"

money. In the process, interest rates will first decline but then snap back as

spending, income, and prices rise, overshooting the new equilibrium paths.

This transmission process is seen as involving variable but on the average

lengthy lags. As the adjustments in the price level are incomplete and those

in wages may be particularly sluggish, employment and output react in a

cyclical manner.

     According to the "natural rate" hypothesis (Friedman, 1968; Phelps, 1967)

the deviations of output, employment, and unemployment from their equilibrium

levels can occur only if and as long as the expected rates of inflation differ

from the actual ones. However, such differences are eliminated only in an ill—

defined "long run," which in this context is often treated as if it meant "on

the average over the business cycle." The process of discovery and elimination

of the price forecast errors is sluggish in a world of frequent monetary and

real shocks, in which it is difficult to distinguish signals from noise, that
                                     —5--




is, absolute from relative price changes and persistent from temporary

movements.

     In the more recent equilibrium models, the hypothesis of AE is replaced by

that of rational expectations (RE). Here expectations are basically like pre-

dictions of the relevant and valid economic theory: free of any bias and

subject to random errors only (Muth, 1961; Lucas, 1972). Economic behavior is

guided by subjective probabilities which on the average agree with the observed

frequencies of the events in question. These frequencies have predictive

value, the processes to which they refer being assumed stable and known from

past learning experience. Unlike in Knight, 1921, or Keynes, 1936, there is no

uncertainty here as to what the applicable objective probability disturbances

are or whether they do in fact exist in any usable form.

     Under RE, all persistent monetary changes, inasmuch as they are predict-

able, will be correctly anticipated and met directly by proportional changes in

prices and related nominal variables. Only random monetary impulses can lead

to surprises and miscalculations which, in this view, are necessary to explain

any cyclical movements in real variables. It is the resulting errors in price

expectations, which must themselves be random and short-lived, that act as the

proximate cyclical impulses in this class of models.

     It is assumed that economic agents have timely and complete information

about their own markets but only incomplete or lagged information about other

"island" markets (Phelps, 1970) and about the economy—wide aggregates such as

the money stock and the overall price level. Supply and demand depend on per-

ceived changes in a broad set of real variables, but that set is in practice

limited to relative prices only. All agents are effectively treated as price

takers, so quantity signals are disregarded. Suppliers compare their current

price and wage opportunities with the expected (discounted future) opportun-
                                     —6—



ities and react positively to the excess of the former over the latter. These

intertemporal substitution effects are typically elastic, reflecting strong

competitive incentives to take advantage of temporarily higher real rates of

return. Now a general price rise due to an unanticipated monetary stimulus is

misperceived by agents as signaling increases in relative prices, which prompts

simultaneous upward adjustments of output and employment throughout the econ-

omy. Only in time, after having made their decisions, will the agents discover

that their relative price estimates were distorted as prices rose in other

markets as well. A retrenchment will then follow. When prices unexpectedly

fall or, which is more likely in our times, the actual inflation rates decline

below the anticipated rates, misperceptions of the opposite sign are predicted

to occur, which again will not be recognized and cleared up until they have

caused a retardation or recession in real economic activity. Thus these

theories rest on several strong, maintained hypotheses: intertemporal

substitution on the supply side, rational expectations, and lags of information

(Lucas, 1975, 1977; Sargent and Wallace, 1976; Sargent, 1976; Barro, 1980).

     The first generation of the RE models assumed flexibility of all prices

and continuous clearing of all markets, including the labor market; they also

implied the impotence of any monetary stabilization policy that is nonranclom

and capable of being anticipated. These propositions are highly controversial

and some critics regard them as entirely inconsistent with basic facts about

the economy (Arrow, 1978; Solow, 1980; Tobin, 1977). flnpirical studies of

intertemporal substitution show that it is difficult to test this hypothesis

directly; the evidence is mixed but for the most part unfavorable (Lucas and

Rapping, 1969; Hall, 1980; Altonji, 1982; Altonji and Ashensfelter, 1980; Clark

and Summers, 1979; Mankiw, Rotemberg, and Summers, 1982). The voluminous

theoretical and empirical work on price determination and labor contracts
                                        —7—



identifies a number of reasons why prices and wages adjust gradually to changes

in aggregate demand (Azariadis, 1975; Baily, 1974; Gordon,1981; Okun, 1981).

Some of the more recent RE models reflect these developments by introducing

contracts which predetermine the course of wages over some future time period

(Phelps and Taylor, 1977; Fischer, 1977; Taylor, 1980; 1982 McCallum, 1982).

Other models with RE retain continuous market clearing but rely largely or

exclusively on real, not monetary, disturbances to explain business

fluctuations (Kydland and Prescott, 1982; Black, 1982; King and Plosser, 1982;

Nelson and Plosser, 1982; Long and Plosser, 1983). The issues addressed in all

these diverse studies are important for the analysis of business cycles but

must be omitted from consideration in this paper which is limited to a single

aspect of this work, namely the treatment of agents' expectations. The related

problem of the accuracy of experts' forecasts will be noted later.


                                   2. Critique


       RE constitute the most common element in the recent theoretical work on

business cycles at least in the U.S., and there is wide agreement that their

use as a technical model—building principle has led to important developments

and new insights, notably in the criticism of some aspects of macroeconometric

models   and the analysis of competitive markets with imperfect information
(Lucas, 1976; Poole, 1976). Economics has always implicitly accepted the RE
hypothesis in   the analysis of steady states or stable market prototypes, where

all   active participants must be presumed   to know the processes involved.

      RE can be viewed as a condition of stochastic equilibrium, but general

equilibrium theorists raise a number of sweeping objections against its

application to macroeconomic dynamics (see Arrow, Solow, and Tobin).

Contingent future markets are conspicuous by their absence. Information is
                                     —8—




limited and unevenly diffused. The subjective probability distributions

underlying the forecasts of the individual decision—makers differ. No one can

predict the evolution of other people's expectations. The counter-argument is

that such criticisms, though they may be observationally correct, are not

helpful. Some apply to more than the RE models and would preclude much

innovative (though of necessity highly aggregative and abstract) theorizing

(Lucas, 1981). Some neglect the many advances in the understanding and

applications of the RE method, e.g., to the problem of diffuse or "asym-

metrical" information (S. Grossman, 1981).

     The fundamental difficulty is not with the rationality of costly infor-

mation uses, which it is only reasonable to assume, but with the availability

of sufficient information, which certainly cannot be taken for granted. Two

assumptions underlie what may be called the strong version of the REH:    (1)


that market incentives and penalties enforce continually and everywhere

optimal, i.e., cost—efficient predictions, and (2) that economic agents

generally possess adequate knowledge (data and models) so that their optimal

predictions are at least unbiased (in practice, such knowledge should make most

forecasts reasonably accurate). while (1) is presumably often well approxi-

mated, there seem to he no good a priori reasons why (2) should be always and

everywhere true. It is the claim of general validity of the REH in its strong

form (which is implicit in the macro—models built on this hypothesis) that many

economists believe is greatly overstated.

     The equilibrium RE models contain no learning processes: they assume that

agents have already learned all that they can know about the probability dis-

tributions they face. This fits best a stochastically stationary environment

that has persisted long enough for people to have acquired the knowledge of its

operation. Learning is impeded in a stochastic nonstationary environment, even
                                         —9—



  without structural change, since nonstationary processes come in many varieties

  and may interact in complicated
                                    ways. Moreover, actions based on incorrect
  beliefs how the economy works cause outcomes that may themselves be misleading.

  Some authors have argued that the learning process, even if optimal in some

  (e.g., least squares) sense, may not converge to the rational_expectations

 equilibrium; however, convergence has been proven by others for some relatively

 simple situations. In any event, during the learning process, optimal predic-

 tions may be approximated by adaptive expectations (AE) with varying correction

 coefficients (Taylor, 1975; B. Friedman, 1979).

      In a nonstationary world with structural changes and a mixture of random

 and autocorrelated disturbances, uncertainty in the sense of Knight and Keynes

 is prevalent. Here AE based on "experience," i.e., the observed frequencies of

 past events modified in the light of recent changes, will often prove unreli-

 able, but they are apt to include the bulk of the available information.
                                                                               (of
course, optimal predictions will also incorporate any genuine information about

 the future, e.g., credible news on prospective policy actions and domestic and

foreign economic trends, but such inputs are in short supply.) The amount of

valuable insight that can thus be obtained may be quite limited, but anyone who

uses it the best way he can in actions
                                         concerning the inherently uncertain
future would conform to a common sense definition of rational behavior.

     A closely related argument is that uncertainty is associated with varia-

tions in nonstationary means resulting from "permanent" changes in levels or

growth rates; in contrast, transitory, random deviations around stable trends

are connected with calculable risk.
                                       Uncertainty is held to be essential to the

persistence of cyclical contractions and the current RE models err in ignoring

it. They should allow permanent changes to occur but not to he identified

immediately. Stochastic shocks in the markets for commodities, money, and
                                           —10—



labor contain in each case a permanent and a transitory component. The two

cannot be reliably separated: new information reduces but does not eliminate

the confusion. The rational response to the shocks takes the form of gradual

adjustments of beliefs about the permanent values of the endogenous variables,

since the structure of information is such that adaptive or distributed-lag

predictions are optimal (Brunner, Cukierman, and Meltzer 1980; Meltzer, 1982).


                                      3. Evidence

      Consider testing for the "rationality" of any set of expectations or fore-

casts. Several related criteria have been formulated arid used. Let X be

the actual value and
                          jt
                               he the forecast of x t      made at the time t -   j.
Then the common test of unbiasedness is that the regression


(1)                              xt =a. +b.X +u.
                                       j       J jt   jt

should yield estimates of the coefficients a and b that are not signif-

icantly different from zero and one, respectively. This test is weak, since RE

are not merely free of systematic error but also efficient in the use of all

relevant information, 't—j ; the strict requirement is that


                                 E
(2)                                  X =E(XtII.)
where E    is   the expected value operator.

      However, condition (2) is too general to he testable. The set 1_ must

be restricted and identified. For expectations or forecasts made regularly or

by a replicable method, 'tj includes importantly the past errors knowable to

the source of         •   Here the requirement is that there be no significant

autocorrelation among the errors ut which could have been exploited to

improve X .        Thus rationality can be rejected by the evidence of either bias

or serially correlated residual errors or both. Of course, RE imply the equal-
                                                     —11—




  ity    of mean actual and predicted values; if
                                                               (as, b) = (0, 1) and
            = 0, E
  E(ut)            (Xt) —E   (x)
          Another   efficiency test    is to check whether the survey data reflect the

  autoregressive properties of the variable in
                                                               question. For example, let j = 1
  and compare the regressions


  (3)                X =                +            and        =
                                                                        x.   +


 For the expectation errors to be
                                  orthogonal, i.e., uncorrelated with the infor-
 mation available from the past history of
                                                             X, c must equal          for all i.
         Forecasts are often made in each successive period for several periods

 ahead. In this case, a test of consistency of such forecasts (or expectations)

 is available. Consider, for example,


 (4)                               =             +                  +
                                                     i=2    1 tj
 Here rationality requires that              =             for all i.
        These tests have, of course, a
                                              common core and logic; they are simply dif-
ferent ways of checking on the properties of expectations conditional
                                                                      upon a
certain set of information. If
                                any exogenous variables generating x can be

identified, further tests can be made to see whether their predictive power
                                                                                               is
fully reflected in

        Recent work using survey data has been preoccupied with tests for the

rationality of inflation expectations. The
                                                            most frequently used U.S. series
are the one-step and two—steps ahead
                                                 group average predictions from semiannual
surveys of economic forecasters conducted since
                                                                1947 by Joseph A. Livingston, a
syndicated financial columnist.

        The balance of the evidence is that
                                                       these data reject the REH according to
at least some of the above tests.
                                            Thus failures to meet the criteria of effi—
                                        —12—



ciency and/or consistency are reported by Pesando (1975) and Carison (1977),

failures to pass the unbiasedness tests by Wachtel (1974) and Gramlich,

(1979). pearce (1979) shows that univariate time—series (ARIMA) models would

have predicted inflation better than the Livingston averages did, which also

contradicts the rationality of the latter. Tests of individual forecasts

predominantly fail the unbiasedness tests, confirming and amplifying the

evidence for the aggregate forecasts, as shown by Figlewski and Wachtel

(1981). Moore (1977b) notes the pronounced tendency of the Livingston averages

to lag behind the actual inflation series. Most of the negative results relate

to the 1970s, a decade of particularly large unpredictable inflationary shocks,

but the earlier Livingston surveys do not fare much better. More favorable

tests are reported by Mullineaux (1978).

        Claims have been made that households predict inflation on the whole "more

rationally" than economic and business forecasters, but the comparisons seem

strained and inconclusive. The evidence comes from surveys of consumer atti-

tudes which over time have dealt mainly with the direction, not the size, of

the expected price changes. Some of the studies find that the hypothesis of

unbiasedriess cannot be rejected for these data, others merely that it is "not

so decisively rejected" as the inflation forecasts by economists and business

executives (Juster, 1979; Huizinga, 1980; Curtin, 1982; deLeeuw and McKelvey,

 1981; Gramlich, 1983).,2 The conclusion that various surveys of price

expectations produce as a rule mixed results, with a disturbingly large

proportion of rejections, applies to European and Japanese as well as U.S. data

 (Aiginger, 1981; Papadia, 1982).

        Relatively few authors have tested expectations data for variables other

 than   inflation.    For many early forecasts of U.S. aggregative series (GNP, con—


        2The   quotation on text is from Gramlich, 1983, p. 163.
                                      —13—



 sumption expenditures, business outlays on plant and equipment, and industrial

 production in the 1950s and 1960s), there is evidence of significant bias

 (Mincer and Zarnowjtz, 1969). The most common pattern is underestimation of

 growth, i.e., of levels in upward-trending series, and somewhat less frequently

 of cyclical changes in general (Theil, 1958; Zarnowitz, 1967). There are

 indications of adaptive learning behavior, with forecast revisions which are a

 fraction of the observed error (the smaller the longer the span of the forecast

 error). The AE models go back to the 1950s and have been used with some

 success in empirical research; whether they are "ad hoc" or, on the contrary,

entirely "rational," depends on the structure and uncertainty of the available

information (Cagari, 1956; Nerlove, 1958; Mincer, 1969; Frenkel, 1975; Mussa,

1975; Meltzer, 1982).

     Sales anticipations of U.S. manufacturing firms have been on the whole

negatively assessed by Hirsch and Lovell (1969), more positively by Pashigian

(1964) and Irvine (1981). The latter study finds that the data pass most of

the rationality tests before 1973 but not thereafter, and considers the

possibility of a structural change associated with the first OPEC oil price

shock. However, these Commerce data were discontinued in 1976.

     Underestimation of the mean actual change for 29 out of 39 variables

covered is reported in a recent comprehensive compilation of tests on expec—

tational survey data from several countries (Aiginger, 1981). These are

surveys of businessmen covering a variety of operational variables (sales,

orders, production, investment, inventories, selling prices); of consumers,

concerning prices and financial situation; and of business analysts and

economists, relating to GNP and its major components and the major price

indexes. The prevalence of underprediction of average changes is attributed to

asymmetries in the loss functions of economic agents: the loss from
                                          —14—



overoptimistic expectations tends to be larger than that for overpessimistic

expectations. Given these asymmetries, the apparent biases in the survey data

are themselves "rational" (on losses from forecasting errors, see Theil, 1958;

Brainard, 1967; Waud, 1976; Johansen, 1980).

        The strongest evidence favorable to RE comes from the literature on

"efficient markets" for financial assets and commodities. This is readily

understandable since these are well—organized competitive auction markets with

full price flexibility, where traders deal largely in standardized instruments,

transaction costs are low, and prompt and general collection and dissemination

of the information is vital and constitutes a central part of the functioning

of the market itself (Fama, 1970; Poole, 1976). Nevertheless, in this area,

too, some test results unfavorable to the REH have been reported, namely for

the interest rate forecasts surveyed in the Goldsmith-Nagan Bond and Money

Letter. These are forecasts of representative interest rates one and two

quarters ahead, made by active market participants. They were found to be in

large part not unbiased or efficient and not always consistent (B. Friedman,

1980).

        However, survey data reflect average expectations whereas what matters in

the marketplace are the expectations of marginal buyers and sellers. If the

most resourceful participants succeed in eliminating unexpected profit oppor-

tunities, the market will behave in a way consistent with the REN, although

many, perhaps even most, of the traders do not. Mishkin (1981) constructs

forecasts of interest rate and inflation from bond market data and provides

tests that fail to reject the rationality of the market interest rate

forecasts. This is taken to suggest that "the Goldsmith—Nagafl survey measures

•   .   • are   not an accurate description of the actual bond market forecasts" in

the period 1959—69 (ibid., p. 300). But the concurrent bond—market predictions
                                     —15—



of inflation fail the rationality test, and Mishkin's argument that the 1960s

were an unusual historical period because of rising inflation is not really

persuasive. (The inflation forecasts in the 1970s seem generally worse yet, and

this decade was in many respects even more "unusual." Long periods of

tranquility are hard to find.)

     Clearly, the evidence from the surveys has certain important limitations

and must be assessed with caution. But it is not good "positive economics" to

dismiss it on the ground that only theories, not their assumptions, can he

tested. Tests on the survey data focus on the issue of expectation formation.

Where direct observations on expectations or forecasts are not used, the

evidence generally consists of joint tests of an expectations hypothesis and

the particular model incorporating that hypothesis. Diverse and rich expecta-

tional survey data are now available and in need of much careful exploration.

Where independent tests based on such materials are in substantial agreement,

they have lessons to impart that should be taken seriously,


         4. Some Illustrations and laplications for Cyclical Analysis

     Table 1 collects the evidence on cyclical turning—point and directional

forecasts for U.S. income and output. The record of the annual end-of-year

predictions of GNP is quite good, that of the earlier mid-year predictions much

worse (section 1). However, few reversals occurred in this annual series

during the period covered. Directional changes over sequences of two

semiannual periods or four quarters are more frequent and much more difficult

to anticipate and indeed these forecasts have not been much better than

guesswork (sections 2 and 3). This and other evidence suggests that business

analysts and economists are often able to recognize turns near the time they

occur but not well ahead of the event (Zarnowitz, 1967 and 1968; Fels and

Hinshaw, 1968; Moore, 1969).
                                                   —16—



                                                 Table    1


                     Forecasts of Turning Points and Directions of Change
                                      in GNP and Real GNP, 1947—1976.

                              1 •    Annual Data, GNP, 1947—1965


                                                                 End of            Middle of
Correct forecasts of Turning Points (TP)                      Preceding Year     Preceding Year
                                                              ___________________________________
 as percentage of

     All predicted TP                                            93 (34)             60 (42)
     All actual TP                                               74 (27)             50 (35)
     All periods covered                                         89 (57)             64 (51)

                                    2. Semiannual Data, GNP, 1947—1964

Correct forecasts of directional change                       Semiannual Change Forecasts, 1947—64
 as percentage of                                                0—6 months       6—12 months

     All periods covered                                         73 (58)             62 (58)

                                    3. Quarterly Data, GNP, 1959—1963

Correct forecasts of directional change            Quarter—to Quarter Change Forecasts, 1959—63
  as percentage of                               0—3 months 3—6 months    6—9 months 9—12 months

        All periods covered                        68 (65)          78 (77)      69 (72)       82 (82)

                                    4. Annual Data, Real GNP, 1959—1976

                                                                Mean Absolute    Percentage of Total
                                                 Number        Error, % Points      Absolute Error

Underestimation errors                              33                1.12              46.8
Overestimation errors                               21                 .92              24.4
                                                     8                2.85              28.8
Turning point errors


NOTE:       Forecasts or actual observations of no change are counted as half TP and half no
            TP. Figures in parentheses are the expected values on the assumption of
            independence and fixed marginal totals. The span 0—3 months refers to the change
            from the current quarter to the one ending three months hence; 3—6 months refers
            to the change from quarter ending three months hence to the one ending six months
            hence; etc.

SOURCE: Zarnowitz (1968 and 1979); Moore (1969).
                                                —17—



         Turning—point errors account for only 13 percent of all errors in a collection of

 annual forecasts of real GNP, 1959—76, but they are on the average 2h/2_3 times larger

 than other errors (Table 1, section 4).      Real GNP is, of course, much more cyclical than
 nominal GNP and of central importance in business—cycle
                                                               analysis and forecasting, but this
 analysis still understates the importance of turning points because it is limited to

 annual   data. In   the present-day practice of quarterly multiperiod forecasting,

 directional   errors play a much larger and more adverse role yet, as shown by studies        of
 recent   U.S. forecasts (Zarnowitz, 1979, 1982). Widespread cumulative errors were
 associated with missing a downturn and projecting continued growth instead, as in 1973-74
 and 1981, or with predicting an upturn prematurely, as in 1982.
        Realistically   judged, annual GNP forecasts in the U.S. earn good marks; moreover,

they have improved, compared with the earlier post-World War II years, in the 1960s and

even in the turbulent 1970s. However, quarterly changes beyond the first two quarters

ahead are much more difficult to predict than the year ahead, and here the record is

actually much worse. Errors of recent multiperiod predictions of real growth and

inflation show a rapid buildup beyond     the spans of 2—4   quarters. Underestimation of
change    is characteristic of most forecasts, hut in periods of unanticipated retardations
and recessions real growth tends to he overpredicted for
                                                         some time as does the rate of
price—level change in periods of unanticipated disinflation
                                                                   (Zarnowitz, 1967, 1979, 1983,
1984).

        I have applied tests of unbiasednegs (based on regression equations of type (1)

above) to a large set of forecasts by individual
                                                       participants in quarterly business
outlook surveys conducted since 1968 by the znerican Statistical Association and the

National Bureau of Economic Research (ASA—NBER). Table 2, column 1, shows that only about

20 percent or fewer of the forecasters fail these F        tests   at the 10 percent   significance
level   for five selected variables: percentage changes in nominal GNP, real GNP, and

nominal consumer expenditures for durable goods, and levels of the unemployment rate and
the changes in business inventories. In contrast, nearly 70 percent fail the tests for

the forecasts of inflation (rate of change in the implicit price deflator) •   More detailed

results (Zarnowitz, 1983) would show that this contrast extends to each horizon but is

particularly sharp for the longer ones (the targets include the current quarter and the

four successive future quarters following each survey date).

     Table 2, column 2, shows that about two thirds of the inflation forecasts and one—

half of the inventory investment forecasts had autocorrelated errors; the corresponding

proportions for the other variables range from 24 to 42 percent. These tests use series

of errors based exclusively on data for past predictions and realizations that were

available to participants in the successive surveys. The underlying argument is that the

forecasters could and should have used this information so as to exploit and thereby

eliminate all systematic elements in it. However, it must be noted that these

computations required creation of a comprehensive computer file of successive vintages of

the data covered. Keeping track of the many successive revisions in complex data, partic-

ularly the quarterly national income and product accounts, is not a small or low—cost

operation in which forecasters can be expected to engage routinely.

     In sum, tests of the REH produce results that are predominantly negative for the

forecasts of inflation but much more favorable for those of real growth and some other

important variables. These findings are generally consistent with others reported in the

literature (Figlewski and Wachtel,1981; McNees, 1978).
                                         —19--




                                        Table 2

            Percentages of Individual Forecasts That Failed the Tests for
              rinbiasedness and Serially Uncorrelated Errors, 1968—1979



        Variable                                 Percent of Forecasts with Significant
                                                       F   tests             Q  tests
Gross national product (GNP)                             21.0                    37.1
Implicit price deflator (IPD)                            69.1                    66.2
ON? in constant dollars (RGNP)                           20.5                    27.0
Unemployment rate (UR)                                   15.4                    42.4
Consumer expenditures for durable goods (CEDG)           14.7                    23.7
Change in business inventories (CBI)                     17.2                    50.0




NOTE:      The level of significance is 10 percent. The F tests are for H0:
           (a, ) = (0, 1), see eq. 1 and text above. These entries refer to all
           individuals who participated in at least 12 of the 42 quarterly surveys
           conducted in the period 1968:4—1979:1 (75 for CEDG, 7 each for each of
           the other variables). The Box—pierce Q = n(n + z)
           where k= cov(u ,u      )/var(u) ,     tests
                                                                  (n —
                                                                            k)p
                                                         for the presence of autocorre
           lation in the forecast errors. These entries refer to all individuals
           who participated in more than 12 consecutive surveys (18—20 depending on
           the target variable).

SOURCE: ASA-NBER   Business   Outlook Survey.
                                    —20—

     Inflation has been underestimated most of the time during the 1970s in both

the short and, particularly, longer forecasts. Mainly for this reason, the mean

errors are generally negative for all nominal variables covered. They tend to be

positive for the predictions of rates of change in real GNP (and accordingly

negative for the unemployment rate), mainly because of the missed downturns in

this period of surprisingly frequent recessions and stagflation (slow growth and

high inflation) coming after a long period of prosperity in the 1960s. The first

two lines in Table 3 provide a summary of the evidence for the above statements.

     The most biased predictions are not necessarily the least accurate. For

example, the inflation forecasts compare favorably with the real growth forecasts

in terms of the average measures of relative accuracy and correlation between the

predicted and the actual values (Table 3, lines 3 and 4). These comparisons show

the ASA-NBER survey participants on the whole in a reasonably good light.

     The group mean forecasts from a series of surveys have smaller variances of

errors and hence are on the average more accurate than most of the corresponding

forecast series of the individual participants. This is a strong conclusion,

which applies to all variables and predictive horizons covered and is consistent

with evidence for different periods and from other studies (Zarnowitz, 1967,

1984). However, a small number of the more regular survey members did perform

better in most respects than the composite forecasts (Table 3, lines 5 and 6).

     As noted earlier, failures to pass tests for rationality have been blamed in

some writings on special features of this or that sample period (e.g., the

Vietnam war inflation in the 1960s; OPEC and the supply shocks in the 1970s).

Tests for the stability of coefficients (the F tests associated with Chow) have

been applied to regressions of type (1) for the individual inflation forecasts to

compare periods before and after 1974. For large majorities of the forecasters,

the hypothesis that the coefficients remained the same could not be rejected.3


     30n the average across the different target quarters, the rejections
accounted for 14 and 21 percent of the forecasters at the 5% and 10% signif i-
cance levels, respectively.
                                           —21—

                                           Table 3



               Selected Statistics on the Properties and Accuracy of Individual
                      Forecasts from Business Outlook Surveys, 1968-1979

                                        GNP       IPD    RGNP      UR      CEDG    CBI
 1. Mean of mean errors (_)a            —0.1      —0.4    0.3      —0.1    —0.3    —1.7
 2. Underestimates, percentb             69        96     14        64      63      79
 3. Relative accuracy (Mi/Ma)C            3         5      9        .1       9      .7
 4. Mean correlation (_)d                           5      5        .8      .4      .5
      Percent better than group:
 5.                  Mean                20       26      22        29      24      33
6.                   Range              13—35 11—37      18—27     8—42    19—31   29—38

NOTE:          For symbols denoting the variables, see Table 2. All measures refer to
               the sample of 79 individual forecasters (75 for CEDG) who participated
               in at least 12 surveys. They are based on the corresponding statistics
               for the five target quarters QO, . . . Q4 (where QO denotes the survey
               quarter, Q1—Q4 the four successive future quarters).

        aError Cis defined as predicted minus actual percentage change for CNP,
IPD, RGNP, and CEDG, and as predicted minus actual level for Ti?. and CBI.
  =        C., where         is the mean error of the th individual's forecasts
 i = 1,    .    . ., n)
      bpercentage of individual forecasters with mean errors that are negative.

     CRatio of the average root mean square errors of forecasts to the root mean
square value of the target series (the sum of its mean value squared and its
variance).
      d   r = coefficient    of correlation between predicted and actual values for

the th individual, corrected for the degrees of freedom. . =

     ePercentage of individual forecasts with root mean square errors
                                                                      (Mi)
smaller than the corresponding root mean square errors for all forecasters who
responded to the same surveys (M j)• Mean and range refer to the percentage of
cases where Mi/Mgi < 1 across he forecasts for QO, .             . . Q4.
SOtJRCE:ASA-NBER Business Outlook Survey.
                                    —22—




    If the government has prompter access to information and better forecasts

than the private sector, then its monetary stabilization policies can be effec-

tive even in the presence of rational expectations and full price flexibility;

otherwise, according to the same argument, agents and markets will anticipate and

neutralize all such nonrandom discretionary policies. Comparisons of the annual

January forecasts of the Council of Economic Mvisors (published in the Economic

Report of the President) with the more or less concurrent average forecasts from

private surveys offer no evidence of any significant and consistent advantage on

the side of the government. Thus the mean absolute error of GNP forecasts for

1962—68 was 1.3 percent for both the collected private predictions and those of

the Economic Report (Zarnowitz, 1972, pp. 212—214). The median forecasts from

the November ASA-NBER surveys had slightly higher, those from the February

surveys slightly lower, mean absolute errors than the corresponding Economic

Report forecasts for nominal GNP growth, real GNP growth, and inflation in 1969—

76 (Moore, 1977a). It is usually not very difficult in retrospect to find

plausible reasons why some government policies proved reasonably effective,

others ineffective or even counterproductive. The record of the policies is

indeed mixed and the reasons vary, including prominently errors of judgment and

foresight hut not differences in such errors between the government and the

private economy.

     Expectations or forecasts for the same aggregate variables are likely to

draw upon common, publicly available information and knowledge of certain estab-

lished techniques and models. Informal exchanges, opinion polls, predictions

publicized in the media and sold as expert advice——all these are ways in which

forecast makers and users interact and influence each other directly and indir-

ectly. In the process, the differences among the individual forecasts are likely

to he reduced as many risk-averters may not wish to deviate much from the
                                      —23—



 prevalent "consensus." Yet responsible forecasters will not simply imitate each

 other but use independent judgment so that their predictions will contain some

 independent information. Indeed, if simple or weighted averages of individual

 forecasts result in some net gains in accuracy, as is often the case, it is

 because these forecasts are to some extent diversified.

      Table 4 compares the root mean square errors of the ASA—NBER group

 averages (M9) with the corresponding measures for forecasts from a major

 corporation and two well—known econometric service bureaus (Me) The ratios

Ms/Me vary between .84 to 1 .59; when averaged across the target quarters, the

range is narrowed to .95—1.11. There is considerable variation in the detail,

but most of the ratios are close to one. IBM seems to be ahead of DRI, hut gaps

in reporting impair comparability here. The early Wharton forecasts often came

out before the ASA—NBER surveys (and regularly precede the mid-quarter Wharton

forecasts by approximately one month), so that they are at some informational

disadvantage. The preponderance of Me/Ms > 1    (except in the case of IBM)

suggests that business economists' forecasts, which tend to be more judgmental,

compare well with the forecasts constructed with the aid of large econometric

models. However, it should be noted that the survey predictions benefit from the

averaging of various inputs, including those from outside and inside econometric

models (see below). To he sure, the model forecasts also include a large

component of "judgmental adjustments," which have been shown to be on the average

helpful. These findings are consistent with other evidence on the comparative

accuracy of the leading corporate and econometric—model forecasters (McNees,

1975; Zarnowitz, 1979).

     The participants in the ASA—NBER surveys have been asked to rank the methods

they use, and Chart 1 sums up the evidence on the relative importance of the

different approaches on the average and over time. The most widely used set of
                                                           —24—




                                                          Table 4
                          Forecasts   from Business Outlook Surveys and Econometric Models,
                                                       1968—1979


Model Compared                              Ratios of Root Mean Square Errors: Model/ASA_NBERC
with ASA—NBER and
                         statisticb         GNP         IPD         RGNP      UR          CEDG       Cr31
period Covereda
                         Mean                .98         .95        .95        .98         .97           .96
IBM, 1968—1979
                         Range            .89—1.09    .90—.98     .86—1.03   .86—1.09   .91—1.01    .90—1.01

                         Mean               1.06        1.05        1.08       1.07       1.01           .96
DRI, 1968—1979
                                          .97—1.09    .97—1.18    .91—1.26   .89—1.59   .87—1.10    .86—1.03
                         Range

Early Wharton,
                         Mean                1.00        1.05     1.08        n.a.         1.06       1.11
  1975—1979
                                           .85—1.18   .84—1.120 .99.1.18      n.a.      1.01—1.12   .81—1.36
                         Range

Mid—quarter Wharton,
                         Mean                .96        1.11        1.04       n.a.       1.02        1.10
   1975—1979
                                           .88—1.02   .96—1.29    .99—1.11     n.a.     .94—1.10    .86—1.28
                         Range



     aIBM (International Business Machines Corp.) and DRI (Data Resources, Inc.) forecasts are those reported to
the ASA—NBER surveys. Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates, Inc. forecasts are those reported by the source
in the first month of each quarter ("early") and in the second month ("mid—quarter"). The ASA-NBER forecasts used
here are the mean group forecasts.

     bMean and range of the ratios for QO—Q4.

                                                                     for the given model and        M5    is the RMSE for the
     CThe        are of the
            ratios              form Me/Ms , where   Me is the RMSE
business survey (ASA/NBER).      For symbols denoting the variables, see Table 2.

     n.a.    not available.
                                                                                   —2




                                                                                   Chart   1


                                       Seventy—nine Regular Participants in the ASA—NBER Quarterly Business Outlook
                                                                                                                    Surveys,
                                           Percentage Distributions by Reported Methods, 1968:4—1979:1 and Subperiods

              Informal                       Inside                        Outside
                   GNP                                                                               Leading Indicators
                                           Econometric                    Econometric                          and                   Other
                  Model                          Model                       Model                   Anticipations Surveys
                                                                                                                                                         - 100


       Not
                                                                                                                                                           90
       Used

       (N.U.)
                                                                                                                                                           80

70
                                                                                                      N.U.                                                 70
       Rank              i   ii   Hi                                     .0.

60     _____
                                                                                                                                                           60
                                         N.U.                                                                                 N.U.
50                                                                  _____                             :::::
                                                                     :.::                                                                                  50


4
       1st
                                                                                                                                                           40
       Rank
       (F.R.)                                                                                        L.A.
30
        /                                                            .     .

                                                                               I                                                                           30
            /1/                          .-.•                        ....
                                                    '
       t//                               L.A.:           ''   '''
                                                                                                     :::::                                                 20
                     I

                                                                                               iii   :::.:
                                                                    :::.                                            III
                                                                                                                             L.A.       I    II
                                                                                                     .....                                         III     10

                                                                    P.R.
                    __ _                                                           Liii                       Elm                      ri-ri
    NOTE:    The large bars (0-100%) refer to the total period 1968—1979. The
                                                                                small bars, marked                    I, II, and lIT, show        the
             first-rank percentages only for the following
                                                           subperiocls, each containing 14 surveys:                     I, 1968:4—1972:1;
             II,    1972:2—1975:3;      III, 1975:4_1979:l
                                     —26—



procedures labeled the "informa_ GNP model" consists of predicting the major

expenditure components of GNP, adding these figures to obtain the overall

forecast, and checking and adjusting the results for plausibility and consis-

tency. It is an eclectic approach in which judgment typically plays a large

role, although various models of macroeconomic relationships are often employed

as well. bout three quarters of the forecasters have used it and some 50 to 60

percent ranked it first. Between 10 and 18 percent of the survey members (the

proportion has been rising) relied mainly on their own ("inside") econometric

models. bout half of all participants reported subscribing to services of

"outside" econometric models and nearly one—tenth ranked them first. Leading

indicators were ranked second by a large majority of the forecasters and used as

a complementary approach along with anticipations surveys. "Other methods"

(write—in) is a rather negligible category.

     Mean forecasts and their accuracy measures were computed and compared for

three subsets of the group of the 79 "regular" participants in the ASA—NBER

surveys, namely those who ranked first the informal GNP model (INF), the inside

econometric model (INS), and the outside econometric model (OUT), respectively.

Chart 2 superimposes the series of root mean square errors of the average fore-

casts of real growth made by the groups INS and OUT (broken lines) on the corre-

sponding series for all participants (solid lines). The subscribers (OUT)

perform better most of the time and on the average than the model proprietors

(INS), particularly for QO (panel A), by smaller differentials for Q3 (panel

B). This may be explained by the fact that OUT is dominated by large corpora-

tions using well—known econometric service bureaus and their own professional

staff, whereas INS includes not only some of the leading models maintained by

teams of experts but also a few models used exclusively by the reporting

individuals.
                                                                  —27—



%                                                                 ddrt   2.
2.6

2.4
                                                 Root Mean                      of Real Grcth (RGNP) Forecasts
                                                 ASA-NREIt Quarterly          liusineas Outlook Surveys, 1966—79

2.2     A.   Predictions for QO

2.0


1.8


1.6                        Inside Econometric        Models
1.4


1.2                                          I   -
                                         I'
 .6

 96
                                                                                                                   .1.8

.4
                                                                                                                   1.6

    2
                                                                                                                   1.4
                                  Part!ciDan ta
0


                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                     U


                                                                                                                    .6


                                                                                                                     4


                                                                                                                    .2


                                     72.I'                                                     7711i     lSt'i
                                                          —28—

                                                          tart 2.
                                                        (nc1ud.d)



            a. pr.d.ictiona fer Q3




                        k
                                     Lsid. £ccncr.tric ModLS
                       I                      (INS)




2.0




 .4
 .2

 0

                                     A11 RsqJ&z
                                      Ptrti.cipents




                                                                           .8
                                                                           .6
                                                                           .4
      "'I                                                           1.'i
                                        —29—




        Chart 3 shows for inflation forecasts what Chart 2 did for the real growth

 forecasts, using the same format. Here again OUT is visibly better than INS for

 QO (panel A). For the longer Q3 forecasts, however (panel B), the overall RMSE

 levels are virtually the same for the two groups. (These levels are shown on

 each of these graphs as the short horizontal lines labeled "means" in the right—

hand margins.)

        Pdthough these differentials are apparently systematic, they are small, par-

ticularly for the longer forecasts, and of uncertain significance (cf. Zarnowitz,

1971, esp. Table 1—6). What is undoubtedly significant, even striking, are the

high correlations among these forecasts and their errors, which are clearly

demonstrated by these charts and others (not shown) for the different target

variables covered. The averages for INF, the largest group, are not plotted in

Charts 2 and 3 to avoid crowding, but their relative accuracy is high, close to

that of OUT.

        Finally, Table 5 provides detail on the relative accuracy and tests of

unbiaseclness for the real growth and inflation forecasts by the participants

included in groups INS and OUT. It indicates that there is much differentiation

among the individual forecasters. The group averages conceal this diversity.

Sixteen of the 23 sources failed none of the F tests at the 5% significance

level for their real GNP growth predictions, hut only three (all in the OUT

group) can boast of the same for their inflation predictions. The ratios of the

individual to the overall group average RMS errors,    Mj/Mgii mostly exceed

unity, reflecting the already noted gains from combining the forecasts, hut 21

out of the total of 46 listed Mi/Mgi ranges include one or more ratios of less

than one. The reader can locate a number of sources with excellent results for

one or the other of the variables covered, and a few with very good results for

both.
                                                                                       —ju—
                                                                                      Chart      3
Perceflti


  1.6


  1.4                                                     Root Mean                        Square Errors of Inflation (IPD) Forecasts,
                                                             ASA-NBER                      Quarterly Business Outlook Surveys, 1968—79
                        A.   Predictions for QO
                                                                                       I                                               Econometric Models
  1.2                                                                                                                         Inside

  1.0


    .8                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                              A              I'       ——       —-
     C)
                                                                                                                                                                       Means
                                                                                                                                                                  t

    .4
                                                                                                                  'I  V
             1



     0




                                                                                           All   Regular      Participants                                                          erce
                                                                                                                                                                                    1.4

                                                                                                                                                                                    1.2


                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0

                                                                             I'                                                                                                       .8


                                                                                                                                                                                      .6



                                                                    Pa                                                    I                       I'
                                                                                                                      /
                                                                                                       'S         /                                                                  .2
                                                                I
                                                                                                                                  '         -.,
                                                               '4                                                                       —              --J
                    '                       I     I   I
                                                          'I
                                                          V
                                                          I              I             •
                                                                                                     Outside Econometric Models
                                                                                                            t--   t- 1
                                                                                                                                      'I'                                           Lo
             -I


            6. Li                  7o&-
                                                                                  j
                                                                                                                   7ct
                                                                                                                                  rmr                        7i
                                                                          —ii-—


                                                                         Chart 3
                                                                    (concluded)

2.4

2.2..

                     B.   Predictions for Q3
2.0


1.8


1.6

                                           Inside Econometric
1.4                                            Model

1.2.                                                                                                                                                              2.4

1.0                                                                                                                                                               2.2
                               It    A
        —•1—                                                                                                                                   A
  H         Means                                                                                                                              I'
                                                                                                                         A
  6.




 .4


 .2                                                                                                                                                               .1.4
                                I

 0                              I                                                                                   Participants

                               I     I
                                      t
                                                                                                                                                          Means
                                      I
                                       I

                                                                      Outside


                                                                                                                         'I-
        I        I
                                                      I    -.   I                   1           I   I       I   I    I         I   I   I       T
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                    IlI       r 1                       4                I                 J
        S   £1                 70                                         7'i't         7..'i           76"
                                                                                                                                                   Ir7:
                                                                 —32—




                                                             TABLE S

                         TWENTY-THREE USERS OF ECONOMETRIC MODELS, SELECTED MEASURES OF RELATIVE         ACCURACY
                            AND TESTS OF BIAS, FORECASTS OF REAL GROWFH AND INFLATION, 1968-1979

                                                 Forecasts  of real growth (RGNP)         Forecasts of inflation (IPD)
                                                 ___________________________________                        L—tests
                                                                    P—tests
                                    Nuther of
                                                 Range of  the      significant           Range of the      significant
                                    Surveys
                                                         ratios     at the 5% level       M./M   ratios     at the 5% level
Code   0   Affiliation              Covered       1                                         j    qi
                                                      gi
                                                           (2)              (3)                    (4)              (5)
                                      (1)

                                                 Inside Econometric Model (INS)

                                                                             4                  1.33—1.49            5
                                      35              1.15—1.59
 31        Academics                                                                                                 2
                                      24              1.06-1.60              0                  1.13—1.30.
 40        Academic           *                                                                                      3
                                      24               .98—1.20              0                   .91—1.30
 42        Large mfq. company
                                      34               .96-111               0                  1.00—1.14            5
 54        Large bank
                                                                             0                  1.00—1.42            1
 60        Government employee *      17               .90—1.23
                                                                             1                   .97—1.16            4
 65                                   30              1.00—1.13
           Large consulting firm                                                                                     3
                                      24              1.01—1.39              3                  1.04—1.24
 78        Large mfg. company                                                                                        5
                                      34              1.01—1.31              1                   .98—1.46
 82        Business           *
                                                       .94-1.03              0                   .09-1.01            3
 09        Large mfg. company         20
                                                      1.05—1.84              0                   .93—1.46            4
 93        Government employee        20
                                      27              1.16—2.30              4                  1.14—1.84            5
100        Private consultant
                                                                             0                  1.17—1.52            3
124        Academic                   18              1.10—1.59
                                                                             0                   .85—1.04            2
133        Government employee        22               •   78—1, 50
                                      23              1.08—1.45              2                  1.36—2.65            S
148        Academic

                                                 Outside Econometric     Model    (OUT)

                                                                             0                   .92-1.22            4
  1        Large mfg. company         22               .09—1.15
                                                                             0                  1.03—1.32            5
  8        Business                   33               .99—1.22
                                                      1.01—1.16              0                  1.20—1.53            0
 16        Business                    12
                                                                             1                  1.01—1.87            4
 22        Business                   29              1.01—1.41                                               •

                                       25              .67-1.10              0                   .90-1.00            0
 44        Large bank
                                                       .96-1.06              0                   .99—1.06            5
 49        Large bank                  40
                                                      1.06—1.24              0                   .94—1.16             3
 81        Public utility              19
                                                                             0                   .96—1.20             3
 86        Business                    213             .91—1.18
                                       16             3.01-1.65              0                  1.09—2.44            0
 96        Consulting



 *A well-known model.                        §Uo adjustments to the     model or other methods   used.
                                         —33--




                              5. Concluding      thaervations
      Recent   theoretical work in macroeconomics has directed scholarly attention

 to the role of information and expectations in business
                                                                cycles, which is certain-
 ly an important subject. What has been called the "rational expectations revolu-

 tion" has stimulated much ingenious effort at
                                                    model—building and —testing, which
 produced many interesting results. But the original claims on behalf of the new

 "classical" models with rational expectations and
                                                        continuous market clearing have
 also encountered strong resistance by those who view them as greatly overstated

 or implausible. More importantly, there is considerable evidence that these

 models attribute to decision and policy makers more knowledge of how the economy

 works, better information and foresight, and
                                                  prompter price adjustments in reac-
 tion to signals of change than people can have or make, given the complex dyna-

mics of the modern world and the irreducible
                                                  uncertainty about the future.

Cyclical turning points in aggregate measures of economic activity more often

than not surprise even expert forecasters, while lags in the public recognition

of such events tend to be considerably
                                          longer yet. Early signals from leading
indicators (which are generally sensitive and erratic series that are themselves

difficult to predict) require confirmation and are sometimes ignored or disbe-

lieved even after they get it. The speedups and slowdowns of inflation also

usually arrive unanticipated. Indeed, the great majority of inflation predic-

tions since the late 1960s fail the rationality tests and show a strong under-

estimation bias. This applies to both experts' forecasts and agents' expecta-

tions. Much less bias was found in the survey data for other variables of major

importance for the analysis of business cycles.

     It is probable that in many cases expectational data which fail to meet the

strict rationality criteria in ex post tests would prove entirely consistent with

optimizing ex ante behavior once the consequences of
                                                         uncertainty, defective
                                     -34 -




models (knowledge), and incomplete, tardy, or costly information are taken into
account. But the concept of rational expectations in this general or weak sense

does not have the striking, definite implications of the original strong version.

     Where expectations are not strictly "rational," it does not follow that they

must be merely extrapolative, regressive, or adaptive. In fact, past studies

have found that such time—series models explain statistically at best little more

than half of the variance of the expectations reported in surveys (Aiginger,

1979). My own reading of survey data is that expectations are in general neither

mere projections of the past nor flashes of intuition about the future. They are

combinations of both extrapolative and autonomous components, which vary across

individuals and change over time. The extrapolations are based on past data for

both the variable to be predicted and other related factors: expectations are

endogenous. But past developments and commitments, and current observations and

news, also have implications for the future, which economic forecasters and

agents try to extract and exploit.

     Expectations matter a great deal but they are not all—important. Not all

the past is bygones. The evidence that forecasts so often underestimate economic

growth during recoveries and early expansions detracts from the hypothesis of

excessive optimism (advanced in particular by Pigou and Jhr). However, during

the late expansion stages, when the high levels of activity suggest a "boom" but

growth typically slows down, overoptimism does show up in that now the growth

prospects tend to be overassessed. This continues a fortiori in the earliest

stage of contraction as a consequence of the widespread failure to recognize the

downturn. Later, after the recession becomes evident, more of it is commonly

anticipated and expectations may turn overpessimistic for some time. If the

depressed conditions persist, these negative attitudes are likely to deepen and

become in part self—validating (Keynes' case). But normally expectations of
                                     —35—



resumed growth soon assert themselves, sometimes prematurely as in 1981. As

these observations suggest, predictions of the future almost inevitably contain

strong elements of projections of the past: extrapolation of trends, regressiv—

ity toward the "normal," partial adjustments for recent errors. Expectations

that affect the course of the economy can he presumed to he basically rational,

that is, to use effectively the limited available knowledge and information, hut

they are diversified and need not always be self—validating.
                                     R- 1




                                   References

Aiginger, Karl, "pirische Informatiorien zur Bildung von Erwartungen," If o—
    Studien, 25, (1/2), 1979, PP. 83—135.

_______ "flupirical Surveyed Expectational Data and Decision Theory," paper
   presented at the 15th CIRET Conference, September 30—October 3, 1981, Athens,
   Greece. Summary in H. Laumer and M. Ziegler, eds., International Research in
   Business Cycle Surveys, Aldershot: Gower, 1982.

Altonji, Joseph G., "The intertemporal Substitution Model of Labour Market
    Fluctuations: An npirical Analysis," Review of Economic Studies, XLIX,
    1982, pp. 783—824;

         and 0. Ashenfelter, "Wage Movements and the Labor Market uilibrium
    Hypothesis," Economica, 47, 1980, pp. 217—245.

Ando, Albert and Frarico Modigliani, "The 'Life Cycle' Hypothesis of Saving:
    Aggregate Implications and Tests," American Economic Review, March 1963, pp.
    55—84.

Arrow, Kenneth J., "The Future and the Present in Economic Life," Economic
    Inquiry 16, 1978, pp. 157—169.

Azariadis, Costas, "Implicit Contracts arid Underemployment Eui1ibria," Journal
    of Political Economy, 83, December 1975, pp. 1,183—1,202;

Baily, Martin N., "Wages and Eknployment under Uncertain Demand," Review of
    Economic Studies, 41, January 1974, pp. 37—50.

Barro, Robert J., "A Capital Market in an quilibrium Business Cycle Model,"
    Econometrica, 48, September 1980, Pp. 1393—1417.

Black, Fischer, "General Equilibrium and Business Cycles," Working Paper,
    Massachusetts Institute of Techonology, rev. July 1982.

Brainard, William, "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy," American
    Economic Review, 57, May 1967 (Papers and Proceedings, 1966), pp. 411-425.

Brunner, Karl, Alex Cukierman, and Allan H. Meltzer, "Stagflation, Persistent
    Unemployment, and the Permanence of Economic Shocks," Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 6, October 1980, pp. 467—492.

Cagan, Phillip, "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in Milton Friedman,
    ed., Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, University of Chicago Press,
    1956.

Clark, Kim B., and Lawrence H. Summers, "Labor Market Dynamics and
    Unemployment: A Reconsideration," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,
    1979, PP. 13—60.

Curtin, Richard T., "Determinants of Price Expectations: Evidence from a Panel
    Study," in M. Laumer and M. Ziegler, eds., International Research on Business
    Cycle Surveys. Aldershot: Gower 1982.
                                         R- 2




 deLeeuw, Frank, and Michael McKelvey, "Price Expectations of Business Firms,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, I, 1981, PP. 299—313.

 Duesenberry, James S., Business Cycles and Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill, New
     York, 1958.

 Eisner, Robert, Factors in Business Investment, Ballinger Publishing Company for
     the NBER, Cambridge, Mass., 1978, esp. ch. 4.

 Fama, Eugene F., "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Eiipirical
     Work," Journal of Finance, 25, May 1970, pp. 383—417.

 Fels, Rendigs, and C. Elton Hinshaw, Forecasting and Recognizing Business Cycle
     Turning Points, NBER, New York, 1968.

 Figlewski, Stephen, and Paul Wachtel, "The Formation of Inflationary
     Expectations," Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (February) 1981, pp.
    1—10.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
    Money Supply Rule," ibid., pp. 191—205.

Frenkel, Jacob A., "Inflation and the Formation of Expectations," Journal of
    Monetary Economics 1 (November) 1975, Pp. 403—421.

Friedman, Benjamin M., "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme Information
    Assumptions of 'Rational Expectations' Macromodels," Journal of Monetary
    Economics 5 (January) 1979, PP. 23—41.

_______  "Survey Evidence on the 'Rationality' of Interest Rate Expectations,"
    Journal of Monetary Economics 6 (October) 1980, pp. 453—465.

Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton University
    Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Princeton, 1957.

_______     "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, March
                                                                           1968,
    Pp. 1—17.

_______ and Anna J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States: 1867—
    1960, Princeton University Press for the NBER,    1963.
_______  "Money and Business Cycles," Review of Economics and Statistics
    (February) 1963, supplement, pp. 32-64.

Frisch, Ragnar, "Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dynamic
    Economics," Economic Essays in Honor of Gustav Cassel, George Allen and
    Unwin, London, 1933.

Gordon, Robert J., "Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price 3justment," Journal
    of Economic Literature XIX, June 1981, pp. 493—530.

Gramlich, ward M., "Models of Inflation Expectation Formation: A Comparison
    of Household and Economist Forecasts," J. Money, Credit, Banking 11 (May),
    1983, pp. 155—173.
                                     R- 3




Grossman, Sanford J., "An Introduction to the Theory of Rational Expectations
    Under Asymmetric Information," Review of Economic Studies XLVIII, 1981, pp.
    541 —559.

Haberler, Gottfried, Prosperity and Depression, 1937 (new ed., 1964), Harvard
    University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1964.

Hall, Robert E., "Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations," Carnegie-Rochester
    Series on Public Policy, 12, 1980, pp. 7—23.

Hart, Albert G., Anticipations, Uncertainty, and Dynamic Planning, University
    of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1940.

Hicks, John R., k Contribution to the Theory of the Trade Cycle, Oxford
    University Press, London, 1950.

Hirsch, Albert A., and Michael C. Lovell, Sales Anticipations and Inventory
    Behavior, Wiley, New York, 1969.

Huizinga, John, "Real Wages, Eiployment, and Expectations,: Ph.D. Thesis,
    M.I.T. , 1980.

Irvine, R. Owen, Jr., "Tests of the Rationality and Accuracy of Manufacturers'
    Sales Expectations," Working Paper Series, Board of Governors, Federal
    Reserve System, 1981.

Johansen, Leif, "Parametric Certainty Equivalence Procedures in Decision Making
    Under Uncertainty," eitschrift fUr National5koflOmie, 40 (3/4) 1980.

j3hr, Walter Molf, Die Konjunkturschwankugefl, J.C.B. Mohr, Tiibingen, 1952,

Jorgenson, Dale W., "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," Aserican Economic
    Review, May 1963, pp. 247—259.

Juster, F. Thomas, Anticipations and Purchases, An Analysis of Consumer
    Behavior, NBER, New York, 1964.

         Statement presented in Hearings before the Task Force on Inflation of
    the Committee on the Budget, House of Representatives, 96th Congress, First
    Session (June), U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1979,
    pp. 214—226.

Katona, Katona, Psychological Analysis of Economic Behavior, McGraw-Hill, New
    York, 1951.

Keynes,John Maynard, The General Theory of Enployment, Interest, and Money,
    Macmillan, London, 1936.
King, Robert G., and Charles I. Plosser, "The Behavior of Money, Credit, and
    Prices in a Real Business Cycle," Working Paper no. GPB 81-8, rev. November
    1982, University of Rochester.

Knight, Frank M., Risk, Uncertainty and profit, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1921.
                                       R- 4




 Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate
     Fluctuations," Econometrica, 50, November 1982, pp. 1345—1370.
 Long, John B., and Charles I. Plosser, "Real Business Cycles," Journal of
     Political Economy, 91, February 1983, pp. 39—69.

 Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique" in Karl
     Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets,
     North Holland, Amsterdam, 1976.

_______ "An auilibrium Model    of the Business Cycle," Journal of Political
     Economy, December 1975, pp. 1113—1144.

_______  "Understanding Business Cycles," in Stabilization of the Domestic and
    International Economy, ed. by K. Brunner and A.T-!. Meltzer, North—Holland
    Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1977, pp. 7—29.

_______ "Tobin and Monetarism: A Review Article," J. Econ. Lit. June 1981,
     19(2), pp. 103—124.

_______  "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
    Theory, April 1972, pp. 103—124.

         and Leonard A. Rapping, "Real Wages, Fnployment, and Inflation,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 77, September/October 1969, pp. 721—754.

Mankiw, N. G., J. Roternberg, and L.H. Summers, "Intertemporal Substitution in
    Macroeconomics," paper presented at the NBER Conference on Inflation and
    Business Fluctuations, April 30, 1982 (prel. draft).

Marshall, Alfred, Money, Credit, and Commerce, Macmillan, London, 1923, pp.
    260—261

Bennett T. 4cCallum, "Macroeconomics After a Decade of Rational Expectations:
    Some Critical Issues," Working Paper No. 1050, National Bureau of Economic
    Research, December 1982.

r4cNees, Stephen K. "The Rationality of Economic Forecasts," American Economic
    Review, 68 (2), May 1978, pp. 301—305.

         "An Evaluation of Economic Forecasts," New England Economic Review,
    November/December 1975, pp. 3—39.

Meltzer, Allan H., "Rational Expectations, Risk, Uncertainty, and Market
    Responses," in Paul Wachtel, ed., Crises in the Economic and Financial
    Structure, Lexington Books, Lexington, Mass., 1982, pp. 3—22.

Mincer, Jacob, and Victor Zarnowitz, "The Evaluation of Economic Forecasts," in
    J. Mincer, ed., Economic Forecasts arid Expectations, NBER, New York, 1969,
    pp. 3—46.

Mishkin, Fredric S., "Are Market Forecasts Rational?" American Economic Review,
    71 (3), June 1981, pp. 295—306.
                                     R- 5




Moore, Geoffrey H., "Forecasting Short—Term Economic Change," journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 64, March 1969, pp. 1—22.


         "The President's Economic Report: A Forecasting Record," NBER
    Reporter, April 1977.

         "Five Little—known Facts about Inflation," The Morgan Guaranty Survey,
    August 1977(b).

MullineaUx, Donald J., "On Testing for Rationality: Another Look at the
    Livingston Price Expectations Data," Journal of political Economy, 86 (2),
    April 1978, pp. 329—336.

Mussa, Michael, "Adaptive and Regressive Expectations in a Rational Model of
    the Inflationary Process," Journal of Monetary Economics 1 (November) 1975,
    pp. 423—442.

Muth, John F., "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,"
    Econometrica, July 1981, pp. 315—335.

Nelson, Charles R., and Charles I. Plosser, "Trends and Random Walks in
    Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications," Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 10, September 1982, pp. 139—162.

Nerlove, Marc, "Adaptive Expectations and Cobweb Phenomena," Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 73, 1958, pp. 227—240.

Okun, Arthur N., Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis, Brookings
    Institution, Washington, D.C.

Papadia, Francesco, "Rationality of Inflationary Expectations in the European
    Communities' Countries," EEC Working Paper, Brussels, March 1982.

Pashigian, B. Peter, "The Accuracy of the Commerce—SEC Sales Anticipations,"
    Review of Economics arid Statistics, 46, November 1964, pp. 398—405.

Pearce, Douglas K., "Comparing Survey and Rational Measures of Expected
    Inflation," J. Money, Credit, Banking 11 (November) 1979, pp. 849—858.

Pesando, James E., "A Note on the Rationality of the Livingston Price
    Expectations," journal of political Economy 83(4), August 1975,
    pp. 849—858.

Phelps, Bmund S., "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and optimal
    Unemployment Over Time," Economica, n.s., August 1967, pp. 254—281.

         "Introduction: The New MicroeconomicS in nployment and Inflation
    Theory" in MicroeconomiC Foundations of Fnployment and Inflation Theory,
    ed. by Phelps, Norton, New York, 1970, pp. 309—337.

         and John B. Taylor, "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy under
    Rational Expectations," journal of political Economy, 85, February 1977,
    pp. 163—190.
                                       R- 6




  Pigou, A. C., Industrial Fluctuations, Macmillan, London, 1927,.

 Poole, William, "Rational Expectations in the Macro Model," Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 2, 1976, pp. 463—514.

 Sargent, Thomas J., "A Classical Macroeconomic Model for the United States,"
     Journal of Political Economy, April 1976, pp. 207—237.

          and Neal Wallace, "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Economic
     Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 1976, pp. 169—183.

 Shackle, G. L. S., Expectations in Economics, Cambridge University Press, 1949.

 Solow, Robert M., "On Theories of Unemployment," American Economic
                                                                    Review, 72,
     pp. 1-11.

 Strigel, Werner H., Business Cycle Surveys, Campus Verlag, Frankfurt/New York,
     1981.

 Taylor, John B., "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of
     Political Economy, 88, February 1980, pp. 1—23.

_______   "Monetary Policy During a Transition to Rational Expectations,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 83, October 1975, pp. 1,009—1,021.

 Theil, Henri, Economic Forecasts and Policy, North—Holland, Amsterdam, 1958.

 Tobin, James, "How Dead is Keynes?", Economic Inquiry, 15, October 1977, pp.
     459—468

________   Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity: Reflections on
                                                                    Comtemporary
     Macroeconomic Theory, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1980.

Waud, Roger N., "Asymmetric Policy Maker Utility Functions and Optimal Policy
    under Uncertainty," Econometrica, 44, January 1976, pp. 53-60.

Zarnowitz, Victor, An Appraisal of Short—Term Economic Forecasts, NBEP, New
    York, 1967.

_______ "The Record of Turning Point Forecasts of GNP and Other Major
    Aggregates," paper presented at the Conference on Forecasting and
    Recognizing Turns in the Business Cycle, NBER, March 1968.

         "New Plans and Results of Research in Economic Forecasting," 51st
    Annual Report, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 1971, pp.
    53—70 (esp. Table 1—6, pp. 67—68).

_______  "Forecasting Economic Conditions: The Record and the Prospect," in V.
    Zarnowitz, ed., The Business Cycle Today, NBER, New York, 1972, pp. 212-
    214.

________ "An Analysis of Annual and Multiperiod Quarterly Forecasts of
     Aggregate Income, Output, and the Price Level," Journal of Business, 52
     (1), January 1979, pp. 1—33.
                                     R- 7




ZarnowitZ, Victor, "The Accuracy of Individual and Group Forecasts from
    Business Outlook Surveys," journal of Forecasting, 1984, forthcoming.


         "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic Forecasts," NBER Working
    Paper No. 1053, December 1982. NBER Working Paper No. 1070, january 1983.
