                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON CROP YIELDS:
            THE IMPORTANCE OF NONLINEAR TEMPERATURE EFFECTS

                                        Wolfram Schlenker
                                        Michael J. Roberts

                                       Working Paper 13799
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13799


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2008




We would like to thank Spencer Banzhaf, Larry Goulder, Jim MacDonald, Mitch Renkow, Bernard
Salanie, Kerry Smith, Wally Thurman as well as seminar participants at Arizona State, Dartmouth,
Georgia State, Harvard, NC State, Stanford, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, University of Illinois, University
of Maryland, University of Nebraska, University of Wyoming for useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research or the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Wolfram Schlenker and Michael J. Roberts. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Impact of Climate Change on Crop Yields: The Importance of Nonlinear Temperature
Effects
Wolfram Schlenker and Michael Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 13799
February 2008
JEL No. C23,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

The United States produces 41% of the world's corn and 38% of the world's soybeans, so any impact
on US crop yields will have implications for world food supply. We pair a panel of county-level crop
yields in the US with a fine-scale weather data set that incorporates the whole distribution of temperatures
between the minimum and maximum within each day and across all days in the growing season. Yields
increase in temperature until about 29C for corn, 30C for soybeans, and 32C for cotton, but temperatures
above these thresholds become very harmful. The slope of the decline above the optimum is significantly
steeper than the incline below it. The same nonlinear and asymmetric relationship is found whether
we consider time series or cross-sectional variation in weather and yields. This suggests limited potential
for adaptation within crop species because the latter includes farmers' adaptations to warmer climates
and the former does not. Area-weighted average yields given current growing regions are predicted
to decrease by 31-43% under the slowest warming scenario and 67-79% under the most rapid warming
scenario by the end of the century.


Wolfram Schlenker
Department of Economics
School of International and Public Affairs
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wolfram.schlenker@columbia.edu

Michael Roberts
Economic Research Service
United States Department of Agriculture
1800 M Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
mroberts@ers.usda.gov
    With accumulating evidence that greenhouse gas concentrations are warming the world’s
climate, research has increasingly focused on estimating the impacts that are likely to occur
under different warming scenarios as well as how economies might adapt to a change in
climatic conditions. Many impact studies focus on the agricultural sector for several reasons.
The first reason is that agricultural production is directly exposed to changes in temperatures
and precipitation. The second reason is that agricultural production and consumption still
comprise a large share of income in poorer developing economies. And while agriculture
comprises a smaller share of GDP in the United States, the U.S. is still the world’s largest
agricultural producer and exporter of agricultural commodities. The US produces 41% of
the world’s corn and 38% of the world’s soybeans1 , so substantial climate impacts on U.S.
agriculture would have broad implications for food supply and prices worldwide. At the
same time, there continues to be a debate whether warming will be a net gain or loss for
agriculture in the more temperate climates like that in the United States (Mendelsohn et
al. 1994, Darwin 1999, Schlenker et al. 2006, Kelly et al. 2005, Timmins 2006, Ashenfelter
and Storchmann 2006, Deschenes and Greenstone 2007).
    In this paper we develop novel estimates of the link between weather and yields for the
three most valuable crops grown in the United States: corn, soybeans, and cotton. Corn and
soybeans are the nation’s most prevalent crops and are the predominant source of feed grains
in cattle, dairy, poultry, and hog production. Cotton is the fourth largest in acres planted,
but more valuable on a per-acre basis and more suited to warmer climates than corn and
soybeans. Estimating the correct relationship between weather and yields for these major
crops is a critical first step before more elaborate models can be used to estimate how crop
choices, food supply, and prices might shift in response to climate change. These models
will give biased results if the underlying relationship between weather and yields is modeled
incorrectly.
   In this paper we pair yields for these three crops with a newly constructed fine-scale
weather data set resulting in a large panel that spans most U.S. counties from 1950 to 2005.
The new weather data includes the length of time a crop is exposed to each 1-degree Celsius
temperature interval in each day of the growing season. We estimate these times for the
specific locations within each county where crops are grown.
   The new fine-scale weather data facilitate estimation of a flexible model in order to
identify nonlinearities and breakpoints in the effect of temperature on yield. If the true
underlying relationship is nonlinear (e.g., increasing and then decreasing in temperature),
  1
      Foreign Agricultural Statistical Service data for 2005/2006: http://www.fas.usda.gov/psdonline/psdHome.aspx



                                                     1
averaging over time or space dilutes effects of extreme outcomes. Yet extreme temperatures
are critical for crop yields (Tubiello et al. 2007). Accurate estimation of nonlinear effects
is particularly important when considering large non-marginal changes in temperatures now
expected with climate change.
    We find a robust nonlinear relationship between weather and yields that is consistent
across space, time, and crops: plant growth increases approximately linearly in temperature
up to a point where additional heat becomes harmful (See Figure 2 below). The nonlinear
relationship is starkly asymmetric, with the slope of the decline above the optimal temper-
ature being much steeper than the slope of the incline below the optimal temperature. Our
flexible specification is superior in explaining yields and results in different predicted climate
change impacts due to the sharp nonlinearity. Despite significant technological progress over
our 56-year sample period, we find no evidence that crops have become better at withstand-
ing extreme heat above the optimal temperature. Moreover, warmer southern states exhibit
the same threshold as cooler states in the north. This robustness and consistency across
time, space, and sources of identification suggests the links are causal and the potential for
adaptation is limited.
    The nonlinear and asymmetric relationship between temperature and yields is confirmed
in an analysis of the futures market. Weekly corn futures prices increase significantly in re-
sponse to extremely high temperatures, while there is no statistically significant relationship
with average temperatures.
    The sharply negative effects of temperatures above the critical temperature threshold
hold powerful implications for climate change. If climate change shifts the temperature dis-
tribution such that a significantly larger portion of it exceeds the threshold, overall impacts
are substantial. Indeed, under the latest warming predictions, the high-end of the temper-
ature distribution shifts upward enough so that damaging heat waves are observed more
frequently. As a result, yields at the end of the century are predicted to decrease by 43%
for corn, 36% for soybeans, and 31% for cotton under a slow warming scenario (B1) and
79%, 74%, and 67%, respectively, under a fast warming scenario (A1FI). These predictions
are highly significant and consistent across alternative model specifications. These scenarios,
however, assume unaltered crop choices, technologies, and no effects from possible CO2 fer-
tilization, and so likely overstate true potential climate impacts. The nonlinear relationship
between temperatures and yields can consecutively be used in more structural models to
estimate crop switching and other farmer responses.




                                                2
1     Literature Review
Many earlier studies have linked weather and climate to outcomes such as yields, land val-
ues, and farm profits. These studies span several disciplines and methods. Agronomic
studies focus on yields and emphasize the dynamic physiological process of plant growth
and seed formation. This process is understood to be quite complex and dynamic in nature
and thus not easily molded into a regression framework. Instead, these studies use a rich
theoretical model to simulate yields given daily and sub-daily weather inputs, nutrient appli-
cations, and initial soil conditions. In some cases, simulated yields are compared to observed
yields with some success. But we are not aware of any study that has tested a simulation
model using data besides that used to calibrate it. Current versions of models developed
for many crops are maintained by the Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer
(http://www.icasa.net/dssat/).
    A clear strength of simulation models is the way they incorporate the whole distribution
of weather outcomes over the growing season. This differs from regression-based approaches
that typically use average weather outcomes or averages from particular months. A weakness
of the approach is uncertainty about the physiological process (functional form) and the sheer
number of parameters in these dynamic and highly nonlinear models. Some agronomists
seem to worry about possible misspecification and omitted variables biases (Sinclair and
Seligman 1996, Sinclair and Seligman 2000, Long et al. 2005). These models also take
production systems and nutrient applications as exogenous: there is no account for behavioral
response on behalf of farmers. Nevertheless, these models are the predominant tool used to
evaluate likely effects from climate change on crop yields. Examples include Black and
Thompson (1978), Adams et al. (1995), Brown and Rosenberg (1999), Mearns et al. (2001),
and Stockle et al. (2003), but there are many others.
    Several economic studies use hedonic models to link land values to land characteris-
tics, including climate, using reduced-form linear regression models (e.g., Mendelsohn et al.
(1994); Schlenker et al. (2006); Ashenfelter and Storchmann (2006)). One strength of the
approach is that, unlike crop simulation models, it can account for the whole agricultural
sector rather than a single crop at a time. It can also account for behavioral response or
adaptation. Cooler areas are likely to become more like warmer areas, with crops choice,
management, and land values changing in accordance with the cross-section of climate.
    The overarching concern with the hedonic approach or any other cross sectional study
is omitted variables bias. Climate variables (e.g., average temperature) and other critical
variables, such as soil types, distance to cities, and irrigation, are all spatially correlated. If

                                                3
critical variables correlated with climate are omitted from the regression model, the climate
variables may pick up effects of variables besides climate and lead to biased estimates and
predictions. This has been a concern since the early part of the last century and the birth
of modern statistics when Ronald Fisher wrote ”Studies in Crop Variation I-VI.” Indeed,
earlier work shows how omission of irrigation critically influences predicted climate impacts
(Schlenker et al. 2005).
   Most recently Deschenes and Greenstone (2007) (DG, henceforth) use year-to-year weather
variation as a source of identification when they link agricultural profits to weather using
county fixed effects to capture time-invariant factors like soil quality. DG argue that their
measure overstates any adverse impact from climate change because it reflects the short-run
response to weather fluctuations and does not allow for long-run adaptation. A problem
with this argument is that many important time-varying factors, such as storage, irrigation,
and price effects, embody short-run weather responses that are not available in long run.2
For example, a one time heat wave might be mitigated by applying more groundwater, but
it might not be feasible to sustain an increased use of groundwater on a continued basis.
    Kelly et al. (2005), another recent study employing panel data, examine county-level
profits for Midwestern states in relation to both climate and weather. The authors include
historic mean climate and climate variability (standard deviation between years) as well
as yearly weather shocks. Since the authors include climate averages (which are constant
over time in the cross-section), they cannot include county fixed effects as they would be
perfectly collinear with climate. Omitted variables hence remain a possible concern, as do
time-varying factors associated with both weather and reported profits.
    While our model is simpler than crop simulation models, it shares the feature of incorpo-
rating the whole distribution of weather outcomes. And like DG, we consider specifications
with county fixed effects that narrow the source of identification to arguably random year-
to-year weather variation. However, we do find that omitting county fixed effects does not
significantly alter our results. Since we focus on yields rather than profits (which rely on sales
in a given year), storage and price effects are not a concern. We also consider specifications
   2
    This issue, and others, are considered thoroughly by Fisher et al. (2007). Most notably, DG’s profit
measure relies on agricultural sales in a given year, yet sales in a given year omit storage between periods.
Analogous to the permanent income hypothesis that stresses that yearly consumption is a bad proxy for
income, sales in a given year only partially reflect economic profit in the same year if a commodity can be
stored. Second, demand for agricultural goods is highly inelastic in the short-run and hence reductions in
output might be offset by large price increases, limiting the effect on profits. Third, DG also present one
regression using yields instead of profit, but the model relies on average daily temperatures and does not
account separately for extreme temperatures which are shown to critically influence yields in this study.



                                                     4
based on the cross-section of average yields, akin to hedonic models where climate variation
serve as the source of identification rather than weather, again with similar results.


2       Model
Our objective is to discern the effect of weather, particularly heat, on crop yields using a
new and rich data set and a novel approach that allows us to estimate nonlinear effects of
heat over the growing season. By using the whole distribution of temperature outcomes,
which is critical for estimating nonlinear effects, we depart from earlier cross-sectional and
panel data studies and share a common thread with the agronomic literature that employs
crop simulation models. However, unlike agronomic literature, we incorporate our model
into a statistical regression framework. We focus on yields because yields, unlike profits, are
linked to the year a plant is grown. Here we describe our model, discuss its assumptions,
and consider various sources of temperature variation used for identification.
    We postulate that the effect of heat on relative plant growth is cumulative over time and
that yield is proportional to total growth. This assumes temperature effects are additively
substitutable over time. Specifically, plant growth g(h) depends nonlinearly on heat h and
log yield, yit , in county i and year t is
                                       Z       h
                               yit =               g(h)φit (h)dh + zit δ + ci + ²it                     (1)
                                           h


where φit (h) is the time distribution of heat over the growing season in county i and year t.
We fix the growing season to months March through August for corn and soybeans and the
months April through October for cotton. Observed temperatures during this time period
range between the lower bound h and the upper bound h. Other factors, such as precipitation
and technological change, are denoted zit , and ci is a time-invariant county fixed effect to
control for time-invariant heterogeneity, such as soil quality.
   While time separability is partially rooted in agronomy,3 we implicitly validate this as-
sumption by showing a statistically significant relationship between the cumulative distri-
bution of temperatures and yields. We would not observe this if time separability were not
appropriate, because random pairing of various temperatures over a season and between years
    3
    This assumption underlies the concept of degree days by which many corn varieties are classified, i.e.,
farmers count the additive number of daily temperatures above a baseline a specific crop variety requires to
mature.



                                                             5
would not provide clear identification. In the empirical section we also split the six-month
growing season for corn into two three-month intervals and find comparable estimates for
both subintervals. That is, temperature effects in the earlier and later parts of the growing
season are similar.
    A special case of time-separable growth is the concept of growing degree days, typically
defined as the sum of truncated degrees between two bounds. For example, Ritchie and
NeSmith (1991) suggests bounds of 8◦ C and 32◦ C for ”beneficial heat”. A day of 9◦ C hence
contributes 1 degree day, a day of 10◦ C contributes 2 degree days, up to a temperature
of 32◦ C, which contributes 24 degree days. All temperatures above 32◦ C also contribute 24
degree days. Degree days are then summed over the entire season. Temperatures above 34◦ C
are included as a separate variable and speculated to be harmful. These particular bounds
have been implemented in a cross-sectional analysis by Schlenker et al. (2006). Thus, growing
degree days are the special case of our model where (using the above bounds as an example)
                                       
                                       
                                       0        if h ≤ 8
                               g(h) = h − 8 if 8 < h < 32
                                       
                                       
                                         24      if 32 ≤ h
    The appropriate bounds for growing degree days are still debated, partly because earlier
studies use a limited number of observations from field experiments to identify them. There
is also uncertainty about temperature effects above the upper bound. While some speculate
that high temperatures are harmful, the critical temperature and severity of damages remain
uncertain.
   In the data section we explain how we derive the amount of time a plant is exposed to each
1-degree Celsius interval. With these data, we approximate the integral over temperature
with
                        X49
                  yit =     g(h + 0.5)[Φit (h + 1) − Φit (h)] + zit δ + ci + ²it          (2)
                           h=−5

where Φit (h) is the cumulative distribution function of heat in county i and year t. We
consider two specifications of this model.
    First, we approximate g(h) using dummy variables for each three-degree temperature
interval.4 The dummy-variable model effectively regresses yield on season-total time within
each temperature interval. Because temperatures rarely exceed 39◦ C (102 degrees Fahren-
heit) we lump all time a plant is exposed to a temperature above 39◦ C into one category.
   4
    We obtain similar results when estimating even more flexible models with dummy variables for each
one-degree interval. We report results for three-degree intervals in order to make figures easy to interpret.


                                                     6
Similarly, we lump all times temperatures are below freezing into the interval [−1; 0]. The
existing temperature distribution is displayed in the left column of Figure 1. The model
becomes5
                                    39
                                    X
                        yit =                   γj [Φit (h + 3) − Φit (h)] +zit δ + ci + ²it .       (3)
                                                   |         {z          }
                                j=0,3,6,9,...               xit,j

County fixed effects ci account for time-invariant factors in the cross-section. The error
terms, however, remain spatially correlated within each year. The non-parametric routine
by Conley (1999) is used to adjust the variance-covariance matrix for spatial correlation.
   Second, we model the function g(h) as a m-th order Chebychev polynomial of the form
        Pm
g(h) =    j=1 γj Tj (h), where Tj () is the j − th order Chebyshev polynomial. Chebyshev
polynomials are a relatively parsimonious approximation for the function g(h), assuming it
is smooth.
    By interchanging the sum we obtain

                         39 X
                         X  m
               yit =                    γj Tj (h + 0.5) [Φit (h + 1) − Φit (h)] + zit δ + ci + ²it
                         h=−1 j=1
                         m
                         X          39
                                    X
                    =          γj          Tj (h + 0.5) [Φit (h + 1) − Φit (h)] +zit δ + ci + ²it    (4)
                         j=1        h=−1
                                    |                       {z                    }
                                                           xit,j


where xij,t is the exogenous variable obtained by summing the j − th Chebyshev polyno-
mial evaluated at each temperature interval midpoint, multiplied by the time spent in each
temperature interval. Successively higher-order polynomials were estimated until the rela-
tionship appeared stable.
    While equations (3) and (4) specify our main two models, the concept of degree days is
a special case where the function g(h) is piecewise linear. In a sensitivity check we therefore
estimate a piecewise-linear model, i.e., growth is forced to increase linearly in temperature up
to an endogenous threshold and then forced to decrease linearly above the threshold. Since
our data is aggregated by 1-degree Celsius intervals, we loop over possible combinations of
bounds and pick the ones with the least sum of squared residuals.
  5
      The omitted category is the time temperatures are below 0◦ C.




                                                             7
3       Data
Dependent Variable
Yields for corn, soybeans, and cotton for the years 1950-2005 are reported by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s National Agricultural Statistical Service (USDA-NASS).6 These
yields equal total county-level production divided by acres harvested.7 We limit the analysis
to counties east of the 100 degree meridian for corn and soybeans (as these counties are
primarily nonirrigated), but use all counties that report cotton yields.8
    In a sensitivity check we also examine changes in futures prices. We collect daily closing
prices of futures with a delivery date of September for the years 1950-2005 from the Chicago
Board of Trade.

Weather Variables
Earlier statistical studies have examined average temperatures over a longer time horizon
(e.g., an entire season, month, or day), which can hide extreme events like high temperatures
that occur during a fraction of the day. Our fine-scale weather aids identification of these
effects which are diluted when weather outcomes are averaged over time or space. Con-
struction of these data is briefly described here and in more detail in Schlenker and Roberts
(2006).
   The basic steps are as follows. We first develop daily predictions of minimum and max-
imum temperature on a 2.5x2.5mile grid for the entire United States. We then derive the
time a crop is exposed to each 1 degree Celsius interval in each grid cell. These predictions
are merged with a satellite scan that allows us to select only those grid cells with cropland.
We then aggregate the whole distribution of outcomes for all days in the growing season
in each county. Since our study emphasizes nonlinearities, it is important to derive the
time each grid cell is exposed to each 1 degree Celsius interval before aggregating to obtain
the county-level distribution. This preserves within-county variation in temperatures in our
county-level distribution estimates.9
    6
      We include all reported yields, even though some appear artificially low. These few outliers are very
infrequent. If we drop them, the results do not change, but the cutoff point becomes somewhat arbitrary
(The outliers have little influence because we use log yield, so they have small errors).
    7
      For about 80% of the observations, NASS reports planted acres. As a sensitivity check we derive our
own yield measure for these observations by taking total production over total acres planted. The results do
not change significantly. Since the area planted is not reported in all areas and years, our analysis focuses
on the larger sample of output per acre harvested that is the standard USDA definition of yield.
    8
      This gives us 105,981 observations with corn yields, 82,385 observations with soybeans yields, and 31,540
observations with cotton yields.
    9
      Thom (1966) develops an alternative method to approximate the distribution of daily temperatures

                                                      8
  More specifically, we use the Parameter-elevation Regressions on Independent Slopes
Model (PRISM), widely regarded as one of the best geographic interpolation procedures
(http://www.ocs.orst.edu/prism/). It accounts for elevation and prevailing winds to pre-
dict weather outcomes on 2.5x2.5 mile grid across the contiguous United States. However,
the PRISM data are on a monthly time scale. We therefore combine the advantages of
the PRISM model (good spatial interpolation) with better temporal coverage of individual
weather stations (daily instead of monthly values). We do this by pairing each of the 259,287
PRISM grid cells that cover agricultural area in a LandSat satellite scan with the closest
seven weather stations having a continuous record of daily observations. We then estimate
a separate regression for each grid cell, where the dependent variable is the monthly PRISM
grid cell estimate and the explanatory variables are the monthly averages at each of the
seven closest weather stations, plus fixed effects for each month. The R-squares are usually
in excess of 0.999. The derived relationship between monthly PRISM grid cell averages and
monthly averages at each of the seven closest stations is then used to predict daily records
at each PRISM grid cell from the daily records at the seven closest weather stations.
    A cross-validation exercise is used to test the accuracy of the daily weather predictions.
Specifically, we construct a daily weather record at each PRISM cell that harbors a weather
station without using that weather station in the interpolation procedure. We then compare
predicted daily outcomes at the PRISM cell with a weather station to actual outcomes
recorded at the weather station in the grid cell. The mean absolute error is 1.36◦ C for
minimum temperature and 1.49◦ C for maximum temperature. Due to the law of large
numbers, our county-level distribution estimates contain less error, since they average errors
over all grid cells in each county and all days of the growing season.
   We approximate the distribution of temperatures within a day with a sinusoidal curve
between minimum and maximum temperatures (Snyder 1985).10 We derive the time spent
in each 1◦ C-degree temperature interval between −5◦ C and +50◦ C. Finally, we construct
the area-weighted averages over all PRISM grid cells in a county. The agricultural area in

from the distribution of average monthly temperatures. This method appears appropriate for predicting
the average frequency that a certain weather outcome will be realized, but less appropriate in predicting
a specific frequency of a weather outcome in a particular year. As a result, these methods work well in a
forward-looking cross-sectional analysis where the dependent variable is tied to weather expected outcomes
rather than realized outcomes (for example, the link between land values and climate), but less well in our
analysis where the dependent variable (yield) linked to specific weather outcomes. Obtaining daily values
on a small scale requires a spatial interpolation procedure to approximate daily weather outcomes between
individual weather stations.
   10
      In a sensitivity check we instead use a linear interpolation between minimum and maximum temperature.
Both methods give similar results.

                                                    9
                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 1: Descriptive Weather Statistics

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Corn
                                                                 Current Average Climate                                                            Hadley III − B1 Scenario (2020−2049)                                                       Hadley III − A1FI Scenario (2020−2049)                                                       Hadley III − B1 Scenario (2070−2099)                                                       Hadley III − A1FI Scenario (2070−2099)
                                               20
                                                                                                                                       20                                                                                         20                                                                                           20                                                                                         20
                                               18

                                               16                                                                                      15                                                                                         15                                                                                           15                                                                                         15

                                               14
                                                                                                                                       10                                                                                         10                                                                                           10                                                                                         10
                                               12

                                               10                                                                                       5                                                                                          5                                                                                            5                                                                                          5

                                                8
                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                          0                                                                                            0                                                                                          0
                                                6




                                                                                                          Change in Exposure (Days)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Change in Exposure (Days)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Change in Exposure (Days)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Change in Exposure (Days)




                                                4                                                                                     −5                                                                                         −5                                                                                           −5                                                                                         −5




       Exposure During Growing Season (Days)
                                                2
                                                                                                                                      −10                                                                                        −10                                                                                          −10                                                                                        −10
                                                0
                                                    0   5   10      15     20      25      30   35   40                                     0   5     10     15     20      25      30     35   40                                     0   5      10     15     20      25      30      35   40                                     0   5     10     15     20      25      30     35   40                                     0   5      10     15     20      25      30      35   40
                                                                  Temperature (Celsius)                                                                    Temperature (Celsius)                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cotton
                                                                 Current Average Climate                                                            Hadley III − B1 Scenario (2020−2049)                                                       Hadley III − A1FI Scenario (2020−2049)                                                       Hadley III − B1 Scenario (2070−2099)                                                       Hadley III − A1FI Scenario (2070−2099)
                                               20
                                                                                                                                       20                                                                                         20                                                                                           20                                                                                         20
                                               18

                                               16                                                                                      15                                                                                         15                                                                                           15                                                                                         15




10
                                               14
                                                                                                                                       10                                                                                         10                                                                                           10                                                                                         10
                                               12

                                               10                                                                                       5                                                                                          5                                                                                            5                                                                                          5

                                                8
                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                          0                                                                                            0                                                                                          0
                                                6




                                                                                                          Change in Exposure (Days)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Change in Exposure (Days)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Change in Exposure (Days)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Change in Exposure (Days)




                                                4                                                                                     −5                                                                                         −5                                                                                           −5                                                                                         −5




       Exposure During Growing Season (Days)
                                                2
                                                                                                                                      −10                                                                                        −10                                                                                          −10                                                                                        −10
                                                0
                                                    0   5   10      15     20      25      30   35   40                                     0   5     10     15     20      25      30     35   40                                     0   5      10     15     20      25      30      35   40                                     0   5     10     15     20      25      30     35   40                                     0   5      10     15     20      25      30      35   40
                                                                  Temperature (Celsius)                                                                    Temperature (Celsius)                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)




     Notes: Graphs display the amount of time a crop is exposed to each 1◦ C interval during the 183-day growing season. The lowest interval has no
     lower bound and includes the time temperatures fall below 0◦ C . The topmost interval has no upper bound and includes the time temperatures
     are above 39◦ C. For each interval, the range between minimum and maximum among counties is shown by whiskers, the 25%-75% percentile
     range is outlined by a box, and the median is added as a solid bold line. The top row displays the results for the 2277 eastern counties that grow
     corn or soybeans while the second row displays the results for the 983 counties that grow cotton. The first column displays current average
     climate conditions, while rows two through five display climate change predictions.
each cell was obtained from LandSat satellite images.11 Boxplots in the left column of Fig-
ure 1 summarize the average historical weather distribution and its variability across space.
Whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum average exposure to a certain temperature
range among counties. The box marks the 25%-75% range, while the middle line within
each box is the median. The weather variables are summed over the six-month period from
March through August for corn and soybeans, and the seven-month period April through
October for cotton.
   We divide the United States into three regions to see whether warmer regions have
adapted to higher temperatures and show a different relationship between yields and tem-
peratures: northern, interior, and southern counties east of the 100 degree meridian.12 The
default data set for corn and soybeans is the union of northern, interior, and southern
states–what we label eastern counties. We exclude counties in the Western United States
and Florida because agricultural production in these areas relies on heavily subsidized access
to irrigation water. Since the access to subsidized water rights is correlated with climate,
omitting these variables, which vary on the sub-county level of irrigation districts, will re-
sult in biased coefficient estimates on the climatic variables in a cross-sectional analysis
(Schlenker et al. 2005). Moreover, the response to temperatures is assumed to be different
in these highly irrigated areas. Cotton is predominantly grown in the south and west, and
we include all states in the analysis to obtain a larger sample of counties.

Climate Change Scenarios
Climate change predictions are drawn from the Hadley 3 model.13 This major climate change
model forms the basis for the report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). We obtain monthly model output for both minimum and maximum temperatures
under four major emissions scenarios (A1FI, A2, B1, and B2) for the years 1960-2099. Each
emission scenario rests on a different assumption about population growth and availability of
alternative fuels, among other factors (Nakicenovic, ed 2000). The model run B1 assumes the
slowest rate of warming over the next century, while model run A1FI assumes continued use
  11
     Vince Breneman and Shawn Bucholtz at the Economic Research Service were kind enough to provide
us with the agricultural area in each PRISM grid cell. Since we use the LandSat scan of a given year, we
are not able to pick up shifts in growing regions.
  12
     The northern subset includes counties in Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New
York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, and Wisconsin that lie east of the 100 degree
meridian. Interior counties are in Delaware, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Nebraska, Virginia, and
West Virginia. Finally, southern counties are in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North
Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas.
  13
     http://www.metoffice.com/research/hadleycentre/


                                                    11
of fossil fuels, which results in the largest increase in CO2 -concentrations and temperatures.
We choose the two extreme scenarios, B1 (slowest increase) and A1FI (largest increase), to
derive the range of possible climate change scenarios. In an appendix available upon request,
we consider the effects for a range of uniform temperature increases.
   Predicted weather under climate change is derived as follows. At each of 216 Hadley grid
nodes covering the United States we find the predicted difference in monthly mean tempera-
ture for 2020-2049 (medium-term), 2070-2099 (long-term), and historic averages (1960-1989).
Next, predicted changes in monthly minimum and maximum temperature at each 2.5x2.5
mile PRISM grid are calculated as the weighted average of the monthly mean change in
the four surrounding Hadley grid points, where the weights are proportional to the inverse
squared distance and forced to sum to one. In a final step, we add the predicted absolute
changes in monthly minimum and maximum temperatures at each PRISM grid to observed
daily time series from 1960 to 1989. In other words, we shift the historical distribution
mean for each climate scenario. An analogous approach was used for precipitation, except
that we use the relative ratio of future predicted rainfall to historic rainfall instead of abso-
lute changes. Each county’s weather outcomes in a climate scenario are the area-weighted
averages of all PRISM grids that cover farmland.
    The last four columns of Figure 1 show the shift in the temperature distribution under
the B1 and A1FI scenarios in the medium-term (2020-2049) and long-term (2070-2099),
with separate plots for eastern counties that grow corn or soybeans (top row) as well as all
counties that grow cotton (bottom row). Each figure shows a series of box plots, one for
each degree Celsius. Each boxplot summarizes the predicted change in the frequency of that
specific temperature across all counties growing that crop. Generally, temperatures below
22◦ C become less frequent in corn and soybeans counties, as well as temperatures below
25◦ C in cotton counties. Temperatures above these levels generally become more frequent.


4     Estimation Results
Estimates and standard errors of each model’s temperature effects are displayed in Figure 2.
The figure has nine panels, where each row represents one of three crops, and each column
uses a different specification of the function g(h). The left column uses the most flexi-
ble dummy-variable specification (equation (3) above); the middle column uses Chebyshev
polynomials (equation (4) above); and the third column uses a piecewise linear specification.
Each specification shows the same characteristic shape, increasing modestly up to a critical


                                               12
Figure 2: Nonlinear Relation Between Temperature and Corn, Soybean, and Cotton Yields

                                                                                                                            Corn
                                           Corn − Dummy Variables                                                        Corn − Chebyshev Polynomial                                                       Corn − Piecewise Linear

                        0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                            0.04

                        0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                            0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)
                          0                                                                               0                                                                               0

                       −0.02                                                                           −0.02                                                                           −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                           −0.04                                                                           −0.04

                       −0.06                                                                           −0.06                                                                           −0.06

                       −0.08                                                                           −0.08                                                                           −0.08

                        −0.1                                                                            −0.1                                                                            −0.1
                            0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40
                                            Temperature (Celsius)                                                           Temperature (Celsius)                                                           Temperature (Celsius)


                                                                                                                     Soybeans
                                         Soybeans − Dummy Variables                                                 Soybeans − Chebyshev Polynomial                                                      Soybeans − Piecewise Linear

                        0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                            0.04

                        0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                            0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)
                          0                                                                               0                                                                               0

                       −0.02                                                                           −0.02                                                                           −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                           −0.04                                                                           −0.04

                       −0.06                                                                           −0.06                                                                           −0.06

                       −0.08                                                                           −0.08                                                                           −0.08

                        −0.1                                                                            −0.1                                                                            −0.1
                            0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40
                                            Temperature (Celsius)                                                           Temperature (Celsius)                                                           Temperature (Celsius)


                                                                                                                          Cotton
                                          Cotton − Dummy Variables                                                   Cotton − Chebyshev Polynomial                                                        Cotton − Piecewise Linear

                        0.04                                                                            0.04                                                                            0.04

                        0.02                                                                            0.02                                                                            0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)




                          0                                                                               0                                                                               0

                       −0.02                                                                           −0.02                                                                           −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                           −0.04                                                                           −0.04

                       −0.06                                                                           −0.06                                                                           −0.06

                       −0.08                                                                           −0.08                                                                           −0.08

                        −0.1                                                                            −0.1                                                                            −0.1
                            0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10       15   20      25      30   35   40
                                            Temperature (Celsius)                                                           Temperature (Celsius)                                                           Temperature (Celsius)




Notes: Graphs show the impact of a given temperature for one day of the growing season on yearly log
yields. The first row use corn yields, the second soybean yields, and the last cotton yields. The left graphs
use dummy variables for each 3◦ C interval (which are added in grey to the middle and right graphs), the
middle graphs use an 8th-order Chebyshev polynomial, and the plots on the right use a piecewise-linear
function. Curves are centered so the exposure-weighted impact is zero. The lower bounds for the piecewise
linear function were fixed at 0◦ C, but the optimal breakpoint was estimated.


temperature and then decreasing sharply. For corn the critical temperature is 29◦ C; for
soybeans it is 30◦ C; and for cotton it is 32◦ C.



                                                                                                                               13
   The vertical axis in each figure marks the log of yield in bushels per acre with the
exposure-weighted average predicted yield normalized to zero. Thus, in comparing two
points on any curve, a vertical difference of 0.01 indicates approximately a 1% difference
in average yield growth. For example, on the top-left panel (the dummy variables model
for corn) substituting a full day (24 hours) at 29◦ C temperature with a full day at 40◦ C
temperature results in a predicted yield decline of approximately 7 percent, holding all else
the same.
    For brevity, other explanatory variables (precipitation, squared precipitation, county
fixed effects, and state-specific quadratic time trends) are not reported. Precipitation has
a statistically significant inverted-U shape with an estimated yield-maximizing level of 25.0
inches for corn and 27.2 inches for soybeans in the dummy-variable specification in the left
column of Figure 2. The precipitation variables are not statistically significant for cotton,
which is not surprising given that it is highly irrigated. The fixed effects and trends control
for time-invariant heterogeneity and technological change and are of little interest by them-
selves. Given the wide geographic variation in yields and three-fold increase in yields over the
sample period, these controls have strong statistical significance. Interestingly, however, the
temperature effects are similar whether or not the controls are included in the regressions.
In alternative specifications (not reported) we also find the estimated temperature effects
to be similar if we instead control for technology and time effects using year fixed effects or
state-by-year fixed effects rather than state-level trends.
    Table 1 reports encompassing tests that compare our new model and approach to others
in the literature. Comparisons are based on out-of-sample forecasts. Each model is estimated
using 85 percent of the sample (randomly selected) and performance is measured according
to the accuracy of the estimated model’s prediction for the omitted 15 percent of the sam-
ple. Models compared include our own three specifications of temperature effects (dummy
variables, Chebychev polynomial, and piecewise linear), a model with average temperatures
for each of four months (Mendelsohn et al. 1994), an approximation of growing-degree days
based on monthly average temperatures (Thom’s formula) used in Schlenker et al. (2006),
and a measure of growing degree days that is calculated using daily mean temperatures used
by Deschenes and Greenstone (2007).14 As a baseline, we also report a model with county
fixed effects and no weather effects.



  14
    We use degree days bounds of each study, but the ranking of models does not change if we were to use
the bounds of this study instead.

                                                  14
                              Table 1: Model Comparison Test for Out-Of-Sample Prediction Accuracy


                                                                 Corn                       Soybeans                      Cotton
                                                       RMS        GW      MGN        RMS       GW MGN              RMS      GW   MGN
     Dummy Variables                                   0.2179                        0.1899                        0.3130
     Chebyshev Polynomials                             0.2179    0.5028      0.03    0.1900 0.9697    1.86         0.3135 0.8441  1.66
     Piecewise Linear                                  0.2199    0.9858      8.60    0.1921 1.0202    8.71         0.3150 0.8929  3.43
     Monthly Averages                                  0.2289    0.7113     13.33    0.2008 0.7480   13.57         0.3162 0.5925  2.14
     Degree Days 8-32◦ C, >34◦ C (Thom)                0.2398    0.9935     28.81    0.2027 0.8952   18.49         0.3220 0.8879  7.33
     Degree Days 8-32◦ C (Daily Mean)                  0.2436    0.9763     30.76    0.2083 0.9191   22.97         0.3272 0.9153  9.55




15
     County-Fixed Effects (No Weather)                 0.2598                        0.2211                        0.3323

     Notes: Table compares various temperature specifications for corn, soybeans, and cotton according to three out-of-sample criteria: (i) RMS
     is the root mean squared out-of sample prediction error; (ii) GW gives the Granger weight on the dummy variable regression of the optimal
     convex combination between the dummy variables regression and the model listed in the row; (iii) MGN is the normally distributed Morgan-
     Newbold-Granger statistic of equal forecasting accuracy.
     Each model is estimated using the same 85% of the data (randomly selected) and yields are forecasted out-of-sample for the omitted 15%.
     Dummy variables Chebyshev Polynomials, and Piecewise Linear are the models developed in this paper; Monthly Averages uses
     a quadratic specification in both average temperature and total precipitation for the months January, April, July, and October (Mendelsohn
     et al. 1994); Degree Days Thom uses Thom’s formula to extrapolate degree days (which are based on daily data) from monthly average
     temperature data (Schlenker et al. 2006); Degree Days (Daily Mean) first derive the average temperature for each day from daily temperature
     readings and then construct degree days from this average (Deschenes and Greenstone 2007); County fixed Effects (No weather) uses only
     fixed effects but no weather measure at all.
    The table reports the root-mean squared prediction error (RMS) and two statistics that
facilitate comparison of the best-predicting dummy-variable model to each of the other mod-
els (Diebold and Mariano 1995). The first statistic is the Granger weight, which is the
weighted average of two forecasts where the weights are forced to sum to one. We report the
weight on the dummy-variable model. If both models forecast equally well, each receives a
weight of 0.5. If one is superior to the other, it receive a weight greater than 0.5. The second
statistic is the normal-distributed Morgan-Newbold-Granger statistic against the null hy-
pothesis of equal forecasting ability between the dummy-variable model and the comparison
model. The statistics show little difference in forecasting ability between our dummy-variable
approach and the smoothed Chebyshev polynomials, but large and statistically significant
differences between the dummy-variable model and other models in the literature. Mod-
els that average temperatures over time or space have significantly inferior out-of-sample
predictions relative to our new approach. Starting from a baseline model without weather
variables, the new model reduces the root mean squared prediction error nearly three times
as much as a model that uses daily temperature averages.
    We explore the robustness of the preferred dummy variable model over various subsets
of the corn panel data set in Figure 3. We focus on corn because it is grown over the widest
geographic area and has been by far the most valuable crop in the United States. The first
three panels of Figure 3 (top row) show results for each of three mutually exclusive subsets
of counties corresponding to the most northern (and coolest) states, the most southern (and
warmest) states, and those in the middle. In all cases we consider the more flexible dummy-
variable specification of the temperature function. Estimates for the pooled sample from
Figure 2 are plotted in grey for comparison. Each plot also includes the empirical distribution
of temperatures within each subregion as grey histogram. These show how much warmer the
southern counties are in comparison to the northern counties. The interesting and notable
feature is the stability of the estimated temperature relationship across the three subregions.
    The next two panels of Figure 3 (middle row) divide the sample into two time periods,
1950-1977 and 1978-2005. Although average yields in the more recent panel are substantially
greater than those in the earlier period, the temperature relationships are similar to each
other and to the pooled sample.
   The last panel of Figure 3 overlays estimates from four regression models that divide the
sample by quartiles of total precipitation in June and July. These estimates have a similar
shape to that of the pooled sample up to the critical temperature of 30◦ C. The decline above
the threshold, however, is less steep for subsamples with greater precipitation. Thus, there is


                                              16
Figure 3: Nonlinear Relation Between Temperature and Corn Yields for Subsets of Counties
or Years
                                         Corn − Northern Counties                                                                                                                  Corn − Interior Counties                                                                                                                               Corn − Southern Counties

                        0.04                                                                                                                            0.04                                                                                                                                                        0.04

                        0.02                                                                                                                            0.02                                                                                                                                                        0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Log Yield (Bushels)
                          0                                                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                              Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exposure in Days
                       −0.02                                                                                                                           −0.02                                                                                                                                                       −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                             30                                            −0.04                                                                                                         30                                            −0.04                                                            30

                       −0.06                                                                             20                                            −0.06                                                                                                         20                                            −0.06                                                            20

                       −0.08                                                                             10                                            −0.08                                                                                                         10                                            −0.08                                                            10

                        −0.1                                                                             0                                              −0.1                                                                                                         0                                              −0.1                                                            0
                            0   5   10     15   20      25      30                      35        40                                                        0   5            10         15   20      25      30                                     35        40                                                        0   5        10         15   20      25      30   35   40
                                          Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                        Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                                   Temperature (Celsius)
                                                                                                  Corn − Years 1950−1977                                                                                                                                       Corn − Years 1978−2005

                                                                            0.04                                                                                                                                                        0.04

                                                                            0.02                                                                                                                                                        0.02
                                                     Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)
                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                              Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exposure in Days
                                                                           −0.02                                                                                                                                                       −0.02

                                                                           −0.04                                                                                                         30                                            −0.04                                                                                                     30

                                                                           −0.06                                                                                                         20                                            −0.06                                                                                                     20

                                                                           −0.08                                                                                                         10                                            −0.08                                                                                                     10

                                                                            −0.1                                                                                                         0                                              −0.1                                                                                                     0
                                                                                0   5        10         15   20      25      30                                         35        40                                                        0   5        10         15   20      25      30                                     35        40
                                                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                                       Temperature (Celsius)

                                                                                                                                                                    By Quartile of Total Precipitation in June and July

                                                                                                                                                        0.04

                                                                                                                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                                 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                       −0.02

                                                                                                                                                       −0.04

                                                                                                                                                       −0.06
                                                                                                                                                                1. Quantile
                                                                                                                                                       −0.08    2. Quantile
                                                                                                                                                                3. Quantile
                                                                                                                                                                4. Quantile
                                                                                                                                                        −0.1
                                                                                                                                                            0       5         10          15   20      25      30                                         35         40
                                                                                                                                                                                         Temperature (Celsius)




Notes: Graphs display changes in annual log yield if the crop is exposed to a particular temperature for one
day. Grey histograms display average weather outcomes in the sample. The top row limits the analysis to
various geographic subsets; the middle row considers temporal subsets; and the bottom row splits the data
into quartiles based on the total precipitation in the months of June and July. Curves are centered so the
exposure-weighted impact is zero. Results from the pooled model are added in grey for comparison in the
top two rows. The 95% confidence band, after adjusting for spatial correlation, is added as dashed lines.


some evidence that precipitation partly mitigates the damages from extreme temperatures.15
Since we do not find a significant correlation between temperatures and rainfall in the raw
            15
    We did estimate models with richer interactions between temperature and rainfall, but these models do
not predict out-of-sample significantly better than additively separable model reported above. It is possible
that the relatively poor predictive power of precipitation in comparison to temperature stems from greater
measurement error in the precipitation variable as spatial smoothing is more difficult for the latter.



                                                                                                                                                                                                     17
Figure 4: Nonlinear Relation Between Temperature and Corn Yields for Different Definitions
of the Growing Season
                                     Corn − Growing Season: March−August                                                                                               Corn − Growing Season: April−August                                                                                                                     Corn − Growing Season: May−August

                        0.04                                                                                                                              0.04                                                                                                                                                    0.04

                        0.02                                                                                                                              0.02                                                                                                                                                    0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                   Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Log Yield (Bushels)
                          0                                                                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Exposure in Days
                       −0.02                                                                                                                             −0.02                                                                                                                                                   −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                               30                                            −0.04                                                                                                     30                                            −0.04                                                            30

                       −0.06                                                                               20                                            −0.06                                                                                                     20                                            −0.06                                                            20

                       −0.08                                                                               10                                            −0.08                                                                                                     10                                            −0.08                                                            10

                        −0.1                                                                               0                                              −0.1                                                                                                     0                                              −0.1                                                            0
                            0   5      10     15   20      25      30                     35        40                                                        0   5        10         15   20      25      30                                     35        40                                                        0   5        10         15   20      25      30   35   40
                                             Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                   Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                                   Temperature (Celsius)
                                    Corn − Growing Season: March−September                                                                                            Corn − Growing Season: April−September                                                                                                                  Corn − Growing Season: May−September

                        0.04                                                                                                                              0.04                                                                                                                                                    0.04

                        0.02                                                                                                                              0.02                                                                                                                                                    0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                   Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Log Yield (Bushels)
                          0                                                                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Exposure in Days
                       −0.02                                                                                                                             −0.02                                                                                                                                                   −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                               30                                            −0.04                                                                                                     30                                            −0.04                                                            30

                       −0.06                                                                               20                                            −0.06                                                                                                     20                                            −0.06                                                            20

                       −0.08                                                                               10                                            −0.08                                                                                                     10                                            −0.08                                                            10

                        −0.1                                                                               0                                              −0.1                                                                                                     0                                              −0.1                                                            0
                            0   5      10     15   20      25      30                     35        40                                                        0   5        10         15   20      25      30                                     35        40                                                        0   5        10         15   20      25      30   35   40
                                             Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                   Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                                   Temperature (Celsius)
                                                                                               Corn − Growing Season: March−May                                                                                                                    Corn − Growing Season: June−August

                                                                              0.04                                                                                                                                                    0.04

                                                                              0.02                                                                                                                                                    0.02
                                                       Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                0                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                            Exposure in Days




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exposure in Days
                                                                             −0.02                                                                                                                                                   −0.02

                                                                             −0.04                                                                                                     30                                            −0.04                                                                                                     30

                                                                             −0.06                                                                                                     20                                            −0.06                                                                                                     20

                                                                             −0.08                                                                                                     10                                            −0.08                                                                                                     10

                                                                              −0.1                                                                                                     0                                              −0.1                                                                                                     0
                                                                                  0   5        10         15   20      25      30                                     35        40                                                        0   5        10         15   20      25      30                                     35        40
                                                                                                         Temperature (Celsius)                                                                                                                                   Temperature (Celsius)




Notes: Graphs display changes in annual log yield if the crop is exposed to a particular temperature for one
day. Grey histograms display average weather outcomes in the sample. The top left panel is the baseline
model. All other graphs use different definitions of the growing season: The growing season ends in August
in the first row and September in the second row, while it starts in April, March, and May in the three
columns of the first two rows. The last row breaks the six-month growing season into two three-month
periods. Curves are centered so the exposure-weighted impact is zero. The 95% confidence band, after
adjusting for spatial correlation, is added using dashed lines.


daily data, omitting temperature-rainfall interactions will not bias our predictions and give
the right average effects of temperature and rainfall.
    An important assumption of the empirical model is the additive separability of temper-
ature effects over time. We fix the growing season to the months March through August for
corn and soybeans, even though northern regions tend to plant later than southern regions,


                                                                                                                                                                                                   18
and planting dates may vary from year-to-year depending on weather conditions. We explore
the sensitivity of the results to various definitions of the growing season in Figure 4. The
figure shows seven alternative specifications of the growing season together with the baseline
(top left). Again, the estimated temperature effects appear similar regardless of how we shift
the growing season. The first two rows vary the start date (March in the first column, April
in the second, and May in the third) as well as the end date (August in the top row and
September in the second row). The third row breaks the six-month growing season into two
three-month periods and still obtains similar results. This lends support to the assumption
of additive separability.
    Another way to consider endogenous grower responses to a permanent shift in climate
is to compare regression results from a panel-data analysis to those from a cross sectional
analysis. A panel data analysis with county fixed effects is identified from arguably random
time-series variation in weather, which accounts for little grower adaptation to weather. In
contrast, a cross-sectional analysis compares yields and grower management choices across
areas with different weather expectations (i.e., climates). Much like the hedonic model, these
comparisons therefore embody grower adaptations to weather, not just the direct effects of
weather. These comparisons are presented in Figure 5. In all plots, results from a panel with
fixed effects are displayed in grey for comparison. Plots on the left replicate the panel analysis
without the use of county-fixed effects. It uses both cross-sectional (climate) and time-series
(weather) variation. Results are very similar to the model with county fixed effects. The
middle and right plots use, exclusively, the aggregate time series and cross-sectional variation,
respectively. For the time-series we derive the average national yield and regress it on the
area-weighted average weather outcome in a given year.16 Since our panel includes 56 years,
the sample size in the pure time series reduces to 56 observations. This makes estimation of a
dummy-variables approach questionable due to insufficient degrees of freedom. Accordingly,
we estimate a piecewise linear function which only has two temperature variables and two
precipitation variables. For the cross-section we regress the average difference between the
county yield and the nationwide average yield on the average climate in a county. Both the
cross-section and the time series give us comparable results, except that the standard errors
become larger in the case of cotton.




  16
     To adjust for technological progress the dependent variable is the log of the average yield in a year minus
a linear time trend of log yields.

                                                      19
Figure 5: Nonlinear Relation Between Temperature and Corn Yields Using Various Sources
of Identification
                                      Corn − Without County Fixed Effects                                                        Corn − Time Series                                                            Corn − Cross Section

                        0.04                                                                                  0.04                                                                          0.04

                        0.02                                                                                  0.02                                                                          0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                       Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                     Log Yield (Bushels)
                          0                                                                                     0                                                                             0

                       −0.02                                                                                 −0.02                                                                         −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                                 −0.04                                                                         −0.04

                       −0.06                                                                                 −0.06                                                                         −0.06

                       −0.08                                                                                 −0.08                                                                         −0.08

                        −0.1                                                                                  −0.1                                                                          −0.1
                            0   5     10      15   20      25      30        35   40                              0   5   10     15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10      15   20      25      30   35   40
                                             Temperature (Celsius)                                                              Temperature (Celsius)                                                          Temperature (Celsius)
                                    Soybeans − Without County Fixed Effects                                                    Soybeans − Time Series                                                        Soybeans − Cross Section

                        0.04                                                                                  0.04                                                                          0.04

                        0.02                                                                                  0.02                                                                          0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                       Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                     Log Yield (Bushels)
                          0                                                                                     0                                                                             0

                       −0.02                                                                                 −0.02                                                                         −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                                 −0.04                                                                         −0.04

                       −0.06                                                                                 −0.06                                                                         −0.06

                       −0.08                                                                                 −0.08                                                                         −0.08

                        −0.1                                                                                  −0.1                                                                          −0.1
                            0   5     10      15   20      25      30        35   40                              0   5   10     15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10      15   20      25      30   35   40
                                             Temperature (Celsius)                                                              Temperature (Celsius)                                                          Temperature (Celsius)
                                     Cotton − Without County Fixed Effects                                                      Cotton − Time Series                                                          Cotton − Cross Section

                        0.04                                                                                  0.04                                                                          0.04

                        0.02                                                                                  0.02                                                                          0.02
 Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                       Log Yield (Bushels)




                                                                                                                                                                     Log Yield (Bushels)




                          0                                                                                     0                                                                             0

                       −0.02                                                                                 −0.02                                                                         −0.02

                       −0.04                                                                                 −0.04                                                                         −0.04

                       −0.06                                                                                 −0.06                                                                         −0.06

                       −0.08                                                                                 −0.08                                                                         −0.08

                        −0.1                                                                                  −0.1                                                                          −0.1
                            0   5     10      15   20      25      30        35   40                              0   5   10     15   20      25      30   35   40                              0   5   10      15   20      25      30   35   40
                                             Temperature (Celsius)                                                              Temperature (Celsius)                                                          Temperature (Celsius)




Notes: Graphs display changes in annual log yield if the crop is exposed for one day to a particular tem-
perature. The grey lines are the baseline model (first column uses the first column of Figure 2, while the
second and third column use the third column of Figure 2). The black lines are sensitivity checks: The first
column replicates the model without county fixed effects; the second column uses the aggregate time-series
of 56 annual averages; the third column uses county average yields in the cross-section. Curves are centered
so the exposure-weighted impact is zero in the left column and fixed at 0 in the right two columns. The 95%
confidence band, after adjusting for spatial correlation, is added as dashed lines.




                                                                                                                                   20
Market Assessment of Extreme Weather Events
Our preceding analysis reveals that temperatures above an upper threshold result in sub-
stantial yield reductions. In the following we briefly examine how futures market assess such
extreme temperature events.17 An efficient futures market immediately incorporates news
about impending shifts in commodity supply and demand. Thus, if extreme temperatures
harm yields, news about current or impending extreme temperatures signal an impending
inward shift in supply, and causes an increase in futures prices. Since it is impossible to de-
termine precisely when expectations are formed, we focus on weekly changes in future prices
rather than daily values.18 We link percent changes in futures price to weather variables
in both the current and the subsequent week, since weather outcomes one week out might
be forecastable.19 We consider weekly price changes for the months May-July for future
contracts that expire in September, by which time most uncertainty about nationwide yield
has been resolved.20
   Results are reported in Table 2. The first column relates futures price changes to degree
days 8-29◦ C and degree days above 29◦ C, the same variables as the right column of Figure 2.
The second column uses the more conventional temperature measures, average temperature
and average temperature-squared. Both specifications include a quadratic in precipitation
and fixed effects for each week so identification comes from deviations from predictable sea-
sonal averages. Futures prices are statistically significantly decreasing in degree days below
29◦ C and increasing in degree days above 29◦ C.21 The magnitude of the coefficient on degree
days above 29◦ C is much larger than the one on temperatures below this threshold. This
sharp asymmetry is consistent with our finding from the yield regression.22 The coefficients
indicate that one additional day at 40◦ C instead of 29◦ C increases future prices by 4.4 per-
cent. The estimated price impact of extreme heat is substantial, particularly given storage
tends to buffer the price effects of yield shocks. In contrast, average temperature and average
temperature squared are not statistically significant. And while the two specifications have
  17
     A more detailed analysis is given in a separate paper.
  18
     We calculate the percent change in closing prices on Friday compared to the previous Friday. Weather
variables are the corn-area weighted average of all counties east of the 100 degree meridian for the week in
question.
  19
     Campbell and Diebold (2005) show that an autoregressive process predicts average temperatures as well
as a professional weather forecast for time periods more than 5-8 days into the future.
  20
     We exclude weeks before May as markets are less liquid before this period: average trade volume is less
than 20% of the weekly volume in the peak season. We also exclude August when USDA publishes its first
yield forecasts, which also influences futures markets.
  21
     Recall that a reduction in quantity implies an increase in price and vice versa.
  22
     Precipitation peaks at 3.06 cm or 1.2 inches. Since we are looking at weekly intervals this translates into
31.5 inches for the 183 growing season, again comparable to our yield regression.


                                                      21
                 Table 2: Impact of Extreme Heat on Corn Futures Prices

                                        Coeff. t-val Coeff.                           t-val
                              Weather in current week
                           ◦
          Degree Days 8-29 C            -0.0296 (2.40)
          Degree Days >29◦ C             0.2241 (2.30)
          Average Temperature                          -0.3374                        (0.88)
          Average Temperature Squared                   0.0072                        (0.75)
          Precipitation                 -2.2006 (4.38) -2.4595                        (4.93)
          Precipitation squared          0.3600 (3.94) 0.3959                         (4.34)

                             Weather is subsequent week
          Degree Days 8-29◦ C             0.0168 (1.23)
                           ◦
          Degree Days >29 C               0.1783 (1.77)
          Average Temperature                           -0.6856                       (1.47)
          Average Temperature Squared                    0.0220                       (1.95)
          Precipitation                  -0.6988 (1.34) -0.7703                       (1.49)
          Precipitation squared           0.1147 (1.20) 0.1206                        (1.27)

          Observations                              698                  698
          R-squared                              0.1006               0.0908
          Durbin-Watson statistic                  1.71                 1.70
          Week fixed effects                        yes                  yes
          Notes: Table lists regression results when weekly percent changes in futures prices
          are regressed on weather variables for the same week as well as the subsequent
          week. We include the subsequent week as weather can be forecasted and hence
          anticipated in advance.



the same dependent variable and identical degrees of freedom, the R2 of the first regression
is 10 percent higher than the second. This is additional evidence that the frequency of very
warm temperatures is especially influential for yields.


5    Climate Change Impacts
Yield predictions under climate change are summarized in Table 3. The table reports na-
tionwide area-weighted impacts and summary statistics for the predicted impacts across
counties under each of the climate scenarios both over medium-term (2020-2049) and long-
term (2070-2099) horizons. All predictions in Table 3 use the most flexible dummy-variable


                                                  22
                               Table 3: Predicted Impacts of Global Warming on Crop Yields (Percent)

                          Medium-term 2020-2049                         Long-term 2070-2099
                  Area-weighted       Impact by County       Area-weighted        Impact by County
     Variable    Impact (t-val) Mean      Min Max      Std Impact (t-val) Mean        Min Max      Std
                                                          Corn
     HCM3 - B1     -22.34 (21.03) -28.32 -63.67 11.70 17.78    -43.16 (19.50) -45.70 -83.76 18.11 18.18
     HCM3 - B2     -23.02 (22.70) -29.43 -70.01 11.08 17.09    -50.66 (21.24) -53.51 -90.03 18.16 18.08
     HCM3 - A2     -27.62 (23.29) -32.55 -68.99 14.39 17.09    -69.71 (16.07) -71.07 -96.34 4.27 16.33
     HCM3 - A1FI   -28.54 (21.14) -32.26 -68.95 11.55 17.19    -78.59 (14.75) -79.83 -98.45 -7.70 14.35

                                                                     Soybeans
     HCM3    -   B1       -18.62    (21.10)     -19.39 -62.24 16.49 17.10  -36.10                 (22.94)    -34.27 -82.53 25.01 19.61




23
     HCM3    -   B2       -19.50    (22.37)     -20.24 -67.21 17.49 16.55  -43.73                 (25.04)    -42.15 -87.53 26.09 20.42
     HCM3    -   A2       -23.11    (23.43)     -23.02 -67.71 20.08 16.78  -63.72                 (20.87)    -61.33 -94.56 19.72 19.54
     HCM3    -   A1FI     -23.04    (21.76)     -22.72 -67.82 16.61 17.11  -73.64                 (19.53)    -71.36 -96.79 11.87 17.32

                                                                      Cotton
     HCM3    -   B1       -21.71      (6.58)    -15.39 -47.37 21.82 14.53  -31.08                  (5.59)    -22.37 -66.83 31.24 18.20
     HCM3    -   B2       -20.98      (5.30)    -14.54 -56.40 25.98 15.01  -40.42                  (6.21)    -31.45 -73.82 32.48 18.60
     HCM3    -   A2       -22.27      (5.81)    -15.41 -53.98 30.15 15.70  -56.99                  (7.10)    -49.26 -86.22 42.03 18.93
     HCM3    -   A1FI     -21.59      (5.53)    -14.67 -51.13 23.18 14.16  -67.18                  (7.97)    -58.79 -91.95 50.78 19.43

     Notes: Table lists percent changes in corn, soybeans, and cotton yields predicted in the medium term 2020-2049 (first six columns) and long
     term 2070-2099 (last six columns) under four emission scenarios. The first two columns show the area-weighted impact including t-values,
     while the next four columns give the distribution of impacts among counties. Standard errors are adjusted for spatial correlation.
model. Across all scenarios and crops, some counties see yield gains and some see losses,
but the nationwide impacts all show marked declines, ranging from about -19 to -29 percent
in the medium-term and from about -31 to -79 percent in the long term. The driving force
behind these large and significant impacts is the increased frequency of extremely warm
temperatures that sharply reduce yields. While the previous section has shown that a model
that accounts for the effect of extreme heat is better at explaining yields, it also gives
significantly different impacts than traditional models that do not adequately model the
nonlinearity.23
    Figure 6 shows a map of the predicted impacts for corn across counties under the slow-
warming scenario (B1) in the top row as well as the fast-warming scenario (A1FI) in the
bottom row. Impacts are comparable in the medium-term (left column), but start to diverge
towards the end of the century (right column). The geographic distribution of impacts
is intuitive, with warmer southern areas seeing much larger declines than cooler northern
areas. The exception is the Appalachian mountain range where temperatures are cooler
compared to neighboring counties of comparable latitude. The central Midwestern region,
which possesses among the world’s best soils, sees substantial declines, and this is critical
for nationwide impacts. A similar pattern is observed for soybeans in Figure 7. Corn is only
grown in the south and we display the geographical distribution of impacts in Figure 8.
    While nationwide predictions are quiet large, the predicted impacts keep planting dates
as well as growing areas fixed.24 In a sensitivity check we shift the growing season one
month forward, i.e., we assume corn is grown from February through July instead of March
to August.25 We still use the coefficient estimates from our baseline dummy variable model
for the months March-August, but derive the predicted change in each 3◦ C interval for the
months February-July. Predicted yield impacts by the end of the century reduce from -43%
to -31% under the B1 scenario and from -79% to -64% under the A1FI scenario. Damages
decline as extremely warm temperatures are observed less frequently in February than in
August. With regards to planting locations, Figures 6-8 show that some areas get hit less
severely and shifts in the growing area could mitigate some of the negative impacts.
  23
     If we compare our preferred model using dummy variables to a model using (i) monthly average tem-
peratures; (ii) degree days derived using Thom’s formula; and (iii) degree days derived using daily means
(models described in the bottom three rows of Table 1) the root mean squared difference in predicted corn
yields by the end of the century under the A1FI scenario is 10.3%, 7.4%, and 18.23%, respectively.
  24
     Note that predictions are relative to what would have been realized without climate change, not relative
to current production levels. These baselines differ because yields have been trending up with technological
change over the last 50-plus years, and are likely to increase in the future as well.
  25
     A further forward shift seems unlikely as it simultaneously reduces available sunlight. Solar radiation is
lower during winter months.

                                                      24
    Figure 6: Predicted Changes for Corn Yields in the Eastern United States (Percent)

                                    Hadley HCM3 - B1 Scenario




                                   Hadley HCM3 - A1FI Scenario




Notes: Graphs display predicted changes in corn yields under the slow warming B1 scenario (top row) and
fast warming A1FI scenario (bottom row). The left column shows predicted changes in the climatic variables
for 2020-2049, while the right column shows predicted changes for 2070-2099. Impacts are evaluated using
the dummy variable regression in the top left panel of Figure 2.




                                                   25
 Figure 7: Predicted Changes for Soybeans Yields in the Eastern United States (Percent)

                                     Hadley HCM3 - B1 Scenario




                                   Hadley HCM3 - A1FI Scenario




Notes: Graphs display predicted changes in soybeans yields under the slow warming B1 scenario (top row)
and fast warming A1FI scenario (bottom row). The left column shows predicted changes in the climatic
variables for 2020-2049, while the right column shows predicted changes for 2070-2099. Impacts are evaluated
using the dummy variable regression in the middle left panel of Figure 2.




                                                    26
                                          Figure 8: Predicted Changes for Cotton Yields (Percent)

                                                           Hadley HCM3 - B1 Scenario




                                                         Hadley HCM3 - A1FI Scenario




27
     Notes: Graphs display predicted changes in cotton yields under the slow warming B1 scenario (top row) and fast warming A1FI scenario
     (bottom row). The left column shows predicted changes in the climatic variables for 2020-2049, while the right column shows predicted changes
     for 2070-2099. Impacts are evaluated using the dummy variable regression in the bottom left panel of Figure 2.
    However, even cooler areas are predicted to be impacted quiet substantially. Furthermore,
shifts in growing areas are limited by the availability of the right soil.
   We further investigate the issue of adaptation in Table 4 by comparing the predicted
nationwide climate impacts derived using different sources of identification. The first two
rows use the full panel data set to estimate the flexible dummy variable model and the
piecewise-linear model.26 The third row of each crop gives the predicted impact if we only
use the time-series of 56 aggregate yields, while the last two use the cross-section of average
yields across counties.27 The underlying regression results are displayed in Figure 5. As
outlined above, the cross section should capture adaptation within a crop species as farmers
with a permanently warmer climate have an incentive to adapt to these warmer climates.
However, the predicted climate impacts are comparable if we look at the panel, the cross-
section, or the time series. However, the confidence intervals increase significantly for the
cotton specification.
    Table 5 reports further sensitivity checks for corn. We focus on corn because it is grown
over the largest geographic area. We estimate the regression coefficients using one of three
geographic subsets in the estimation but then evaluate the impact for all counties. If southern
counties had successfully adapted to their warmer climate one would expect extreme temper-
atures to have a less harmful effect on yields. Again, the results are rather robust to which
subset of counties is used in the estimation, suggesting limited potential for adaptation. The
same holds true if the estimation is done using different time periods. This suggests that
corn has not developed improved heat tolerance over time. We also consider an alternative
interpolation procedure for estimating the temperature distribution within each day. In our
baseline model we follow the natural science literature and fit a sinusoidal curve between
minimum and maximum temperature. Table 5 shows that a linear interpolation between
minimum and maximum gives comparable climate impacts. Finally, we evaluate predictions
when yields are derived as total production divided by the land area planted instead of the
land area harvested and we again obtain similar predictions.




  26
     As mentioned above, the time-series regression has only 56 observations, which impedes estimation of
the dummy-variables model due to insufficient degrees of freedom. We therefore consider the piecewise linear
model with only two temperature variables.
  27
     In the cross-section, controls for soil quality include water capacity, percent clay, permeability, soil
erodibility (k-factor) and the fraction of soil classified as high quality.


                                                     28
                Table 4: Predicted Climate Impacts Using Panel, Cross-section, and Time Series (Percent)

                                               Medium-term (2020-2049)                             Long-term (2070-2099)
                                               B1   (t-val) A1FI (t-val)                          B1  (t-val) A1FI (t-val)
                                                       Corn
     Dummy Variables (Baseline)              -22.34 (21.03) -28.54 (21.14)                       -43.16    (19.50)    -78.59     (14.75)
     Piecewise-linear                        -22.84 (21.57) -29.34 (23.19)                       -45.06    (27.18)    -81.87     (57.91)
     Piecewise-linear (Time Series)          -23.38  (6.88) -30.13  (7.23)                       -45.85     (8.31)    -82.99     (16.27)
     Piecewise-linear (Cross Section)        -19.58  (7.51) -24.67  (7.00)                       -37.88     (7.57)    -72.12      (9.83)
     Piecewise-linear (Cross Section + Soil) -19.33  (8.36) -24.29  (7.97)                       -37.61     (8.75)    -72.05     (12.40)

                                                                Soybeans
     Dummy Variables (Baseline)              -18.62             (21.10) -23.04        (21.76)    -36.10    (22.94)    -73.64     (19.53)
     Piecewise-linear                        -19.67             (22.20) -24.16        (22.94)    -37.33    (25.88)    -74.50     (48.52)
     Piecewise-linear (Time Series)          -14.12              (5.32) -17.24         (5.35)    -27.31     (5.75)    -59.18      (7.72)




29
     Piecewise-linear (Cross Section)        -17.13              (4.84) -20.89         (4.71)    -32.33     (4.99)    -65.38      (6.14)
     Piecewise-linear (Cross Section + Soil) -17.98              (6.87) -21.91         (6.71)    -33.93     (7.31)    -68.18     (10.01)

                                                                  Cotton
     Dummy Variables (Baseline)              -21.71              (6.58) -21.59         (5.53)    -31.08     (5.59)    -67.18      (7.97)
     Piecewise-linear                        -22.95              (6.84) -23.59         (6.22)    -35.37     (7.27)    -72.26     (14.71)
     Piecewise-linear (Time Series)          -18.51              (2.24) -19.18         (2.06)    -29.37     (2.32)    -65.67      (4.17)
     Piecewise-linear (Cross Section)        -24.39              (1.81) -27.79         (1.84)    -40.25     (2.01)    -71.75      (2.05)
     Piecewise-linear (Cross Section + Soil) -25.29              (1.82) -28.71         (1.86)    -41.43     (2.00)    -72.90      (2.04)

     Notes: Table lists predicted climate change impacts under various sensitivity checks for the slowest warming scenario (B1) as well
     as the most rapid warming scenario (A1FI). The dummy variables regression are the baseline results reported in Table 3. The
     last four rows of each crop report the predicted climate change impacts of a more parsimonious piecewise-linear function with only
     two temperature variables. Rows labeled time series use 56 area-weighted average yields (as well as area-weighted average climatic
     variables) in the regression. Rows labeled cross section use the average yield (and climatic variables per county) in the regression,
     both with and without controls for soil quality.
              Table 5: Sensitivity of Predicted Climate Impacts Under Various Model Assumptions (Percent)

                                                    Medium-term (2020-2049)                         Long-term (2070-2099)
                                                    B1   (t-val) A1FI (t-val)                      B1  (t-val) A1FI (t-val)
                                                           Corn
     Dummy     Variables   (Baseline)             -22.34 (21.03) -28.54 (21.14)                  -43.16     (19.50)    -78.59    (14.75)
     Dummy     Variables   (Northern Counties)    -20.63 (16.16) -19.92 (17.69)                  -50.23     (16.45)    -92.89    (15.74)
     Dummy     Variables   (Interior Counties)    -37.86  (9.98) -44.54  (9.03)                  -60.41      (8.10)    -90.75     (5.94)
     Dummy     Variables   (Southern Counties)    -35.60 (17.65) -36.91 (17.59)                  -49.66     (18.17)    -80.12    (15.32)
     Dummy     Variables   (1950-1977)            -22.33 (14.95) -29.29 (15.57)                  -46.99     (16.80)    -87.62    (23.75)
     Dummy     Variables   (1978-2005)            -22.52 (18.36) -28.36 (18.86)                  -40.85     (17.32)    -70.77    (10.48)
     Dummy     Variables   (Linear Interpolation) -22.87 (20.90) -29.33 (20.74)                  -45.18     (18.07)    -82.85    (10.51)
     Dummy     Variables   (Area Planted)         -27.82 (18.56) -35.31 (19.70)                  -52.15     (20.57)    -87.78    (21.73)

                                                                Soybeans




30
     Dummy Variables (Baseline)             -18.62               (21.10) -23.04       (21.76) -36.10        (22.94) -73.64       (19.53)
     Dummy Variables (Linear Interpolation) -19.70               (22.43) -24.42       (23.00) -38.42        (23.92) -75.21       (14.42)
     Dummy Variables (Area Planted)         -22.47               (19.22) -27.87       (19.43) -43.13        (19.74) -82.53       (19.67)

                                                                  Cotton
     Dummy Variables (Baseline)             -21.71                (6.58) -21.59         (5.53) -31.08        (5.59) -67.18        (7.97)
     Dummy Variables (Linear Interpolation) -22.74                (6.67) -23.11         (5.79) -35.21        (6.56) -76.71       (12.53)
     Dummy Variables (Area Planted)         -29.26                (7.75) -29.79         (6.80) -42.36        (7.30) -80.42       (12.28)

     Notes: Table lists predicted climate change impacts under various sensitivity checks for the slowest warming scenario (B1) as well
     as the most rapid warming scenario (A1FI). The dummy variables models are the baseline results reported in Table 3. To show
     stability of the estimates we report results when using various geographic and temporal subsets of corn. The last two rows for each
     crop report results when (i) we use a linear rather than sinusoidal interpolation between minimum and maximum temperature in
     each day to derive the time a crop is exposed to each temperature and (ii) yields are calculated as total production divided by the
     land area planted instead of the land area harvested.
    The stability of predicted impacts across models and subsets of data shows the robustness
of the general findings to specification and sources of climate variation used to identify
the model. Predictions are similar whether just warmer southern counties, cooler northern
counties, or all counties are used for estimation. Predictions are similar whether earlier or
more recent half of the sample is used for estimation. Predictions are also similar whether
derived from aggregate time-series variation in aggregate weather or derived from the cross-
section of average county-level yields and climate outcomes. This stability is also replicated
across all three crops.
    Stability of the predictions across models and sources of identification lends strong sup-
port to the idea that the underlying weather-yield relationships are in fact causal. It also
suggests that scope for adaptation within a crop species, at least using current and historical
seed varieties and management strategies, is limited. Where identification using just time se-
ries variation uses arguably random year-to-year weather variation and thus reflects a causal
link, it accounts for little adaptation. In contrast, identification using the cross-section of av-
erage climate outcomes compares warmer and cooler areas, and much like a hedonic model,
implicitly accounts for farmers’ managerial adjustments in response to differing climates.
And predictions based on the cross-section are robust to controls for soils, which suggest
omitted variables biases are less likely.


6     Conclusions
This paper examines links between US corn, soybeans, and cotton yields to a new fine-scale
data set of daily weather records and that considers the entire distribution of temperatures
within each day and each county. We find a robust and significant nonlinear relationship
between temperature and yields that shows yields increasing in temperature up to a critical
threshold of 29◦ C for corn, 30◦ C for soybeans, and 32◦ C for cotton, above which higher
temperatures significantly harm yields. Our model is significantly better at predicting yields
than existing statistical models in the literature. Moreover, the sharp nonlinearity has strong
implications for a warming climate.
    The same basic yield-temperature relationship is observed for various subsets of the data,
such as warmer southern states, cooler northern states, and in both earlier and later years
of the sample. It is also observed if statistically identified using only time-series (year-to-
year variation in aggregate temperature and yield outcomes) or cross-sectional (variation in
county-average yields in relation to average temperature distributions) sources of variation.


                                                31
Furthermore, corn futures respond sharply to extremely warm temperatures suggesting that
financial markets expect extreme temperatures to drive down yields. The basic relationship
is also robust to the definition of the growing season and to various controls for soils and
unobserved factors, accounted for using county fixed effects. Taken collectively, these findings
suggest the statistical link is both causal and robust to many kinds of adaptation. They also
imply that relative heat tolerance has not increased over time, which may be surprising given
technological change has led to a three-fold increase in corn yields over the sample period
examined.
   We use the estimated link between weather and yields to derive yield predictions under
the latest climate change scenarios. Predicted damages are large, highly significant, and
robust to various model specifications. Using our preferred model, nationwide average yields
for corn, soybeans, and cotton yields for the years 2070-2099 are predicted to decline by 43%,
36%, and 31%, respectively, under the slow-warming scenario (B1), and by 79%, 74%, and
67% under the rapid warming scenario (A1FI).
    These rather dire predictions hold growing areas and planting dates fixed. A sensitivity
check shows that moving planting dates one month forward would mitigate damages some-
what but would still result in sizeable impacts. While more elaborate structural models are
needed to estimate shifts in growing regions, the results and data presented here will provide
valuable inputs into such an analysis.28
   In future work, it may be fruitful to apply some of the basic techniques developed here
for predicting future crop choices and/or for modeling weather and climate effects more
generally. Such efforts may facilitate estimates of more comprehensive equilibrium price
and welfare effects likely to occur. While the analysis presented here cannot speak to these
broader implications, it sets forth a valuable new data set, statistical approach, and pattern
of yield responses to temperatures. We see the estimated yield responses as a critical first
step in such an analysis. Moreover, the findings do suggest that large shifts in the supply of
food and fiber are a distinct possibility.




  28
    Yield declines may also be offset by CO2 -fertilization. Plants use CO2 as an input in the photosynthesis
process and increasing CO2 levels might spur plant growth. While higher CO2 concentrations may boost
yields, the magnitude of the effect is still debated. Long et al. (2005) and Long et al. (2006) recently stressed
that existing laboratory studies and field experiments might overestimate this effect.


                                                       32
References
Adams, Richard M., Ronald A. Flemming, Ching-Chang Chang, Bruce A. Mc-
   Carl, and Cynthia Rosenzweig, “A Reassessment of the Economic Effects of Global
   Climate Change on U.S. Agriculture,” Climatic Change, June 1995, 30 (2), 147–167.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Karl Storchmann, “Using a Hedonic Model of Solar Radiation
   to Assess the Economic Effect of Climate Change: The Case of Mosel Valley Vineyards,”
   NBER Working Paper 12380, July 2006.
Black, J. Roy and Stanley R. Thompson, “Some Evidence on Weather-Crop-Yield
    Interaction,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, August 1978, 60 (3), 540–
    543.
Brown, Robert. A. and Norman J. Rosenberg, “Climate Change Impacts on the
   Potential Productivity of Corn and Winter Wheat in Their Primary United States
   Growing Regions.,” Climatic Change, January 1999, 41 (1), 73–107.
Campbell, Sean D. and Francis X. Diebold, “Weather Forecasting for Weather Deriva-
   tives,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, March 2005, 100 (469), 6–16.
Conley, Timothy G., “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of
   Econometrics, September 1999, 92 (1), 1–45.
Darwin, Roy, “A Farmers view of the ricardian approach to measuring agricultural effects
   of climate change,” Climatic Change, March-April 1999, 41, 371–411.
Deschenes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, “The Economic Impacts of Climate
    Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather,”
    American Economic Review, March 2007, 97 (1), 354–385.
Diebold, Francis X. and Roberto S. Mariano, “Comparing Predictive Accuracy,” Jour-
    nal of Business and Economic Statistics, July 1995, 13 (3), 253–263.
Fisher, Anthony C., W. Michael Hanemann, Michael J. Roberts, and Wolfram
    Schlenker, “Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Crop Yields and Land Values in
    U.S. Agriculture: Negative, Significant, and Robust,” Working Paper, 2007.
Kelly, David L., Charles D. Kolstad, and Glenn T. Mitchell, “Adjustment costs
    from environmental change,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
    November 2005, 50 (3), 468–495.
Long, Stephen P., Elizabeth A. Ainsworth, Andrew D.B. Leakey, and Patrick B.
   Morgan, “Global food insecurity. Treatment of major food crops with elevated carbon
   dioxide or ozone under large-scale fully open-airconditins suggests recent models may
   have overestimated future yields.,” Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society B,
   2005, 360, 2011–2020.

                                          33
    ,     ,     , Josef Nosberger, and Donald R. Ort, “Food for Thought: Lower-
    Than-Expected Crop Yield Simulation with Rising CO2 Concentrations,” Science, 30
    June 2006, 312 (5782), 1918–1921.

Mearns, L. O., W. Easterling, C. Hays, and D. Marx, “Comparison of Agricultural
   Impacts of Climate Change Calculated from High and Low Resolution Climate Change
   Scenarios: Part I. The Uncertainty Due to Spatial Scale,” Climatic Change, November
   2001, 51 (2), 131–172.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw, “The Impact of
   Global Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis,” American Economic Review,
   September 1994, 84 (4), 753–771.

Nakicenovic, Nebojsa, ed., Special Report on Emissions Scenarios, Cambridge University
   Press, 2000.

Ritchie, J. T. and D. S. NeSmith, “Temperature and Crop Development,” in John
    Hanks and J. T. Richie, eds., Modeling Plant and Soil Systems. Agronomy 31, American
    Society of Agronomy Madison, WI 1991, pp. 5–29.

Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael Roberts, “Non-linear Effects of Weather on Corn
    Yields,” Review of Agricultural Economics, 2006, 28 (3), 391–398.

    , W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher, “Will U.S. Agriculture Really
    Benefit From Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedonic Approach.,”
    American Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 395–406.

    ,     , and       , “The Impact of Global Warming on U.S. Agriculture: An Econo-
    metric Analysis of Optimal Growing Conditions,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
    February 2006, 88 (1), 113–125.

Sinclair, Thomas R. and Noam G. Seligman, “Crop modeling: from infancy to matu-
    rity,” Agronomy Journal, September-October 1996, 88 (5), 698–704.

    and Noam Seligman, “Criteria for publishing papers on crop modeling,” Field Crops
    Research, November 2000, 68 (3), 165–172.

Snyder, R. L., “Hand Calculating Degree Days,” Agricultural and Forest Meterology, Oc-
   tober 1985, 35 (1-4), 353–358.

Stockle, Claudio O., Marcello Donatelli, and Roger Nelson, “CropSyst, a cropping
    systems simulation model,” European Journal of Agronomy, January 2003, 18 (3-4),
    289–307.

Thom, H. C. S., “Normal Degree Days Above Any Base by the Universal Truncation
   Coefficient,” Monthly Weather Review, July 1966, 94 (7), 461–465.


                                          34
Timmins, Christopher, “Endogenous Land Use and the Ricardian Valuation of Climate
   Change,” Environmental and Resource Economics, January 2006, 33 (1), 119–142.

Tubiello, Francesco N., Jean-Francois Soussana, and S. Mark Howden, “Crop and
   pasture response to climate change,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
   of the United States, December 11 2007, 104 (50), 19686–19690.




                                          35
