                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                EDUCATING URBAN CHILDREN

                                         Richard J. Murnane

                                        Working Paper 13791
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13791


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Richard J. Murnane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Educating Urban Children
Richard J. Murnane
NBER Working Paper No. 13791
February 2008
JEL No. I2

                                              ABSTRACT

For a variety of reasons described in the paper, improving the performance of urban school districts
is more difficult today than it was several decades ago. Yet economic and social changes make performance
improvement especially important today. Two quite different bodies of research provide ideas for
improving the performance of urban school districts. One group of studies, conducted primarily by
scholars of organizational design, examines the effectiveness of particular district management strategies.
The second, conducted primarily by economists, focuses on the need to improve incentives. Each
body of research offers important insights. Each is somewhat insensitive to the importance of the
insights offered by the other literature. A theme of this paper is that insights from both literatures
are critical to improving urban school systems.


Richard J. Murnane
Graduate School of Education
Harvard University
6 Appian Way - Gutman 469
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_murnane@harvard.edu
Richard J. Murnane



                                Educating Urban Children



I. Introduction

       America’s urban schools are like mirrors, reflecting both the accomplishments

and the failures of our society. The accomplishments are evident in graduation

ceremonies at urban high schools throughout the country, when students bound for

college thank their teachers for the opportunities their parents did not have. The failures

are evident in the high drop out rates and low average test scores of students attending

urban public schools.

       Neither the accomplishments nor the failures of students in urban public schools

are recent phenomena. Throughout the last century America’s urban public schools have

provided the staircase to a better life for vast numbers of children. The failures are just as

long-standing, as described in books written at the end of the 19th century by reformers

such as Jacob Riis and Jacob Mayer Rice.1

       The tendency throughout American history has been to blame the public schools

for perceived shortcomings of the nation’s young people. Urban schools have been

particularly frequent targets. Urban public schools do need to increase their effectiveness

markedly, and the primary goal of this chapter is to offer suggestions for improvement.

However, the academic performances of urban children will lag behind those of suburban

children so long as the nation continues to view the problems facing urban children

growing up in poverty as the sole responsibilities of urban public school systems.
                                             2


II. What has not changed

       Ever since free public education became an American institution in the 19th

century, urban public schools have served large numbers of children from low income

families, many of whom did not speak English at home. Educating poor children is more

difficult than educating children from more affluent families, in part, because poor

children often come to school hungry and in poor health, and in part, because many of

their parents lack the resources and knowledge to reinforce good school-based instruction

or to compensate for poor school-based instruction. Equality of Educational

Opportunity, the 1966 document by James Coleman and his colleagues, documented in

enormous detail the power of the challenge facing schools serving large numbers of poor

children.2

       A related problem is the high mobility rate of children in urban schools – a pattern

that Theodore Sizer described in 1968, 3 and that urban school principals today count as

one of their greatest challenges. For example, the student mobility rate at Boston’s

English High School, the nation’s oldest public high school, was 32 percent in the 2005-

2006 school year. A continual flow of new students entering classes during the school

year requires teachers to devote scarce instructional time to assessing the skills and

knowledge of the new entrants and to socializing them to classroom norms of behavior.

For this reason it is no surprise to urban teachers that non-mobile students enrolled in

classes with high mobility rates make less academic progress during the school year than

comparable students enrolled in stable classes.4

       High student poverty and student mobility rates make working conditions in

urban schools difficult. A result is that a great many skilled teachers avoid urban schools
                                            3
serving high concentration of poor children. If they do begin their careers in such

schools, they transfer out as soon as possible. A consequence is that children who are in

especially great need of the nation’s best teachers are the least likely to get them. This too

is an old pattern, one that the sociologist Howard Becker found in Chicago schools in the

early 1950s. 5

III. What has changed

       The consequences of a poor education

       Until about 30 years ago the primary goals for urban schools were to socialize

waves of recent immigrants about the duties of citizenship, to provide all students with

quite basic cognitive skills, and to prepare a minority of students for post-secondary

education.6 Even as late as 1970 these goals made economic sense because the

economies of most cities provided large numbers of jobs involving routine manual or

routine cognitive work in manufacturing and administrative support occupations. While

not exciting, these were jobs that most high school graduates could do. More

importantly, they paid enough to allow large numbers of high school graduates and many

school dropouts who were willing to follow directions and carry out repetitive tasks to

earn a middle class living.

       In recent decades changes in the American economy have created pressures on

urban schools to reach a new, unprecedented goal – to prepare all students to master a

demanding set of academic standards that will prepare them for post-secondary education

and training or for jobs with promising futures. 7 The economic basis for this new

demand is illustrated in Figure 9.1, which displays the distribution of U.S. jobs by

occupational categories arrayed from lowest paying on the left to highest paying on the

right. Between 1969 and 1999, the percentage of the nation’s jobs in manufacturing and
                                            4
administrative support occupations – the two occupations that provided work for vast

numbers of urban high school graduates – fell from 55 to 39. 8 In contrast, growth took

place in higher paying occupational categories that typically require post-secondary

education and in lower paying service sector jobs such as food preparation and janitorial

work. A consequence of these changes in the occupational distribution is that high

school graduates who leave high school with the skills to succeed in post-secondary

education and training find growing opportunities. However, those graduates and

dropouts who lack these skills are increasingly relegated to service sector jobs that are

growing in number, but that do not pay enough to support children.

                                           Figure 9.1 here

       Figure 9.2, which provides an update of the trends in Figure 9.1, shows that the

same trends prevail in the most recent data. During the six year period from May 2000-

2006 when the number of jobs in the U.S. economy increased by 7.4 million, the number

of jobs in manufacturing and administrative support occupations declined by 3.5 million.

While the economic forces underlying these trends are complex, there is every reason to

believe that the trends will continue. 9

                                           Figure 9.2 here

       The changes in the U.S. economy have resulted in quite dramatic shifts in the

distribution of tasks done by American workers and in the skills needed to do these tasks.

This is illustrated in Figure 9.3, which shows how changes in the job mix over the last

three decades of the 20th century affected the types of tasks carried out by the American

work force. 10 Especially important are the growing importance of jobs requiring expert

thinking and complex communication. We will return to these skills later in the paper in

discussing strategies for improving urban high schools.
                                              5
                                             Figure 9.3

       The economic trends displayed in Figures 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3 play a large role in

explaining the trends in the wages of American workers with different educational

attainments that are displayed in Figure 9.4.11 In 1979, four-year college graduates

earned 46 percent more than high school graduates on average. In 2005 the comparable

figure is 74 percent. During this same period the average real earnings of high school

dropouts fell by 16 percent.12 It is these economic trends that have created the demand

on urban high schools to prepare all students to master the skills needed for success in

post-secondary education and training.

                                          Figure 9.4 here

       The best information on the skills of urban students relative to those of students

attending suburban schools shows disturbing patterns. In 2003, 50 percent of eighth

graders attending schools in large cities scored below Basic on the National Assessment

of Educational Progress mathematics test, compared to 29 percent of eighth graders

attending suburban schools. The comparable figures for reading scores are 43 percent and

24 percent. 13

       In summary, as a result of changes in the economy, the consequences of leaving

school with weak skills are much greater than they were 40 years ago. This is why

improving the skills of urban students is the nation’s most pressing educational problem.

       Standards-Based Educational Reforms

       In the last twenty years almost every state has adopted standards-based

educational reforms, often called test-based accountability, as its primary strategy for

improving public education. To a significant extent, this strategy is a response to state

legislators’ frustrations with the consequences of court-mandated school finance reform,
                                          6
the dominant approach to improving public schools during the previous two decades.

Under court-mandated school finance reforms, many states assumed greater

responsibility for funding public schools, reducing reliance on local property taxes.

These reforms did lead to significant equalization of per-pupil spending across school

districts, usually by increasing expenditures in low-spending school districts. In

particular, school spending rose markedly in districts serving high percentages of

children from poor families and children of color. However, the increased spending was

not accompanied either by a marked increase in or equalization of student

achievement.14 This led legislators to the conclusion that simply providing public

schools with more money was not an effective strategy for improving their performance.

Instead, increased funding must be accompanied by increased accountability.

       While details of accountability systems vary greatly from state to state, all

standards-based educational reforms include three components:

   •       content standards that specify what students should know and be able to do,

           performance standards that describe how students should demonstrate their

           knowledge and skills and what levels of performance meet the standards, and

           assessments that measure the extent to which students meet performance

           standards;

   •       incentives for educators to do the hard work required to prepare all students to

           meet the performance standards and incentives for students to devote the time

           and energy needed to meet the performance standards, and

   •       instructional materials and professional development aimed at providing

           teachers with the knowledge, skills, and resources needed to prepare all

           students to meet the performance standards. 15
                                           7
        The passage of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB) marked a

significant change in the federal role in public K-12 education in the United States.

NCLB requires that states annually test the reading and mathematics skills of all public

school students in grades three through eight. It also specifies that all schools are

expected to make adequate yearly progress (AYP) toward ensuring that all groups of

students, including groups defined by race/ethnicity and poverty, reach proficiency within

12 years (by 2014). School districts and schools that fail to demonstrate adequate yearly

progress for all groups of students are subject to corrective actions that can ultimately

include staff replacement and school reconstitution.16 NCLB and state accountability

systems have put the spotlight on urban schools, highlighting the weak reading and math

skills of urban students, and their low graduation rate. In particular, they have put great

pressure on urban school systems to improve the English Language Arts and mathematics

skills of students.

        Isolation of Urban Schools

        One troubling change in urban schools is that they serve many fewer middle class

children today than they did in the past. In fact, the vast majority of students served by

the nation’s largest urban school districts are children of color from low income families.

Among the many factors contributing to this disturbing trend is the 1974 decision by the

U.S. Supreme Court in the Milliken v. Bradley case. In this decision, the Court ruled that

communities neighboring Detroit had no obligation to participate in an inter-district

desegregation plan aimed at improving educational opportunities for Detroit’s

overwhelmingly low-income minority student population. In effect, the decision meant

that the problems facing urban school districts serving concentrations of minority group

children were the responsibility of cities, not of broader communities of Americans. The
                                             8
flight of middle-class families from urban schools has markedly increased the challenge

of improving these schools.

       Competition for Teaching Talent

       Forty years ago K-12 teaching was one of the few professional work opportunities

available to female college graduates. This was especially the case for female graduates

of color. A consequence was that education did not need to compete very intensely for

academically talented female college graduates. In the intervening decades, employment

opportunities in other professions have improved markedly for women and minorities.

As a result, competition for talent is much more intense than in the past. The public

schools are not faring well in this competition, as indicated by the 50 percent decline over

the last 35 years in the percentage of the nation’s most academically strong college

graduates who enter teaching.17 The problem is especially acute for urban school

districts, where the teaching challenges are especially difficult and the working

conditions are often especially poor.

       Teachers’ Unions

       Forty years ago, very few urban school districts engaged in collective bargaining

with teacher unions. Today teacher unions are important players in most urban school

districts. Many urban teachers’ contracts specify not only salary scales and fringe

benefits. They also specify many things once considered management decisions, such as

maximum class size, length of the school day and school year, number of teaching

preparations, amount of time devoted to training (typically called professional

development), and procedures for filling teaching vacancies.

       There is no question that changes are needed in the contracts under which

teachers in many urban school districts work. Particularly troubling are seniority rules
                                              9
governing transfers that contribute to high teacher turnover rates in schools serving

concentrations of poor children. At the same time I believe it is a mistake to view teacher

unions as powerful villains opposing needed reforms. Urban teacher unions became

powerful because many urban teachers felt besieged by the conditions under which they

worked and wanted a voice in improving these conditions. Tenure and seniority rights to

transfers are not new. They became part of contracts long before urban public schools

were charged with preparing all students to meet demanding academic standards. They

were among the modest perquisites that came with relatively low paying, difficult jobs

with few opportunities for advancement.

       Today urban school districts face unprecedented challenges and need employment

contracts that are very different from those negotiated in the past. In particular, contracts

are needed that enable school districts to attract and retain academically talented teachers

in all subject fields, that induce them to work in the schools where they are most needed,

that create incentives and opportunities for teachers to work together to improve

instruction, and that define strategies for identifying ineffective teachers, supporting their

improvement, and dismissing those who remain inadequate. Unfortunately, it is not

obvious just what contract provisions will contribute to these objectives. Mistakes,

especially if not corrected in a timely fashion, are costly because the teachers urban

districts most want to attract and retain have compelling alternative employment

opportunities. Unions can play a critical role in enabling urban school districts to move

toward human resource policies aligned with standards based educational goals. They

can do this by articulating the concerns of effective teachers, by collaborating on the

design of teacher evaluation procedures, and by providing timely feedback about

potential reactions to proposed changes in contracts and human resource policies.18
                                        10
       Peer Assistance and Review (PAR) programs provide one example of promising

collaborations. Districts including Toledo, Cincinnati, and Montgomery County have

negotiated PAR programs, under which teacher unions and school district management

work together in evaluating teachers, in providing assistance to those whose performance

is sub-par, and in dismissing those teachers whose performance does not improve

remarkably after receiving assistance. Bonnie Cullison, the President of the Montgomery

County Teachers Union, provided the following summary of her district’s program:

       For the 10 years prior to PAR being instituted in Montgomery County, exactly

       one person had left the system because of performance. … In the six years

       since PAR has come in, 400 people have left the system because of performance.

       Now many of them decide to leave without going through the dismissal process.19

Of course, using the collective bargaining process to reach agreements that result in

improved education for children requires great skill on the part of both union and school

district leaders. Often these skills have been lacking.

       In summary, improving urban education is both more important now than in the

past and more difficult. It is more important because the economic consequences of

leaving school without strong skills are greater than in the past. The work is more

difficult because urban schools lack the human resources provided by middle class

students and their parents and because they must compete for teaching and leadership

talent to a much greater extent than they did in the past.

       Two quite different bodies of research provide ideas for improving the

performance of urban school districts. One group of studies, conducted primarily by

scholars of organizational design, examines the effectiveness of particular district

management strategies. The second, conducted primarily by economists, focuses on the
                                           11
need to improve incentives. Each body of research offers important insights. Each is

somewhat insensitive to the importance of the insights offered by the other literature. A

theme of this chapter is that insights from both literatures are critical to improving urban

schools.

IV. District Improvement Strategies

        Improving urban elementary schools

        A consensus is emerging on the components of urban school district reform

strategies that are successful in improving elementary schools. Elements include system-

wide, demanding curricula that are well aligned with state standards and assessments, a

new partnership between the central office and city schools known as reciprocal

accountability, the use of student assessment results to guide decision-making, and a

consistent strategy to support English-language learners. Since each of these elements is

either relatively new or controversial, I provide an explanation of each.

        There are two advantages to adopting common curricula for all elementary

schools. First, it facilitates the integration into classes of the many students who move

during the school year from one district elementary school to another. Second, it reduces

the cost of providing professional development aimed at increasing teachers’ skill in

teaching core curricula. Alignment of curricula with state standards is essential so that

teachers have reason to believe that helping their students to master the curriculum will

result in good scores on mandatory state tests. The reason to adopt relatively demanding

curricula is to assure the district’s best teachers that they have the tools to prepare

students to succeed in subsequent education. However, since curricula that challenge

students to master higher order skills are difficult to teach effectively, a corollary is the
                                           12
importance of providing the ongoing training needed to learn to teach the curricula well.

This is where the new role for the central office comes in. 20

       Reciprocal accountability is a term characterizing the relationship between the

central office and individual schools.21 On the one hand, the district leadership requires

that schools make progress in improving student achievement. If they do not, there are

consequences, often beginning with a change in leadership. On the other hand, the

district leadership commits itself to providing the resources that schools need to

accomplish this goal. These include well educated teachers, on-going training that

increases principals’ and teachers’ effectiveness, enough time in the school day for

teachers to both work together at instructional improvement and to provide extra help to

lagging students, and the resources needed to support the learning of students with

varying needs.

       Making reciprocal accountability a reality requires a new role for the central

office. It must recognize that schools vary in capacity and need to be treated differently.

Low performing schools need special attention and support. Schools making real

progress need the freedom to use resources in new ways. To provide the resources

schools need, the district leadership must reallocate resources away from the many

programs and activities that absorb funds but do not contribute in a coherent fashion to

improving students’ literacy and mathematics skills in the district as a whole.

       Given the importance of preparing all students to master state learning standards,

it is important to track progress toward this goal and to use data to inform decision-

making. One use of data is to assess whether professional development is making a

difference. Another is to identify schools in need of intervention. Yet a third is to

provide school faculties with up-to-date, fine-grained information on the extent to which
                                             13
individual students are mastering critical skills. (Formative assessment is the term used

to describe such information.) School faculties need to learn how to use the results of

formative assessments to assess the effectiveness of their instruction, to identify skills

that need to be taught again or taught differently, and to figure out ways to improve

instruction and to provide lagging students with extra learning time. Central office

leadership is needed in developing or purchasing the assessments, in providing school

faculties with the results in an easy-to-understand format, and in providing the training

school faculties need to learn to make constructive use of the assessment results. 22

       A critical challenge in most urban school districts is educating students who come

to school with little or no proficiency in English. For example, in 2007, 18 percent of

Boston’s 57,000 public school students were English-language learners. They came from

40 different countries. The largest native language groups were Spanish, Haitian Creole,

and Chinese, but there also were students speaking dozens of other languages. State and

federal accountability systems requiring that the scores of English-language learners on

state examinations be included in calculations of schools’ performance ratings have

increased pressure on schools to develop the English proficiency of English-language

learners.

       How best to teach English-language learners has been the subject of great

controversy in the United States.23 On the one side are advocates of bilingual education,

an approach that combines some native-language instruction with instruction in English.

They argue that developing students’ reading abilities in their native language will help

them to learn to read in English. On the other side are advocates of English-only

instruction, who argue that instruction in a student’s native language slows progress in

mastering English. In practice, the choice of instructional method is much less clear-cut
                                         14
than a dichotomous choice between bilingual education or English-only instruction. For

example, some bilingual programs begin with instruction solely in students’ native

language and then make a transition to English. Others employ two teachers with each

group of students from the outset, one of whom teaches in the student’s native language

for part of the day and the other teacher teaches in English for part of the day. Some

programs aim to move children to English-only instruction within a year, while others

continue with instruction in two languages for several years.

       There are also many variants of English-only approaches. At one extreme,

students are placed in regular classes with native-English speakers and expected to

“catch-up.” In another approach, called structured English immersion, students are

grouped together for a specific period of time and taught content in English using special

techniques accessible to English-language learners.

       Of course, the quality of implementation of any particular approach, whether it be

a form of bilingual education or English-only instruction, varies from classroom to

classroom, depending on the skills of the teachers, the time allotted to learning to read,

the availability of resource materials, and the backgrounds and skills of the students.

However, such subtleties are typically lost in the heat of debates about bilingual

education. The intensity of the controversy is illustrated by the passage of laws in several

states, including California and Arizona, prohibiting or severely restricting the use of

bilingual education in public schools.

       While many evaluations of the relative effectiveness of bilingual education and

English-only instruction have been conducted, only a small percentage of studies have

sufficiently rigorous designs to provide compelling evidence. A recent meta-analysis of

evaluations with satisfactory designs reached two important conclusions. The first is that
                                           15
bilingual instruction does not hamper academic progress in either a student’s native

language or in English. Indeed, bilingual education has a small advantage, on average,

over the English-only approach. The second is that program quality matters more than

the choice of a bilingual education or an English-only approach. In other words, what is

most important is having instructors skilled in teaching English-language learners,

curriculum that is accessible to and engages English-language learners, sufficient time

devoted to acquiring literacy skills, close monitoring of the progress of each child, and

rapid intervention when a child is lagging. All of this is just one more aspect of

reciprocal accountability between the central office and individual schools.

       The four elements that are part of successful school district improvement

strategies make sense. Indeed, to some readers, they may seem obvious. However,

implementing them requires a significant reorganization of central offices, which

historically have been large bureaucracies divided into departments (often derogatively

labeled “silos”), each of which functioned with its own standard-operating procedures

and did not coordinate its work with that of other departments. The typical district had

hundreds of programs with different objectives and funding sources. The central office’s

role was to administer the funding of these programs, not to ask whether they contributed

to a coherent instructional program. Most districts kept track of students’ scores on end-

of-the-year achievement tests and some eventually sent these scores to schools.

However, until quite recently, most central offices did not think in terms of an obligation

to put in place a system of formative assessments that would provide school faculties

with timely, fine-grained information on students’ skills. In most urban districts there

was one office responsible for the education of English-language learners, with little
                                           16
coordination between the work of that office and the operations of other central office

departments.

       Improving Urban Secondary Schools

       Among the most troubling indicators of the problems of urban education are the

extraordinarily high dropout rates of students from urban high schools and the large

number of urban high school graduates who enroll in two-and four-year colleges but fail

to pass the exams required for entry into credit-bearing courses. Fifteen years ago,

when states began standards-based education reforms, many analysts thought that these

problems would go away in time. The logic was that the poor reading and math skills of

a great many ninth graders stemmed from low quality elementary school education.

Thus, improving elementary schools would solve crippling problems that besiege

secondary schools. This logic has turned out to be faulty. Many urban school districts

have markedly improved the reading and math scores of elementary school students. Yet

the dropout rates of students from their urban high schools do not seem to have declined.

Nor have the scores on state tests administered to urban 10th graders improved nearly as

much as the scores of elementary school students. This pattern has led to the realization

that improving secondary schools, including both middle schools and high schools, is the

biggest challenge facing urban school districts.

       Recent research has shed light on the elements of effective strategies to improve

urban secondary schools. Critical dimensions include:

           •   creating a personalized and orderly learning environment in which

               students and teachers treat each other respectfully,

           •   identifying students who enter middle schools and high schools with poor

               academic skills and intervening intensively to improve these skills,
                                             17
            •   improving the quality of instruction and making a stronger case to students

                that particular skills and knowledge are important to acquire,

            •   connecting students to the world of work,

            •   strengthening connections between high schools and community

                colleges.24

       The most visible evidence of this strategy is the creation of many small high

schools – often by dividing large comprehensive high schools into three or four smaller

schools housed in the same building. Other common actions are the creation of double-

length instructional periods in English and mathematics for ninth graders with weak

skills. In many districts these sensible changes have taken place quite rapidly, to a large

extent because they could be done by administrative fiat, if sufficient resources are

available. It has proven more difficult, however, to improve instruction and engage

students.

       Why is progress so slow?

       If urban districts such as Boston and San Diego have made progress by embracing

the district improvement strategy described above, why have not all urban districts done

so? Why has the rate of progress been so modest in even the most rapidly improving

urban districts? There are several contributing explanations. First, attempts to implement

the district-wide improvement strategies described above encounter significant political

resistance. Some comes from central office staff that lose their jobs as resources are

reallocated from peripheral programs to school-based professional development aimed at

improving English and mathematics instruction. Some comes from central office staff

told that reciprocal accountability means they must serve schools rather than require that

schools follow their rules. Some comes from teachers who are told that they must work
                                          18
with colleagues and coaches to improve instruction and make it more consistent instead

of closing the classroom door. Some comes from parents angry that principals whom

they personally like are replaced due to stagnant test scores. Sustaining commitment to a

coherent district improvement strategy in the face of such resistance requires significant

support from the school board and the business community. Often such support dwindles

as resistance to change becomes evident. 25 The brief tenure of urban superintendents

(less than three years, on average) also contributes to resistance. Why should central

office staff, teachers, and parents embrace significant system-wide changes if the initiator

of the changes is unlikely to see them through? Of course, the causation works the other

way as well: resistance leads many superintendents to resign rather than to fight for

change.

       A related reason why only a relatively small minority of urban districts has

successfully embraced a coherent system-wide instructional improvement strategy is that

there is no recipe for doing so. Instead, each superintendent must find his or her own way

of building and sustaining support for change and for overcoming the many sources of

resistance. This is vividly illustrated by the different approaches taken by Alan Bursin

and Thomas Payzant, both of whom led districts that significantly improved student

achievement under their leadership.26

       A third reason is that the incentives in place for many actors in urban education

do not support an unwavering commitment to improving student achievement. These

incentives are a legacy of a time when students needed fewer skills to earn a decent living

and an industrial mode of production was a serviceable way to organizing schooling.

These incentives hinder progress today.

V. Improving Incentives
                                         19
       In analyzing the problems with American public schools and urban public schools

in particular, economists have emphasized that the system provides the wrong incentives

for teachers, for school administrators, and for students. In this section, we explain these

arguments.

       Incentives for teachers

       Virtually all public school districts in the United States use compensation

systems for teachers that reward advanced degrees and years of teaching experience and

nothing else. School districts typically adopted these uniform salary scales in the middle

of the 20th century as part of efforts to professionalize teaching. Often they replaced

arrangements in which the compensation of individual teachers depended on their gender

and on their relationships with school board members.

       While the uniform salary schedule may have made sense in the past, it creates a

variety of problems today for urban school districts striving to use scarce resources

wisely. One problem is the difficulty of attracting skilled teachers in fields such as

chemistry and computer science that provide strong private sector employment

opportunities and in fields such as special education where the work with children may be

especially draining. A second is that the pay scale creates incentives for teachers to

acquire Master’s Degrees even though most studies indicate that teachers with Masters

Degrees are not more effective than those without them. A third is the lack of incentives

for teachers to invest in developing skills that do enhance their effectiveness. A fourth is

the lack of incentive for skilled teachers to work in the schools serving high

concentrations of low-achieving students. Indeed, teachers use the seniority rights that

are part of most collectively bargained contracts to move away from such schools. 27
                                        20
       Among the most common initiatives aimed at improving incentives for teachers

are pay premiums for teaching in schools serving high percentages of poor children.

Often the pay premiums are coupled with increases in the length of the school day and

school year and with training aimed at improving instructional quality. To date the

evidence on the consequences of these initiatives is extremely limited. However, one

study based on data from North Carolina suggests that initiatives of this kind have

promise. This study found that a $1,800-per-year retention bonus for math, science, and

special education teachers working in high-poverty or academically failing secondary

schools reduced eligible teachers' turnover rates by 12%.28 Unfortunately the study did

not address the critical question of whether the reduction in teacher turnover resulted in

increases in student achievement.

       Another type of initiative ties teachers’ pay to demonstration of mastery of

particular knowledge bases and skills. One well known initiative of this type is National

Board Professional Teacher Certification, a voluntary program under which teachers with

at least three years of experience who successfully demonstrate a range of skills over a

year-long evaluation process are designated as Board Certified Teachers. A number of

states and school districts offer significant pay premiums to teachers who have acquired

this status. A recent study showed that elementary school teachers who achieved Board

Certification were more effective in increasing students’ reading and math test scores

than were teachers who applied for Board Certification but did not succeed in obtaining

it.29 These results suggest the value of using aspects of the board certification process in

making teacher licensing and tenure decisions.

       Yet another type of initiative provides pay premiums to teachers or to the entire

faculties of schools that are effective in improving students’ scores on standardized tests.
                                          21
The direct link between student performance gains and teachers’ pay makes this type of

policy attractive to many policymakers. It troubles many teacher union leaders, however.

One reason is that test scores are imperfect indicators of the skills students should master.

A second is that test scores depend not only on teachers’ efforts and skills, but also on

many factors beyond teachers’ control. It is clear that the consequences of performance-

based pay plans (sometimes called “new-style merit pay”) will depend critically on the

quality of the student assessments and the development of “value-added” models that

provide credible estimates of teachers’ contributions to test score gains.30 While there is

little evidence on the consequences of teacher compensation plans that link pay to student

test scores, a recent evaluation of a short-lived program in Israel found a positive impact

on student achievement. 31

        Perhaps the most interesting teacher compensation plan adopted by an urban

school district is Denver’s ProComp plan. This plan includes a combination of the type

of incentives described above: extra pay for teaching hard-to staff subjects or teaching in

hard-to-staff schools, extra pay for demonstrated mastery of knowledge and skills, and

extra pay for students’ growth in test scores. To date, there is no solid evidence on the

extent to which the plan increased the district’s ability to attract and retain skilled

teachers and to increase students’ achievement. However, the plan does demonstrate that

it is possible for school district management and teacher union leaders to bring about

significant changes in teachers’ contracts through collective bargaining.

        Incentives for school leaders

        School principals play key roles in determining the effectiveness of the schools

that they lead. Typically they hire teachers, specify their teaching assignments, and

evaluate their performances. In many school districts principals also specify the
                                           22
professional development activities teachers engage in. Principals also typically assign

students to classes and decide which students will be retained in grade. The value of

skilled principals is frequently illustrated by profiles that appear in the media of schools

with strong leaders that have been uncommonly successful in educating disadvantaged

students.

       Despite the central role of school principals in leading schools, many urban

school districts do not provide incentives to attract and retain effective school leaders.

The problems are of three kinds. First, in many urban districts school principals do not

have control over many resources. Consequently they lack the tools to lead schools

effectively. Second, the job has become much more difficult, with pressure to improve

the test scores of all students. Many districts lack effective training for developing the

skills principals need to achieve these relatively new goals. Third, in many districts,

effective principals are paid on the same scale as ineffective principals. Moreover, some

state labor laws make it very difficult for school district superintendents to remove

ineffective principals. The net result is that many urban public schools lack effective

leaders.

       In recent years some states have passed legislation that makes it easier for school

district superintendents to remove school principals who are not effective. Some states

and urban districts have also introduced performance-based contracts for school leaders.

These types of initiatives make sense as part of strategies to improve school leadership.

However, whether particular initiatives succeed in attracting talented educators to

leadership positions and ultimately in improving student achievement is an empirical

question. Currently, there is very little evidence about the design of incentives that

contribute to these goals.
                                            23
       Incentives for students

       Mastering difficult skills takes hard work. Students who aspire to attend highly

competitive colleges know this and do the requisite work. However, historically the

majority of urban high school students have seen little reason to do the hard work that

skill mastery takes. They could obtain enough credits to graduate from high school by

doing minimal work in undemanding courses. They correctly perceive that differences in

math and reading skills are not rewarded when they apply for entry-level jobs as 18-year-

olds. There is always some college that will accept them if they have a diploma. 32

       A number of initiatives are underway to improve incentives for students. More

than 20 states currently require high school students to pass state-mandated English and

mathematics examinations in order to obtain a high school diploma. The intent of these

test-based graduation requirements is to create incentives for students to focus greater

attention on academic work and to create a signal to employers that high school graduates

do possess basic cognitive skills. However, passing these exams does not mean that

students are ready for college or the demands of jobs with promising futures. While more

than 70 percent of high school graduates enter two-and four-year colleges, more than one

quarter must take remedial English and mathematics courses before registering for

courses that provide college credit, and the percentage is much higher for urban students.

More than 60 percent of employers rate high school graduates’ skills in writing and basic

math as only “fair” or “poor.” 33

       A new initiative undertaken by a growing number of states, working together

under the auspices of the American Diploma Project, seeks to align high school

standards, assessments, and graduation requirements with the knowledge and skills

needed for success in post-secondary education and in jobs with growth potential. The
                                             24
hope is that this will provide educators and students with clear signals about the adequacy

of the work they do together in high schools.

        It makes sense for states to align high school standards, assessments, and

graduation requirements with the knowledge and skills needed for post-secondary

education and work. Public higher educational institutions could create incentives for

high school students to master the more demanding skills required for high school

graduation by committing to use students’ scores on recalibrated state exams for college

course placement. In other words, knowledge that scoring well on high school exit exams

would guarantee acceptance into college courses that count toward degree attainment (as

opposed to being funneled into “developmental courses” that do not) would increase

students’ incentives to do the hard work needed to attain mastery of important skills. 34

       There is another benefit of encouraging states to align high school graduation

requirements with the skills needed to do college level work. This would almost

inevitably lead states to modify content standards at the earlier grades so that students

would be prepared to do more demanding high school work. The net result is likely to be

a reduction in the variation across states in standards and assessments. Moving toward a

common set of national standards and assessments makes sense in a country with a

mobile population and an increasingly integrated economy.

       One caution is the need for care in determining just what skills are important for

success after high school graduation. The tendency is to ratchet up standards in areas in

which it is relatively easy to measure skills, such as mathematics, and to neglect skills

that are critical to success in a variety of post-secondary educational and work settings,

but that are difficult to measure. These include oral communication skills, teamwork

skills, and job search and interviewing skills. 35
                                          25
       A ten-year experimental study of career academies illustrates that reading and

math skills are not the only skills important to success after high school. Career

academies are schools within schools that embrace three design principles. First, they are

generally smaller learning communities, and are comprised of a group of students

embedded within a larger high school, who take classes together for at least three years,

and who are taught by a team of teachers drawn from different disciplines. Second, they

offer a college preparatory curriculum with a career theme, which enables students to

identify relationships among academic subjects, and understand how they are applied in a

broad field of work. Third, they generally include partnerships with local employers who

provide work-based learning opportunities for students enrolled in the Academies.

       In 1993, one of the nation’s leading contract research firms, MDRC, undertook an

experimental study of the educational impact of Career Academies. Nine career

academies, for which there was excess student demand, participated. All of these

academies were located in urban school districts and served large percentages of students

living in poverty. Lotteries were used to determine which interested students were

offered places in the career academies. Both the students who were offered places (the

treatment group) and those who lost out in the lottery and enrolled in other school

programs (the control group) were followed through high school and for four years after

graduation. A variety of indicators of success (reading and math scores, course grades,

on-time graduation, college enrollment and completion, labor market earnings) were

measured for all participants.

       The results of the career academy evaluation are quite striking. Both treatment

and control group members had academic skills, high school graduation rates, and college

enrollment rates that were higher, on average, than the national average for students with
                                            26
similar demographic characteristics. (This reflects the greater than average motivation of

students who wanted to enroll in career academies.) However, students who were offered

places in the career academies did not fare better on these measures of academic success

than the students in the control group. Fortunately, MDRC researchers continued to

follow students from the treatment and control groups into the labor market. They found

that males who had been offered places in a career academy earned $10,000 (18%) more

than males in the control group in the four year follow-up period after high school. The

labor market benefits were especially large for males who were at risk of dropping out of

high school at the beginning of the experiment. The likely explanation for this pattern is

that enrollment in career academies and the associated opportunities for work place

internships and jobs enabled students to acquire skills that were important to labor market

success even though they were not captured by scores on standardized reading and math

tests. 36

            A critical lesson from the MDRC study is the importance of supporting the

development and implementation of programs like career academies that offer rich

opportunities for urban students to acquire the communication and teamwork needed in

middle class workplaces. One way to do this might be to make demonstration of these

skills a condition for high school graduation. Of course, doing this would require

different and more expensive types of skill assessments than the standardized

examinations states currently use to measure mathematics and English skills.

Experimenting with such alternative assessments is important in that it might stimulate

the development of high school programs that provide urban students with critical skills

not captured by scores on standardized reading and mathematics tests.

            Incentives and capacity building are complements
                                           27
        As described above, states and urban school districts have recently introduced a

wide variety of policies aimed at improving the alignment between incentives and the

goal of dramatically improving students’ skills. This concern with incentives is a step

forward for public education. However, it is important to keep in mind that it is much

more difficult to get incentives right than it is to point out the flaws in current incentives.

Many initiatives that have seemed promising in the past, such as basing teachers’ pay on

supervisors’ evaluations (sometimes called “old-style merit pay”), have not improved the

performance of urban school districts.37 Moreover, some incentives have elicited

dysfunctional responses. Documented examples include changing students’ answers on

high stakes tests 38 and suspending students likely to score poorly on such tests.39

        Stating the incentive challenge in a positive way, people like to do what they do

well.40 Consequently, a critical complement to appropriate incentives is a management

system that provides teachers and administrators with the skills to improve student

achievement and students with the consistently high quality instruction they need to

master important skills.

VI. Catalyzing and Monitoring Progress

        As described above, research on the reform efforts of states and urban school

districts over the last 20 years provides guidelines about the elements of successful

school improvement strategies and promising changes in incentives. These are steps

forward. However, guidelines are not recipes. Every district will need to work out the

details of its strategy for systemic change and improved incentives.

        Given the power of inertia, it is important to catalyze change. Given the potential

for mistakes in designing and implementing systemic improvements and new incentives,

it is important to monitor whether changes are resulting in better education. Two types of
                                           28
information can be important in catalyzing change and monitoring progress. The first

comes from the choices parents make about where to send their children to school. The

second comes from systematic evaluations of student outcomes. We consider each in

turn.

        A role for school choice

        One source of information about the effectiveness of incentives and school

management initiatives are parents’ choices about where to send their children to school.

Parents with significant financial resources who are unhappy with their child’s public

school can either move to a school district with better public schools or send their child to

a private school. Historically low income parents have typically lacked these options.

        In an attempt to provide parents with choices, many urban school districts have

established public school choice programs. While details vary greatly among districts,

choice plans typically allow parents to rank their school preferences and then a system

that gives priority to neighborhood students and to siblings (and sometimes to racial

balance) is used to determine assignments to oversubscribed schools. The 2001 Now

Child Left Behind law takes school choice a step further by mandating that school

districts provide school choices for children currently attending schools that have not

made Adequate Yearly Progress for two years in a row.

        Most public school choice plans suffer from two related problems. First, the

supply of effective schools does not grow over time. Consequently, many parents do not

get their first choices and remain frustrated with their children’s schooling options.

Second, schools that are not popular among parents are typically filled with students who

lose out in the lottery. Consequently, there are no strong signals to the educators staffing

these schools that the schools need to change or to close.
                                            29
       In recent years 40 states have passed legislation that supports the creation of

charter schools, which are publicly funded schools that typically establish their own

curricula and do not operate under many of the rules that constrain conventional public

schools. Currently there are almost four thousand charter schools in the United States

serving approximately one million students.

       Supporters of charter schools envision two types of benefits. The first is that they

provide new schooling options for parents who are dissatisfied with conventional public

schools and lack the resources to use private schools. Second, by competing with

conventional public schools for money and students, they will catalyze improvement in

public schools. One plausible improvement mechanism is that the potential loss of

students to private schools will nudge urban school districts and teacher unions toward

contract revisions that provide better alignment of incentives with school district

improvement goals.

       A related initiative is the call to have public funding for education follow

students. In other words, a particular funding level would be attached to each student,

with the level higher for students with documented special learning needs. Every public

school, whether a conventional public school or a charter school, would operate on the

revenues from the students it attracted. If a student changed schools, the funding would

move with the student. The aim of this proposal is to create strong incentives for school

districts and individual schools to create educational programs that appeal to parents and

students.

       In principle, both charter schools and funding that follows students make sense as

components of a strategy to improve urban education. However, whether they fulfill

their promise depends critically on the details of the laws and rules governing their
                                           30
operation. To cite just one example, currently urban charter schools are less likely to

serve students with special needs than are conventional urban public schools. Whether

this puts conventional urban districts at a disadvantage in competing for students depends

critically on whether funding formulas accurately reflect the extra costs of educating

children with special needs.

       Currently charter schools laws and school funding formulas vary enormously

across states. It is much easier to start a charter school in some states than in others. In

some states charter schools are significantly disadvantaged relative to conventional public

schools in access to funding and physical facilities. In other states the playing field is

more equal. In yet other states, legislation and rules make it difficult for public schools to

compete with charter schools. Much needs to be learned about the tensions between

designs of charter school laws and funding formulas that encourage the creation of

educational alternatives and designs that create a level playing field on which schools can

compete for students and funding.

       Monitoring progress

       Advances in computer-based administrative record keeping and data retrieval

make it increasingly possible to monitor a variety of student outcomes. For example,

most urban districts currently have, or could develop, the data-analytic capacity to

monitor progress in attracting and retaining a skilled teaching force. Critical data to track

would be the percentage of new teachers hired before the start of the school year, the

number of teachers who apply for openings in schools targeted for improvement, and

these schools’ success in attracting and retaining their first choices.

       A second important type of information consists of longitudinal data on students’

mathematics and reading skills. Such data can support the tracking of students’
                                         31
achievement growth over time, something that can be especially important in judging the

performance of schools serving extremely mobile student populations. For example,

some of these schools have low average test scores, but have achieved significant success

in increasing the achievement of students who had spent the entire year at the school.

Identifying such schools is critical to making informed judgments about which schools

are doing a good job under difficult circumstances and which schools are in need of

significant intervention.

       Another area in which better data are available than in the past concerns outcomes

for high school students. For example, a growing number of states have state-wide

student tracking systems that provide more accurate information on student dropout rates

than was available in the past. It is also possible now at relatively low cost to track the

college progress of high school graduates of particular schools or districts through a

service called StudentTracker, provided by the National Student Clearinghouse. As stated

on its website, this service provides answers to the following questions:

       Where did my program's former participants enroll in college?

       How long did their educational efforts persist?

       Did they transfer between colleges?

       Did they receive a college degree? If so, which degree?

       Where did they graduate from college?

       What was their college major? 41

Tracking this information over time would provide important evidence of the progress

urban high schools are making in preparing students to thrive after graduation.

VII. A National Problem Requiring a National Solution
                                           32
   Putting in place the type of system-wide school improvement plan and incentives

described in this chapter will improve urban schools. However, urban school districts

cannot do these things on their own. Progress will also depend critically on state and

federal policies.

   State collective bargaining laws play an important role in either facilitating or

hindering changes in incentives for teachers and school administrators. State school

finance policies influence whether urban districts have the resources to serve intensely

disadvantaged student populations. State educational accountability systems influence

the incentives for skilled teachers to work in urban school systems and the consequences

when schools are judged to be failing or succeeding.

   Federal government policies also influence urban school districts in important ways.

For example, the 2001 No Child Left Behind Act creates strong pressures on urban

districts to improve the reading and math scores of all groups of students defined by

race/ethnicity, and poverty and special education status. While this is a strength, the law

also has significant weaknesses that affect urban school districts. For example, by

placing schools and districts in only one of two categories (making Adequate Yearly

Progress or failing to), the law does not distinguish between schools in drastic need of

intervention, and those that are making progress with most groups of students. Another

respect in which federal government education policies matter is in supporting research.

The federal government provides a significant portion of the funding for research on the

consequences of systemic reform strategies and new incentives for educators and

students. This research is critical to increasing the knowledge base available to

policymakers charged with improving urban schools.
                                             33
   In closing, I return to the image of urban schools as mirrors. The accomplishments

and failures of children growing up in large cities reveal a great deal about the nation’s

success in providing high quality education to urban students. However, they also reflect

the nation’s success in providing employment, health care, and public safety to city

dwellers. Finally, they provide us with an image of the future of America’s cities. For all

these reasons improving the lives of urban children is a pressing national priority.
                                                              34
                                                            Figure 9.1



                         The Adult Occupational Distribution:
                         1969 and 1999

                       40%


                       35%


                       30%
% of Employed Adults




                       25%


                       20%


                       15%


                       10%


                       5%


                       0%
                             Service   Blue Collar   Administrative Sales Related Technicians   Professional Managers and
                             Workers    Workers        Support       Occupations                Occupations Administrators
                                                       Workers

                                                                    1969    1999
                                                    35


                                                   Figure 9.2




         Occupational Change May 2000-May 2006
         Change in 1000’s of persons



     Change in Total Employment                                                                         7,356


Management, Business & Financial
                                                                     1,290
      Operations Occs.

        Professional and Related.
                                                                                2,506
              Occupations

    Installation, Maintenance and
                                                               587
         Repair Occupations


   Sales and Related Occupations                                     1,414


     Construction and Extraction
                                                                        1,766
            Occupations

        Office and Admin Support
                                          -1,598
               Occupations


         Production Occupations        -2,045


     Transportation and Material
                                                               441
         Moving Occupations


             Service Occupations                                                        3,244


   Farming, Fishing and Forrestry
                                                    -250
            Occupations

                               -4000       -2000           0           2000               4000   6000     8000
                                                                 Thousands of Jobs
                                                              36




                                                             Figure 9.3

                                           Economy-Wide Measures of Route and Non-
                                           Routine Task Input: 1969-1998 (1969=0)

                                         14
                                                                                 Co mplex Communicat ion

                                         12

                                         10
Percentile Change in 1969 Distribution




                                                                                 Expert Thinking
                                          8

                                          6

                                          4

                                          2

                                          0
                                               1969   1980         1990   1998
                                          -2
                                                                                 Rout ine Manual
                                          -4

                                          -6

                                          -8                                     Rout ine Cognit ive


                                         -10
                                                                                37


                                                                           Figure 9.4




Real hourly wage by highest educational attainment for
U.S. workers: 1973-2005 (2005 dollars)
                        $35.00



                        $30.00                                                                                                        Advanced Degree




                        $25.00                                                                                                        4-year college
 W age/H our (2005 $)




                                                                                                                                      degree


                        $20.00
                                                                                                                                      Some College
                                                                                                                                      High School
                        $15.00                                                                                                        diploma



                        $10.00                                                                                                        Some High
                                                                                                                                      School


                         $5.00
                                 73

                                       75

                                             77

                                                   79

                                                         81

                                                               83

                                                                     85

                                                                           87

                                                                                 89

                                                                                       91

                                                                                             93

                                                                                                   95

                                                                                                         97

                                                                                                               99

                                                                                                                     01

                                                                                                                           03

                                                                                                                                 05
                             19

                                      19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                          19

                                                                                19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                20
                                            38
                                          References

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, et al. (2003a). "The Skill Content of Recent Technological

       Change: An Empirical Exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4):

       1279-1333.

Becker, H. S. (1952). "The Career of the Chicago Public SchoolTeacher." American

       Journal of Sociology 57(5): 470-77.

Bishop, J. H., F. Mane, et al. (2001). The Role of End-of-Course Exams and Minimal

       Competency Exams in Standards-Based Reforms. Brookings Papers in Education

       Policy 2001. D. Ravitch. Washington, D.C., Brookings.

Cantrell, S., J. Fullerton, et al. (2007). National Board Certification and Teacher

       Effectiveness: Evidence from a Random Assignment Experiment. National

       Bureau of Economic Research Economics of Education Workshop. Cambridge.

Clotfelter, C., E. Glennie, et al. (2006). "Would Higher Salaries Keep Teachers in High-

       Poverty Schools? Evidence from a Policy Intervention in North Carolina."

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12285.

Coleman, J. S. and a. others (1966). Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington,

       D.C., Office of Education, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.

Corcoran, S. P., W. N. Evans, et al. (2004). "Women, the Labor Market, and the

       Declining Relative Quality of Teachers." Journal of Policy Analysis and

       Management 23(3): 449-470.

Elmore, R. F. (2002). Bridging the gap between standards and achievement: The

       imperative for professional development in education. Washington, DC, Albert

       Shanker Institute: 40.
                                            39
Evans, W. N., S. E. Murray, et al. (1999). The Impact of Court-Mandated School Finance

       Reform

Equity and Adequacy in Education Finance: Collected Papers H. F. Ladd. Washington,

       D.C., National Academy Press.

Figlio, D. N. (2005). "Testing, Crime and Punishment." National Bureau of Economic

       Research Working Paper No. 11194.

Francis, D. J., N. K. Lesaux, et al. (2006). Language of instruction for language minority

       learners. Developing Literacy in a second language: Report of the National

       Literacy Panel. D. L. August and T. Shanahan. Mahwah, N.J., Erlbaum

       Associates: 365-414.

Freeman, R. B. (1985). What Do Unions Do. New York, Basic Books.

Graham, P. A. (2006). Schooling America: How the Public Schools Meet the Nation's

       Changing Needs New York, Oxford University Press.

Hanushek, E. A. (1994). Making Schools Work: Improving Performance and Controlling

       Costs. Washington, D.C., Brookings.

Hanushek, E. A. and S. G. Rivkin (2006). School quality and the black-white

       achievement gap. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.

       12651. Cambridge.

Hess, F. M., Ed. (2005). Urban school reform: lessons from San Diego. Cambridge,

       Harvard Education Press.

Jacob, B. A. and S. D. Levitt (2003). "Rotten Apples: An Investigation of The Prevalence

       and Predictors of Teacher Cheating." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3):

       843-877.
                                           40
Johnson, S. M., M. L. Donaldson, et al. (2007). Leading the Local: Teachers Union

       Presidents Speak on Change, Challenges. Education Sector Reports. Washington,

       D.C., Education Sector.

Kemple, J. J. (2004). Career Academies: Impacts on Labor Market Outcomes and

       Educational Attainment New York, MDRC.

Lavy, V. (2007). "Using Performance-Based Pay to Improve the Quality of Teachers."

       The Future of Children 17(1): 87-109.

Levy, F. and R. J. Murnane (2004). The New Division of Labor: How Computers are

       Creating the Next Labor Market. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press.

Loewenstein, G. (1999). "Because it is there: the challenge of mountaineering --- for

       utililty theory " Kyklos 52(3): 315-344.

Murnane, R. J. (forthcoming 2007). "Improving the Education of Children Living in

       Poverty." The Future of Children.

Murnane, R. J. and D. K. Cohen (1986). "Merit Pay and the Evaluation Problem: Why

       Most Merit Pay Plans Fail and a Few Survive." Harvard Educational Review

       56(1): 1-17.

Murnane, R. J. and F. Levy (1996). Teaching the New Basic Skills. New York, Free

       Press.

Project, T. A. D. (2004). Ready or Not: Creating a High School Diploma that Counts.

       Washington D.C., Achieve.

Quint, J. (2006). Meeting Five Critical Challenges of High School Reform. New York,

       MDRC.

Reville, P., Ed. (2007). A Decade of Urban School Reform: Persistence and Progress in

       the Boston Public Schools Cambridge, Harvard Education Press.
                                           41
Rice, J. M. (1969). The Public-School System of the United States. New York, Arno

       Press.

Riis, J. A. (1892). The Children of the Poor. New York, Scribner's Sons.

Sharkey, N. S. and R. J. Murnane (2006). "Tough choices in Designing a formative

       assessment system." American Journal of Education 112(4): 572-588.

Sizer, T. R. (1968). The Schools in the City. The Metropolitan Enigma. J. Q. Wilson.

       Cambridge, Harvard University Press: 311-349.




1
   Riis, J. A. (1892). The Children of the Poor. New York, Scribner's Sons., and Rice, J.
M. (1969). The Public-School System of the United States. New York, Arno Press.
2
  Coleman, J. S. and a. others (1966). Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington,
D.C., Office of Education, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
3
   Sizer, T. R. (1968). The Schools in the City. The Metropolitan Enigma. J. Q. Wilson.
Cambridge, Harvard University Press: 311-349.
4
  Hanushek, E. A. and S. G. Rivkin (2006). School quality and the black-white
achievement gap. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12651.
Cambridge.
5
   Becker, H. S. (1952). "The Career of the Chicago Public SchoolTeacher." American
Journal of Sociology 57(5): 470-77.
6
   Graham, P. A. (2006). Schooling America: How the Public Schools Meet the Nation's
Changing Needs New York, Oxford University Press.
7
  Murnane, R. J. and F. Levy (1996). Teaching the New Basic Skills. New York, Free
Press.
8
   Figure 1 is taken from Levy, F. and R. J. Murnane (2004). The New Division of Labor:
How Computers are Creating the Next Labor Market. Princeton, N.J., Princeton
University Press..
9
  Figure 2 is based on data taken from the U.S. Current Population Survey.
10
   Figure 3 is a revised version of a figure that originally appeared in Autor, D. H., F.
Levy, et al. (2003a). "The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical
Exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1279-1333.
11
   Figure 4 is constructed from data taken from the U.S. Current Population Survey, as
reported on the Economic Policy website:
http://www.epi.org/content.cfm/datazone_dznational.
12
   Data are from U.S. Current Population Survey and were taken from the Economic
Policy Institute Data Zone, www.epinet.org/datazone/05/wagebyed_a.xls.
                                           42

13
   U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (2005). The
Condition of Education 2005 (NCES 2005-094. Washington , DC: US Government
Printing Office. Table 14.2, page 142.
14
    See Evans, W. N., S. E. Murray, et al. (1999). The Impact of Court-Mandated School
Finance Reform Equity and Adequacy in Education Finance: Collected Papers
H. F. Ladd. Washington, D.C., National Academy Press.
15
   This description of standards-based educational reforms is taken from Levy, F. and R.
J. Murnane (2004). The New Division of Labor: How Computers are Creating the Next
Labor Market. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press., pp. 134-135.
16
   For a discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of NCLB, see Murnane, R. J.
(forthcoming 2007). "Improving the Education of Children Living in Poverty." The
Future of Children.
17
   Corcoran, S. P., W. N. Evans, et al. (2004). "Women, the Labor Market, and the
Declining Relative Quality of Teachers." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
23(3): 449-470.
18
   For a discussion of this line of reasoning, see Freeman, R. B. (1985). What Do Unions
Do. New York, Basic Books.
19
   Johnson, S. M., M. L. Donaldson, et al. (2007). Leading the Local: Teachers Union
Presidents Speak on Change, Challenges. Education Sector Reports. Washington, D.C.,
Education Sector., p 15.
20
   For a discussion of the elements of urban school district reform, see Reville, P., Ed.
(2007). A Decade of Urban School Reform: Persistence and Progress in the Boston
Public Schools Cambridge, Harvard Education Press.
21
   See Elmore, R. F. (2002). Bridging the gap between standards and achievement: The
imperative for professional development in education. Washington, DC, Albert Shanker
Institute: 40.
22
   Sharkey, N. S. and R. J. Murnane (2006). "Tough choices in Designing a formative
assessment system." American Journal of Education 112(4): 572-588.
23
   This description of the evidence about how to teach English-language-learners
effectively is taken from Francis, D. J., N. K. Lesaux, et al. (2006). Language of
instruction for language minority learners. Developing Literacy in a second language:
Report of the National Literacy Panel. D. L. August and T. Shanahan. Mahwah, N.J.,
Erlbaum Associates: 365-414.
24
    Quint, J. (2006). Meeting Five Critical Challenges of High School Reform. New York,
MDRC.
25
   See Hess, F. M., Ed. (2005). Urban school reform: lessons from San Diego.
Cambridge, Harvard Education Press.
26
   See Ibid. and Reville, P., Ed. (2007). A Decade of Urban School Reform: Persistence
and Progress in the Boston Public Schools Cambridge, Harvard Education Press.
27
   Hanushek, E. A. (1994). Making Schools Work: Improving Performance and
Controlling Costs. Washington, D.C., Brookings.
28
   Clotfelter, C., E. Glennie, et al. (2006). "Would Higher Salaries Keep Teachers in
High-Poverty Schools? Evidence from a Policy Intervention in North Carolina." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12285.
29
   Cantrell, S., J. Fullerton, et al. (2007). National Board Certification and Teacher
Effectiveness: Evidence from a Random Assignment Experiment. National Bureau of
Economic Research Economics of Education Workshop. Cambridge.
                                            43

30
    Lavy, V. (2007). "Using Performance-Based Pay to Improve the Quality of Teachers."
The Future of Children 17(1): 87-109.
31
    Ibid.
32
   Bishop, J. H., F. Mane, et al. (2001). The Role of End-of-Course Exams and Minimal
Competency Exams in Standards-Based Reforms. Brookings Papers in Education Policy
2001. D. Ravitch. Washington, D.C., Brookings.
33
    Project, T. A. D. (2004). Ready or Not: Creating a High School Diploma that Counts.
Washington D.C., Achieve., executive summary, p. 2.
34
    The text in this section borrows heavily from Murnane, R. J. (forthcoming 2007).
"Improving the Education of Children Living in Poverty." The Future of Children.
35
   For a discussion of the reason these skills are increasingly important in workplaces full
of computers, see Levy, F. and R. J. Murnane (2004). The New Division of Labor: How
Computers are Creating the Next Labor Market. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University
Press.
36
   Kemple, J. J. (2004). Career Academies: Impacts on Labor Market Outcomes and
Educational Attainment New York, MDRC.
37
   Murnane, R. J. and D. K. Cohen (1986). "Merit Pay and the Evaluation Problem: Why
Most Merit Pay Plans Fail and a Few Survive." Harvard Educational Review 56(1): 1-17.
38
   Jacob, B. A. and S. D. Levitt (2003). "Rotten Apples: An Investigation of The
Prevalence and Predictors of Teacher Cheating." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3):
843-877.
39
    Figlio, D. N. (2005). "Testing, Crime and Punishment." National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 11194.
40
   Loewenstein, G. (1999). "Because it is there: the challenge of mountaineering --- for
utililty theory " Kyklos 52(3): 315-344.
41
   Information copied from the following website on April 17, 2007:
http://www.nslc.org/outreach/default.htm. The website reports that the National Student
Clearinghouse currently provides information for students attending more than 2900
institutions. Currently 91 percent of the nation’s college and university students are
enrolled in these institutions.
