                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 LIQUIDITY PRODUCTION IN 21ST CENTURY BANKING

                                           Philip Strahan

                                       Working Paper 13798
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13798


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Philip Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Liquidity Production in 21st Century Banking
Philip Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 13798
February 2008
JEL No. G2

                                            ABSTRACT

I consider banks' role in providing funding liquidity (the ability to raise cash on demand) and market
liquidity (the ability to trade assets at low cost), and how these roles have evolved. Traditional banks
made illiquid loans funded with liquid deposits, thus producing funding liquidity on the liability side
of the balance sheet. Deposits are less important in 21st century banks, but funding liquidity from
lines of credit and loan commitments has become more important. Banks also provide market liquidity
as broker-dealers and traders in securities and derivatives markets, in loan syndication and sales, and
in loan securitization. Many institutions besides banks provide market liquidity in similar ways, but
banks dominate in producing funding liquidity because of their comparative advantage in managing
funding liquidity risk. This advantage stems from the structure of bank balance sheets as well as their
access to government-guaranteed deposits and central-bank liquidity.


Philip Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu
INTRODUCTION

       Commercial banks produce credit and they provide liquidity. Credit involves channeling

resources from entities with excess funds (savers) to entities with a scarcity of funds (investors).

Many institutions produce credit. Banks collect savings from depositors and lend the funds to

firms and households; finance companies collect funds in the commercial paper market and lend

(or lease) the funds to various investors; insurance companies collect premiums and purchase

stocks, bonds, commercial paper and other securities.

       Defining liquidity is more difficult. Brunnemeier and Pederson (2007) contrast ‘funding

liquidity’ with ‘market liquidity’. Funding liquidity involves raising cash on short notice.

Brunnemeier and Pederson model trading in securities markets, so for them funding liquidity

describes traders’ ability to raise cash with securities as collateral (i.e. margin requirements).

But the concept is quite general. When a depositor withdraws cash or a firm borrows from a

credit line, for example, the issuing bank has supplied funding liquidity to the customer. Market

liquidity, in contrast, describes the cost of selling assets. Market liquidity is high when prices net

of all transactions costs approximate fundamentals (present values). Real estate brokers produce

market liquidity for houses. Broker-dealers (i.e. investment banks) produce market liquidity for

stocks, bonds and derivatives, both as underwriters in primary markets and as market makers and

traders in secondary markets.

       Banks provide both funding liquidity and market liquidity. Traditional intermediation –

making illiquid loans funded with liquid deposits – involves production of funding liquidity.

Like investment banks, commercial banks also provide market liquidity in their role as market

makers in derivatives markets. Banks also create market liquidity in loans. For example, in

securitization banks transform pools of illiquid loans, such as mortgages or credit card

                                                  1
receivables, into liquid securities. Securitization only flourishes in the presence of a deep

securities market. Banks’ function in securitization is similar to the function played by

investment bankers when they underwrite debt and equity for non-financial companies.

        In this paper I consider how banks provide funding liquidity and market liquidity, and

describe how these roles have evolved. With provision of both sorts of liquidity, banks face

unique risks and risk-management challenges. I discuss how banks meet those challenges. I

argue that banks have a special advantage in managing funding liquidity risk but not market

liquidity risk. Hence, many institutions provide market liquidity, while banks dominate in

producing funding liquidity. Their comparative advantage stems from the structure of bank

balance sheets as well as their access to government guarantees and central bank liquidity.

        In the end, I argue that liquidity production has always been, and continues to be, the core

function of banking, but its form has changed in response to development of financial technology

and deepening of securities markets. Traditional banks issued liquid deposits to finance illiquid

loans. In this ‘old-school’ model, most bank liquidity production came in the form of issuing

transactions deposits and supporting the payments system. Modern banks continue to run the

payments system, but the rise of electronic mechanisms has made this function more efficient

and reduced the float available to finance lending. At the same time, securities markets have

expanded and deepened. Thus, much of the liquidity production supported by the banking

system now occurs (in the US) or likely will occur (in developing economies) in support of the

capital markets. For example, in the form of off-balance sheet commitments to lend (e.g. lines of

credit), credit guarantees (e.g. letters of credit), securitization (and the associated implicit support

from originating banks), and syndicated lending. These modern roles have changed because

financial innovations now allow funding to be separated from the information production and

                                                   2
financial contracting necessary for credit production.1



FUNDING LIQUIDITY

Liquidity Production from Deposits

         Banks have traditionally provided funding liquidity to customers by issuing transactions

deposits that act as a close substitute for currency. Transactions deposits allow account holders

to take cash on demand from the bank. The float from this business - the average balance

depositors hold in their accounts - can be invested by the bank in loans to businesses and

households. Because banks tend to invest in illiquid loans, this business model has been called

‘asset transformation’ - banks transform illiquid and hence high-yield assets (loans) into liquid

and thus low-yield assets (deposits). The yield spread creates positive carry for the bank. Loans

are illiquid because banks lend to small and medium-sized businesses without access to broad

securities market. To do such lending, banks collect private information on credit risk and future

growth opportunities and monitor borrowers over the life of the loan.

         The early theory emphasized how information and monitoring solve financial contracting

problems in bank lending (e.g., Leland & Pyle, 1977). As the intermediary, the bank pools funds

from many small and uninformed depositors and lends on their behalf. Given the relatively

limited information of these investors, banks tend to be financed with debt (Townsend, 1979).

Because banks monitor loans on behalf of depositors, Diamond (1984) argues that they will be

large and diversified. This structure minimizes the cost of delegating the monitoring role from


1
  This paper will not survey the literature on liquidity and banking. The literature is a vast, with many hundreds of
papers focusing on bank runs, contagion and financial crises. These papers span finance, industrial organization and
macroeconomics. It is simply too much to review here. I will briefly discuss some classic treatments of these
topics, but will focus most of the discussion on the current state of liquidity production and liquidity risk that we see
emerging as banks change to keep pace with the development of capital markets.
                                                           3
the principal depositor to the agent banker. Safety and soundness improves the banker’s

incentives. So, theory suggests that loans are illiquid because the originating bank has superior

information to any potential buyer, and that banks are large, well-diversified, and financed

mainly with debt.

       In contrast to loans, deposits are low in risk and high in liquidity. Bank deposits possess

the three attributes theorists ascribe to money, namely they act as a store of value, they are

denominated in the economy’s unit of account (e.g. dollars for the U.S.), and they can be used as

a medium of exchange. In order for deposits to act as an effective store of value, banks must

minimize the risk to depositors that their claims will not be honored at face value; hence low risk

and high liquidity go hand in hand.

       Banks also spend substantial resources to enhance customers’ ability to use deposits as a

medium of exchange. For example, demand depositors use checks as a medium of exchange. In

recent years, electronic payments technologies offer a cheaper alternative to cash or checks in

both large and small transactions. Customers can use debit cards to transfer funds electronically

from the buyer’s deposit account to the seller’s without losing interest before making the

payment. Credit card transactions work similarly, although the buyer maintains more flexibility

by having the option to borrow funds from the issuing bank.

Liquidity Production from Loans

       Banks also produce funding liquidity by issuing lines of credit (sometimes known as

‘revolvers’ or ‘loan commitments’), which allow customers to receive cash by drawing down the

line, much as a demand deposit allows customers to take cash at any time. The difference

between a demand deposit versus a line of credit - such as a credit card account – is that the line

is not pre-funded. Instead, the customer borrows from the bank when they take cash, typically at

                                                  4
a pre-arranged rate of interest. Households use unsecured lines in the form of credit card

accounts and secured lines in the form of home-equity lines. Businesses typically also receive

liquidity from banks in the form of credit lines.

       The appeal of lines of credit has been studied theoretically from the stand point of

businesses. For example, credit lines mitigate the risk of credit rationing for businesses during

downturns (Berger & Udell, 1992; Morgan, 1998), and they insure firms against shocks to

demand for capital (Holmstrom & Tirole, 1997). Firms can also use cash, but Sufi (2007) shows

that firms with high cash flow use bank lines as a cheaper source of liquidity. Firms with low

cash flow are unable to access bank liquidity on good terms and as a result hold cash instead.

Sufi also finds that firms without bank lines adjust their buffer cash to changes in cash flow,

while firms with access to bank lines do not. Together these results suggest that bank lines

mitigate liquidity constraints on firms by providing them access to capital when investment

opportunities improve (Almeida, Campello and Weisbach, 2004).

What explains the traditional model of banking?

       Why combine liquid deposits with illiquid loans and credit lines? There have been many

attempts to understand this traditional structure of banks. Some explanations suggest a causal

chain running from liquid deposit to illiquid lending; some emphasize a chain of logic running

from illiquid loans to liquid deposits; a third set emphasize a true synergy in which the causality

goes in both directions.

                                Liquid Deposits Î Illiquid Loans

       One simple explanation for bank balance sheets stems from government deposit

insurance. With insurance, deposits are safe, regardless of the bank’s investment and financing

decisions. Claims against banks are thus a close substitute for claims against the government and

                                                    5
are an equally good store of value. Banks can invest in safe and liquid assets - they can be

structured as narrow banks - or they can invest in higher yielding risky assets like loans. That

decision does not matter to a fully insured depositor. With limited liability, bank shareholders

receive the upside but have limited downside and benefit from risky, high-yield assets. Thus, the

‘moral hazard’ from deposit insurance encourages banks to invest in risky assets like loans and

may play some role in explaining bank structure. Explicit deposit insurance schemes have

become common worldwide. As of 1999, for example, 99 countries had created such programs

(Kane and Demirguc-Kunt, 2002).

       Kane and Demiurgic-Kunt also show that deposit insurance was absent in most countries

before the 1960s. Implicit insurance can also induce risk-shifting behavior, but history suggests

that the structure of banking pre-dates active involvement by governments. Much theory

attempts to explain the economics of combining illiquid loans with liquid deposits absent

government guarantees. Fama (1985) argues that banks have a comparative advantage in

information production flowing from their role managing the payments system. Imagine a bank

providing payments services to a small business. Each day the small business makes and

receives payments, both in the form of checks as well as currency. These payment flows reflect

the current state of business, and if the small firm uses one bank, this bank has the opportunity to

know before others if the firm is having problems. Such private information could explain why

the bank can lend on better terms than other competing intermediaries.

       Some evidence suggests that banks do have an information advantage stemming from

deposits. Small firms concentrate their borrowing with a single financial service firm, and these

firms usually borrow from commercial banks. More than 80 percent of borrowing from financial

institutions comes from commercial banks, and most borrowing comes from lenders where firms

                                                 6
have a deposit account (Petersen and Rajan, 1994). In two bank case studies, Mester, Nakamura

and Renault (2006) and Norden and Weber (2007) find that changes in checking account

balances help banks monitor small businesses. Similarly, Udell (2004) finds that finance

companies that lend with account receivable as collateral sometimes require borrowers to set up

a special checking account to take payment on the receivables, thus potentially providing the

finance company with the same information flows available to banks.

       Loan pricing and credit availability, however, do not seem lower for those borrowing

from the bank that holds their checking account. Cole (1998), for example, finds no link

between the presence of a checking account and the probability that a firm will be granted credit

from a bank. Cole, Goldberg and White (2004) find that for small firms applying to borrow from

small banks, the likelihood of approval increases with the presence of a deposit relationship but

no such result is evident when small firms borrow from large banks. Petersen and Rajan (1994)

find no relationship between borrower deposits and the interest rate charged (holding constant

the length of the bank-borrower relationship). Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan and Stein (2005)

find no link between the presence of a checking account and the fraction of trade credit paid late,

a measure of credit availability to the firm.

       Beyond information, transaction deposits may be supplied inelastically with respect to

market interest rates, thereby allowing banks to insure borrowers against credit shocks. Berlin

and Mester (1999) present a model in which bank core deposits allow them to insure borrowers

against credit shocks, whereas an intermediary funded with, say, commercial paper, would not be

able to offer this insurance. Borrowers value this contract either because they are risk averse or

because they face costly financial distress. Thus, the deposit franchise may give banks an

advantage in lending that is unrelated to information. As evidence, Berlin and Mester show that

                                                 7
interest rates on bank loans are less sensitive to economy-wide credit shocks (e.g. corporate bond

spreads, changes in unemployment, etc) when the originating bank holds more core deposits

(defined as deposits under $100,000).

       Myers and Rajan (1998) argue that because banks are funded with very liquid debt and

have such high leverage, they need to some hold illiquid assets to mitigate the risk of

expropriation or fraud. It is simply too easy for banker to “steal” when assets are highly liquid.

In a sense, their model argues against the “narrow bank” in which deposits are backed 100

percent by low-risk and highly liquid government securities. Too much liquidity on the asset

side is dangerous because it becomes too easy for funds to be expropriated quickly. Although

not an empirical article, Myers and Rajan argue that the historical development of commercial

banking supports their model. Banks historically emerged as payments-providers only; the bank

began as a ‘money-changer’. These money changers held high levels of reserves, and the main

risk perceived at the time had to do with fraud rather than bank runs. Myers and Rajan argue that

the money-changers enhanced their reputation for honesty by engaging in lending in the local

community, hence the origin of asset transformation.

                                Illiquid Loans Î Liquid Deposits

       Several recent theories argue that the structure of bank lending shapes the nature of their

liability structure. These arguments reverse the causal chain but lead to the same main

implication, which is that illiquid loans go together with liquid deposits. For example, Calomiris

and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001) argue that demandable-deposits, by making the

bank vulnerable to a destructive run, improve incentives for monitoring loans. Similarly,

Flannery (1994) argues that very short term maturity of deposits improves bank incentives; for

example, asset substitution problems are contained by short debt maturity. Moreover, Calomiris

                                                 8
and Kahn emphasize that the “sequential service constraint”, whereby deposits are paid on a

first-come, first-served basis, strengthens monitoring incentives for informed depositors. Thus,

the nature of the bank loan portfolio shapes the structure of its deposits.

                               Illiquid Loans Í Î Liquid Deposits

        Diamond and Dybvig (1983) argue that the liquid deposit account offered through a

financial intermediary fosters households insurance against liquidity risk and fosters

consumption smoothing. In their model, a bank is a mechanism to allow investors to finance

illiquid but high return projects while insuring against unpredictable early-period consumption

demands through pooling. The cost of this arrangement is the possibility of a bank run. While

this model does not suggest a true synergy between lending and deposits, it does begin to

consider links between the two sides of the banking business.

        Recent studies suggest that by combining exposure to liquidity risk in both deposit-taking

and lending yields a risk-reducing synergy. Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (2002) argue that as long

as liquidity demands from depositors and borrowers off lines of credit are not too correlated, an

intermediary reduces its cash buffer by serving both customers. Holding cash raises costs for

both agency and tax reasons. Thus, their model yields a diversification synergy between

transactions deposits and unused loan commitments. Gatev, Schuermann and Strahan (2007)

show that bank stock-return volatility increases with both transactions deposits and unused loan

commitments, but that volatility declines when banks are exposed to liquidity on both sides of

the balance sheet. Thus, there seems to be a hedge associated with combining these two

activities.

        Gatev and Strahan (2006) suggest a stronger hypothesis than Kashyap et al, arguing that

liquidity demands may be negatively correlated during episodes of ‘flight to quality’. Funds tend

                                                  9
to flow into bank transactions deposits during such episodes. At the same time, demands from

borrowers for liquidity from credit lines also increase then because of lack of liquidity in

commercial paper and bond markets. Why do banks enjoy funding inflows when liquidity dries

up? First, the banking system has explicit guarantees of its liabilities. Second, banks have

access to emergency liquidity from the central bank. Third, large banks such as Continental

Illinois have been supported in the face of financial distress (O’Hara and Shaw, 1990). Thus,

funding inflows occur because banks are rationally viewed as a safe haven for funds. Consistent

with this notion, Pennacchi (2006) finds that during the years before federal deposit insurance,

bank funding supply did not increase when spreads tightened.

Sources of Funding Liquidity Risk

       By it very nature, providing funding liquidity makes (non-narrow) banks unstable

because they are in the position of promising to disgorge cash on demand. Diamond and Dybvig

(1983) present the classic treatment of liquidity risk from traditional asset transformation. Under

normal circumstances the bank can meet random liquidity demands from depositors, but the

structure is vulnerable to a run based on depositors’ expectation that other depositors will run. In

other words, runs can occur with no basis in fundamentals. Forced early liquidation lowers value

and so runs are costly. This bank-run scenario presents the classic rationale for government

provision of deposit insurance and back-up liquidity from central banks because these safety nets

eliminate the incentive to run based on depositor expectations that others may run. The safety

net, however, creates a host of other incentive and implementation problems (see Chapters 26 &

27 in this volume).

       The empirical evidence suggests that expectations-based runs are the exception rather

than the rule. Gorton (1988) studies seven banking panics in the United States prior to the

                                                 10
creation of the Federal Reserve and finds that in all seven cases rational concerns about solvency

motivated depositors. Under such circumstances, runs may cripple even healthy banks if

depositors can not distinguish solvent from insolvent banks. Gorton also finds, however, that the

economic shocks preceding the banking panics during the Depression were not sufficiently large

to justify the scale of the subsequent runs. Thus, changes in depositor expectations may have

exacerbated the severity of bank runs above what one might normally expect. Calomiris and

Mason (1997) study a specific run on Chicago banks in 1932 and also find no evidence that

solvent banks failed because of runs.

       More recently, McCandless, Gabrielli and Rouillet (2003) study runs faced by banks in

Argentina in 2001 and, consistent with the studies of the U.S., find that solvency concerns were

at the root of the runs. Puri and Iyer (2007) used detailed depositor-level data from a single

Indian bank that experienced a run triggered by the insolvency of a large cooperative bank

invested heavily in securities-based lending. Sharp declines in stock prices in 2001 led to the

panic, but the individual bank studied appears to have been solvent. The study finds that

depositors with a longer history with the distressed bank, depositors that also borrow from the

bank, and depositors from the majority ethnic groups were less likely to run than other account

holders. Relationships between banks and depositors seem to mitigate liquidity risk.

       Loss of funding from runs can spill over and constrain bank production of credit.

Bernanke (1983) argued, for example, that bank failures reduced credit supply and worsened the

U.S. depression during the 1930s. Many subsequent studies have tested how bank insolvency or

monetary policy changes affect credit, but several recent studies have found that pure liquidity

shocks can also alter credit. Khwaja and Mian (2005) study bank lending following runs on

dollar-denominated deposits that occurred in the wake of Pakistan’s unexpected nuclear test in

                                                11
1998. They exploit variation in the magnitude of the liquidity shock across banks (from different

levels of dollar deposits), and show that borrowers substituted away from banks experiencing

greater runs and toward banks experiencing smaller runs (or no runs). Paravisini (2007) exploits

the opposite kind of shock – an injection of liquidity by the Argentine government - and finds

that profitable lending expanded following the liquidity infusion.

       Banking panics and failures dropped to near zero in U.S. banks from the creation of the

FDIC in 1934 until the late 1970s. This stability ended in the 1980s, but most of the failures

have been from investments in high-risk loans (e.g. Continental Illinois in business lending;

Bank of New England in high-risk commercial real estate), or in the case of savings institutions

in taking on interest rate risk. In some cases banks faced funding outflows, but for the most part

instability had little to do with liquidity risk from depositors. For example, large, uninsured

depositors began removing funds from Continental Illinois in response to large credit losses on

business lending. Very recently, depositors at the UK bank Northern Rock and the US bank

Countrywide ran because of solvency concerns - losses on securities backed by troubled sub-

prime mortgages.

       Bank exposure to funding liquidity risk also arises from issuance of lines of credit, which

commit the bank to provide cash on demand. Much of the day-to-day variation in liquidity risk

is managed by diversification across a large base of customers. Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (2002)

argue that diversification benefits across broad classes of customers – specifically borrowers off

lines of credit and demand depositors – can reduce risk and the need to hold cash. As evidence,

they report that banks dominate the market for lines of credit and, among banks, those with high

transactions deposits issue more credit lines. Gatev, Schuermann and Strahan (2007) show that

stock-return volatility is lower at banks exposed to liquidity risk in both lines of credit and

                                                 12
deposits, suggesting a powerful hedge associated with combining these two products.

        Several studies explore why firms and households draw funds from credit lines.

Aggarwal, Ambrose and Lin (2005) find that individuals draw more funds from home equity

lines when their credit quality declines. Using data on Spanish firms, Jimenez, Lopez and

Saurina (2007) find that usage rates on credit lines increase as firms near bankruptcy. These

studies suggest that ex post demand for liquidity increases as a borrower’s credit quality

deteriorates, but other studies suggest that bank ex ante supply of lines offsets this risk. Banks

restrict access to lines for poor credit quality firms and households. For example, Gropp, Schulz

and White (1997) show that total supply of credit to households is lower in states with large

housing exemption, and that this reduction restricts access to low-income, high-default risk

customers. Sufi (2007) finds that large public firms with low cash flow have less access to

liquidity from bank lines and thus hold more balance-sheet cash. Similarly, Agarwal (2004)

finds that riskier private firms have both less access to credit lines and lower utilization rates than

safer firms, and Agarwal et al (2006) compare home equity lines with second mortgages (home

equity loans) and finds greater default risk in the second category of ‘spot loans’.

Managing Funding Liquidity Risk

        Banks use several tools to manage funding liquidity exposures. First, they hold liquid

assets – cash, securities, and loans that may be sold easily. Second, they have access to liquidity

from other banks in the inter-bank market. Third, they have liquidity support from the Central

Bank. And, fourth, they are funded with deposits that expand during periods of market

uncertainty.2


2
  Banks also face similar liquidity risk management problem in balancing high frequency payments during daylight
hours. The Federal Reserve provides intraday credit to help grease the wheels of the payments system. The funding
liquidity risk discussed here involves somewhat longer-lived risks of loss of funding sources beyond a single day.
                                                       13
       Holding cash is a simple yet costly way to bear liquidity risk. Banks have no particular

advantage in bearing risk this way. Cash is costly because it earns a low return, is tax inefficient,

and may be easily diverted or misallocated (Jensen, 1986). Nevertheless, during the early part of

the 20th century banks used cash to persuade depositors of their soundness. A.P. Giannini, the

founder of what is now the Bank of America, famously withstood runs during the panic of 1906

by displaying gold reserves on the street front, and offering to convert deposits into gold to all

comers. This show of strength calmed his depositors while many competing banks failed.

Modern evidence also suggests that cash and liquid assets, as well as loans that can potentially be

sold or securitized, act as a buffer for banks against funding shocks (e.g. Kashyap and Stein,

2000; Loutskina, 2005).

       Banks second layer of support comes from borrowing and lending in the interbank

market. While not a source of aggregate liquidity, interbank markets can recycle liquidity

through the system. Typically large banks have greater access to inter-bank credit than small

ones. Ashcraft, McAndrews and Skeie (2007) find that small U.S. banks hold larger cash buffers

and excess reserves with the Federal Reserve than large banks, and that they supply funds to

large banks in the Federal Funds market.

       Even with such access, a key issue for large banks is how well this market functions

during periods of market stress. Allen and Gale (2000) show theoretically how interbank

connections can lead to contagion of liquidity shortages from one part of the banking system to

others. Furfine (2002) studies the Fed Funds market during the LTCM crisis and finds that

LTCM-exposed banks continued to have access to borrowing during this period. During the

summer of 2007, however, spreads in the LIBOR market increased to about 50 basis points

above rates in the Fed Funds market as investors appeared to lose confidence in their ability to

                                                 14
evaluate the risks of large European banks with potential exposure to losses in the U.S. sub-

prime mortgages market (Kane, 2007).

       The third source of liquidity for banks is from the Central Bank, the ‘lender of last

resort’. According to Bagehot (1873), central banks should lend to illiquid but solvent banks at a

penalty rate. Some have argued that such targeted liquidity support may worsen moral hazard

problems associated with bailouts. Instead, open market operations that expand the total supply

of liquidity are preferable. Such broad expansions of liquidity can be recycled in the interbank

lending market without (or with less) moral hazard (e.g. Goodfriend and King, 1988).

Coordination failures may occur in the interbank market, however, whereby banks hoard

liquidity because of concern about counterparty solvency (e.g. Rochet and Vives, 2004). Such

coordination failures worry policymakers, who often intervene to overcome them. Examples

include the 1987 stock market crash, when commercial banks were encouraged to lend by the

Federal Reserve to distressed investment banks; the reorganization of LTCM in 1998, where

counterparties were discouraged from forcibly liquidating the hedge fund; the temporary freezing

up in the wholesale payments system following 9/11/01, when Federal Reserve officials not only

injected liquidity through open market operations and direct lending to banks, but also implored

banks to resume making payments to restore the normal patterns of payment coordination

(McAndrews and Potter, 2002); and the summer of 2007, when the Federal Reserve explicitly

encouraged banks to borrow from the discount window to assure markets that liquidity support

would be offered if necessary.

       Combining exposure to funding liquidity on both the asset and liability sides of the

balance sheet provides the fourth measure of liquidity stability for banks. First, as noted above

Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (2002) argue that demands for funding liquidity by borrowers and

                                                15
depositors tends to be less than perfectly correlated, so combining the two products offers some

diversification benefits. Moreover, Saidenberg and Strahan (2000) study the LTCM crisis during

1998 and find that bank lending increased to satisfy a systematic increase in loan demand from

firms that normally receive liquidity in the commercial paper market, but that this increase in

liquidity demand from borrowers was offset by funding inflows by depositors. Gatev and

Strahan (2006) study these flows across many market conditions and find that both bank loans

and their holding of cash and securities increase when market liquidity dries up generally (as

proxied by the commercial paper-T-bill spread).

       So, recent evidence suggests that by offering liquidity from lines of credit, bank expose

themselves to the systematic risk that they may face loan take downs across many borrowers at

the same time. Bearing this risk requires access to funds at exactly the time that most firms find

borrowing expensive. Banks enjoy an increase in funding supply at exactly such times because

they are viewed as a safe haven for funds. For example, during the 1998 liquidity crisis, banks

experienced funding inflows into transactions deposit accounts, and banks with larger transaction

deposit bases prior to the shock received the greatest inflows. Since banks tend to combine these

two products, flows into the bank deposit accounts tended to balance outflows of funds from

unused lines of credit (Gatev, Schuermann and Strahan, 2006).

Empirical Trends in Funding Liquidity

       The importance of funding liquidity produced through deposits seems to be falling

consistently over time, as shown graphically in Figure 1. The decline in the ratio of transactions

deposits to GDP has occurred as banks have increasingly offered customers money-like services

via electronic technologies. Similar trends are evident in plotting the ratio of M1, which also

includes currency, to GDP. The secular decline in ‘money demand’ reflects better payments

                                                16
technologies that allow households to make payments without losing interest on their savings.

For example, credit card payments’ share rose consistently since 1980. Debit card usage

remained very small (around 2% or less) until the middle of the 1990s, and then rose sharply to

about 20 percent of all payments by 2006.

                                         [FIGURE 1 HERE]

        Figure 1 also shows that the drop in transaction deposits has been more than offset by the

growth in unused credit lines. All kinds of lines – lines to consumers (mainly home equity lines

and credit cards) and business lines - have grown relative to GDP over the past 20 years, in

contrast to the declining ratio of transaction deposits to GDP. Lines to households have grown

most dramatically, from about 10 percent of GDP in the early 1990s to more the 30 percent by

2006, more than offsetting the decline in transactions deposits to GDP. Moreover, the total

amount of liquidity provision by the banking system as a whole has grown. Thus, while the

composition of banks provision of funding liquidity has changed, it remains as important as ever

(Berger and Bouwman, 2007).



MARKET LIQUIDITY

        Many of the changes in banking over the past twenty years reflect moving from a model

of ‘originate and hold’ to one of ‘originate and sell.’ The first model involved creation of

funding liquidity through asset transformation from loans to deposits. This traditional model has

been reshaped by the growth of loan sales and securitization. In the modern approach, the bank

creates market liquidity rather than funding liquidity; that is, the bank (or other intermediary)

transforms a hard-to-sell asset like a loan into one that is easier to sell, like a bond or other



                                                  17
security. This allows the originating bank to sell the asset to passive investors and re-cycle their

capital to originate new loans, which can in turn be transformed and sold.

Securitization

          Banks have increasingly used securitization to finance their lending by creating structures

such as collateralized loan, mortgage and debt obligations (CDOs, CLOs, CMOs and, generically

SIVs, or structured investment vehicles). These financing arrangements allow the originating

bank to remove business loans, credit card loans and mortgages from the balance sheet.

Securitization involves pooling the cash flows from a number of similar assets and selling the

pool to a separate legal entity known as a special purpose vehicle (SPV). The SPV purchases

those cash flows from the proceeds of the sale of securities, such as bonds or commercial paper.

The securities are sold to arm’s-length investors like insurance companies and money market

mutual funds. Rather than holding the asset on a balance sheet financed with liquid deposits (the

traditional model of asset transformation), securitization transforms the asset itself from an

illiquid one (pools of loans) into a liquid securities issued by the SPV (bonds and commercial

paper).

          The pooling process results in a diversified portfolio of cash flows, which are used to

support payments on debt securities issued by the SPV. Creating the separate SPV isolates the

cash-flow generating assets and/or collateral so that securities issued by the SPV are not a

general claim against the issuer, just against those assets. Cash flows from the original pool of

loans can be further stripped and repackaged based on various characteristics (e.g., the

prepayment behavior or payment priority) to enhance their liquidity. Often, the cash flows come

with some additional implicit or explicit guarantees from the originating financial institution.

For example, the originator may retain the residual or equity tranche in the SPV, thus retaining

                                                  18
most of the credit risk. Originating banks also will often issue backup liquidity when SPV

funding comes from short-term sources such as commercial paper. The backup liquidity may be

necessary if the SPV has trouble rolling over the commercial paper, as occurred during the

summer of 2007. In cases like this, there is no clean separation between the bank’s production of

funding and market liquidity because without the backup liquidity (i.e. the funding liquidity), the

securitization would probably not be possible.

       Securitization is attractive to banks (as well as to non-financial firms) because it lowers

the total cost of financing loans. One benefit of securitization is that it avoids bankruptcy costs.

In contrast to normal debt finance, owners of the SPV-issued debt have no claim against the

originator’s other assets if the originator files for bankruptcy (Ayotte and Gaon, 2006).

Moreover, the SPV itself can not go bankrupt, although defaults on the underlying loans can

create losses for bondholders. This is accomplished contractually by forcing early amortization

of the bonds issued by the SPV if cash flows from the underlying assets are lower than expected.

With no possibility of default on the bonds, no claim against the originator when cash flows are

low, and no decisions to be made by the SPV itself, the bonds sold by the SPV have side stepped

both the agency costs of financial distress as well as direct and indirect costs of bankruptcy

(Gorton and Souleles, 2006).

       While early amortization avoids financial distress cost, it does impose losses on

bondholders. Thus, buyers of bonds created through securitization face a potential lemons

problem because originators have better information and may be tempted to securitize their low-

quality loans (Akerlof, 1970). If the lemons problem were not solved in some manner,

securitization would fail to lower the costs of finance. Demarzo (2005) shows how pooling and

tranching can reduce the lemons problem by allowing the SPV to fund most of the purchase of

                                                 19
the original assets with very safe bonds issued by the SPV. In a typical structure, the SPV will

issue senior notes with a high rating (say AA), a mezzanine tranche with a lower rating (say BB),

and an equity tranche that is unrated. Both the senior and mezzanine tranches are liquid and held

by various sorts of institutional investors; only a small piece of the financing – the equity tranche

– remains illiquid. The equity tranche bears all of the losses (unless losses fully deplete this

tranche), and is typically held by the originator (Franke and Krahnen, 2004) or the master or

special servicer (Sanders, 2004). Thus, most of the credit risk is concentrated in the equity

tranche; because the originator holds this tranche, their incentive to place lemons in the pool is

reduced. Moreover, the originator typically continues to collect payments and pass these

payments to the SPV. Again, holding the first loss also improve incentives to monitor the assets

to minimize losses on this riskiest tranche.

       To reduce the risk of early amortization further, there have been a number of documented

instances in which originating financial institutions voluntarily enhanced the cash flows to the

SPV (and thus reduced losses to security holders) to preserve their reputation in the market (e.g.

Calomiris and Mason, 2002 and Higgins and Mason, 2004). In 2007, several large banks

repurchased billion in assets that had been securitized in SIVs. Gorton and Souleles (2006) show

that the pricing of bonds issued by the SPV reflect not only the quality of assets in the pool but

also the rating of the issuer, suggesting that investors value implicit support for unexpectedly low

cash flows.

       Securitization also enhances liquidity by creating classes of assets with risk

characteristics suitable to different clienteles. For example, insurance companies may be the

natural clientele for the most senior tranches, while hedge funds with either a strong appetite for

risk or superior credit-risk management models may be the natural clientele for the subordinated

                                                 20
tranches. Mortgage securitizations are often tranched according to prepayment risk. Again, this

kind of structure allows specialists in pre-payment risk to earn returns on their expertise by

concentrating that risk in one class of securities.

       Securitization of mortgages has grown most dramatically in the United States, in large

part because of subsidies from Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) - The Federal

National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation

(Freddie Mac). Fannie Mae was created by the U.S. Congress in 1934 to promote access to

mortgage credit for low and moderate-income household. During its first three decades, Fannie

Mae was operated as a government agency that purchased mainly mortgages insured by the

Federal Housing Authority (FHA). In 1968, Fannie Mae became a public corporation; its role in

purchasing FHA mortgages (as well as mortgages insured by the Veteran’s Administration) was

taken over by a new government agency, the Government National Mortgage Association

(GNMA). Freddie Mac was chartered by Congress in 1970 to provide stability and liquidity to

the market for residential mortgages, focusing mainly on mortgages originated by savings

institutions. Freddie Mac was privatized in 1986.

       By the 1990s, both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were heavy buyers of mortgages from

all types of lenders, with the aim of holding some of those loans and securitizing the rest.

Together they have played the dominant role in fostering the development of the secondary

market. As shown by Frame and White (2005), the GSEs combined market share has grown

rapidly since the early 1980s. In 1990 about 25% of the $2.9 trillion in outstanding mortgages

were either purchased and held or purchased and securitized by the two major GSEs. By 2003,




                                                  21
this market share had increased to 47%.3 GSE access to implicit government support allows

them to borrow at rates below those available to private banks. Passmore, Sherlund and

Burgess (2005) argue that most (but not all) of the benefits of GSE subsidized borrowing

benefits their shareholders rather than mortgage borrowers. To take advantage this subsidy,

during the 1990s the GSEs increasingly opted to hold, rather than securitize, many of the

mortgages that they buy. Policymakers have become concerned about the resulting expansion of

interest rate risk at the GSEs (Greenspan, 2004).

        Despite the policy concerns, the GSEs do enhance mortgage liquidity either by buying

and holding mortgages or by securitizing them. The GSEs operate under a special charter,

however, limiting the size of mortgages that they may purchase or securitize. Today, the GSEs

may only purchase ‘non-jumbo’ mortgages, defined in 2006 as those below $417,000 for loans

secured by single-family homes. The loan limit, first set at $93,750 in 1980, increases each year

by the percentage change in the national average of one-family housing prices, based on a survey

of major lenders by the Federal Housing Finance Board. Loutskina and Strahan (2007) show

that bank supply of mortgages to the jumbo market are constrained by their liquidity and cost of

funds, whereas there are no such supply constraints to the non-jumbo market because banks have

the low-cost option of selling those mortgages to the GSEs.

Loan sales and syndication

        Banks also create market liquidity in loan syndication and in secondary market trading of

loans. Gorton and Pennacchi (1995) describe how adverse selection and moral hazard dampen

the liquidity of loans. They argue that loan sales took off in 1980s because banks learned to sell


3
  GNMA provides a very important source of mortgage finance to low-income borrowers, holding or securitizing
about 10% of all mortgages outstanding.

                                                      22
only a portion of loans and began to offer implicit guarantees to buyers (e.g. promises to buy

back troubled loans).4 As a result, loan sales grew from $27 billion in 1983 to $291 billion by

1989. Loan syndication, which grew dramatically during the 1990s, works much the same as

loan sales. In these structures financial institutions lend as a group at the outset, with one bank

taking the lead in contracting with the borrower.

          Loan sales and syndication differ from securitization mainly in the scale of loans

considered. Loan sales involve large loans while securitization achieves sufficient scale by

pooling of many small loans. But the fundamental contracting problems - asymmetric

information and moral hazard - are basically the same. In loan syndication, a lead bank has the

primary responsibility for negotiation with the borrower, writing contracts, pricing the loan, and

setting the non-price terms (e.g. covenants). The lead bank also manages the relationship over

time. The lead bank will often guarantee a commitment amount to the borrower, and then sell

pieces of the loan to participant banks. The participant banks thus help fund the loan but are less

involved in the relationship on a day-to-day basis. Lead banks thus typically have better

information than participants, so there is a potential lemons problem similar to the one described

earlier about securitization.

          As with securitization, the contracting problem in loan sales and syndication is solved in

part through incentives and in part though the lead-bank’s reputation. Lead banks generally

retain the largest share of syndicated loans, which helps mitigate the information problem faced

by less-informed participants. Both the lead-bank’s share and the concentration of the syndicate

increase with borrower opacity (Dennis & Mullineaux, 2000; Lee & Mullineaux, 2004; Jones,




4
    Such guarantees undermined the spirit of bank capital requirements and have been a concern to bank supervisors.
                                                         23
Lang and Nigro, 2005; and Sufi, 2007). Moreover, Ivashina (2006) shows that the incentive

problems built into a syndicate are priced into the yield.

       Syndication itself is a kind of liquidity production on the part of the lead bank, similar

conceptually to bond underwriter. Since 1995, many cases of loan syndications have also

received ratings from Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s, just as bonds do. In contrast to bonds

underwritten by investment banks, however, lead banks are more actively involved in

maintaining a relationship with the borrower after syndication. And, as we have seen, the lead

bank invariably retains a stake in the loan, again in contrast to the case of bond underwriting.

       In recent years, participation in syndicated loans has become increasingly liquid as

secondary market trading has flourished. Güner (2006) finds that yields on loans issued by

banks that actively sell loans tend to be lower than other loans, consistent with the idea that

liquidity reduces the yield required to compensate lenders. Wittenberg-Moerman (2006) finds

that bid-ask spreads are higher when borrowers are more opaque (e.g. unrated, private firms v.

rated, public firms), consistent with private information reducing liquidity. She also finds,

however, that loans originated by lead arrangers with greater market share trade at lower spreads.

This result echoes studies of securitization, providing further evidence that banks enhance

liquidity not only with explicit contracting and credit guarantees but also with their reputation

(e.g. through implicit guarantees or recourse).

       Much of the secondary market trading occurs as a means for non-bank investors to enter

the syndicated lending market. Term loans trade much more than credit lines because non-bank

institutional investors do not want the funding risk. Drucker and Puri (2005) study the

emergence of secondary market trading volume in syndicated loans, which has grown from

nearly nothing in 1990 to about $180 billion in 2006. They find that loans with more restrictive

                                                  24
covenants are more likely to trade because covenants provide assurances to buyers that they will

have sufficiently strong control rights to protect their investment. In this case, control rights

seem to act as an alternative to information in enhancing liquidity. Their results are surprising

because most public debt, which continues to trade more than bank loans, comes with much

looser covenants than what is seen in the typical syndicated loan. Overall, however, this paper

suggests that information asymmetry between bank lenders and potential buyers continue to

dampen liquidity. For example, in their sample sold loans are rated 88% of the time, compared

to just 39% for loans that have no secondary market liquidity.

       So, banks provide market liquidity when they repackage loans via securitization, when

they trade loans, and when they act as lead arrangers in loan syndication. In all three cases the

asymmetric information creates a barrier to liquidity. To overcome this barrier, banks expose

themselves to risk - in the case of loan securitization by taking the first losses and in the

syndicated lending context by holding the largest share of the loan. In many cases originating

banks also provide implicit guarantees. Reputation in the market mitigates shirking incentives,

and helps explain why large, well capitalized banks tend to dominate as lead arrangers (Gatev

and Strahan, 2007).

Sources of Market Liquidity Risk

       Market liquidity risk occurs if banks lose the ability to sell or securitize loans at fair

prices. Under such circumstances, market liquidity risk feeds back to funding liquidity if the

bank must raise funds on short notice in order to hold those assets on their balance sheet.

       Producing market liquidity requires banks to bear enough risk to maintain incentives to

deal responsibly with the borrower in setting prices and enforcing covenants. Loan syndication

also exposes lead banks to ‘underwriter risk’, similar to the risk born by securities underwriters

                                                  25
offering firm commitments to debt and equity issuers. In the case of syndicated lending, if

demand from participant banks is lower than expected, the lead arranger must either fund more

of the loan than anticipated or the deal may fail to close.5 Both outcomes are costly for the lead

bank. The first option would require the bank to have additional debt and equity capital; the

second would be harmful to the lead bank’s reputation.

        Securitization also often comes with not only credit guarantees of various kinds but also

liquidity support. For example, asset-backed commercial paper structures usually come with a

liquidity backstop facility issued by the bank that set up the securitization. These facilities

expose banks to funding liquidity risk as described above, but the facilities are necessary to

create the securitization in the first place. Many of these kinds of structures could not re-finance

their commercial paper market during the credit crunch of 2007 and required banks to replace

that financing to avoid default. In such cases, there is no bright line between market liquidity

and finding liquidity.

Empirical Trends in Market Liquidity

        Figure 2 illustrates the growing quantitative importance of loan securitization for

different types of loans over time. In 1976, there was no securitization of commercial

mortgages, business loans (commercial and industrial, or C&I, loans) or consumer loans. By the

end of 2003, $294 billion of commercial mortgages were securitized, $104 billion worth of C&I

loans were securitized, along with $658 billion worth of consumer loans. But the really

explosive growth has occurred in the market for home mortgages: In 1976, the amount of


5
  While most loan syndicates are arranged under a firm commitment between the bank and the borrower (opposed to
‘best efforts’ where borrowers bear all of the risk of the issue failing), some syndicated loans have been arranged
under market-flex contracts whereby the pricing of a loan may not be guaranteed by the lead bank (Standard &
Poor’s, 2006). These kinds of arrangements shift some of the underwriting risk from the lead arranger(s) to the
issuer.
                                                        26
securitized home mortgages was $28 billion; by the end of 2003 the total amount of securitized

home mortgages had grown almost 150 times, reaching $4.2 trillion. Over the same period, the

amount of home mortgages outstanding grew from $489 billion to $7.3 trillion.

                                      [FIGURE 2 HERE]

                                       [TABLE 1 HERE]

       Unlike the United States, securitization has not been spurred elsewhere by government

enterprises – there are no institutions analogous to the GSEs in Europe. Nevertheless,

securitization has taken root there as private banks have begun to tap into markets to fund

various kinds of loans. Table 1 reports the rate of securitization issuance for new loans between

2000 and 2006, and by collateral type in 2005. The figures show rapid growth overall. For

example, between 2000 and 2006 securitization origination rates soared by more than 35% per

year in Europe; in contrast, based on growth in outstandings, securitization in the U.S. rose by

only about 9% per year over the same period. Securitization of residential mortgage-backed

securities grew fastest in Europe, by almost 70% between 2005 and 2006. Moreover, as in the

U.S., securitization of loans backed by real estate – both residential and commercial - seem to

be taking the lead, comprising about 56% of total securitization in 2005 (compared with about

80% share for real estate loans in the U.S.). Presumably real estate backed loans are relatively

transparent and thus amenable to purchase by a diffuse class of investors, in contrast to more

opaque assets such as loans to businesses.

                                    [FIGURES 3 & 4 HERE]

       Like securitization, loan sales and syndication have also grown rapidly over time. Figure

3 reports the share of total bank loans plus undrawn commitments to businesses that were

syndicated over the past 15 years, and Figure 4 reports the growing volume of trade in secondary

                                               27
markets for syndicated loans. The share of loans that are syndicated grew rapidly until 2001,

reaching more than 75% of total loan commitments. Since that time, this share has fallen as non-

bank lenders began to enter aggressively into the syndicated lending market. Much of this entry

occurred in secondary market transactions in which banks sold participation in syndicated loans

to non-bank institutional investors (Ivashina and Sun, 2007; Nandy and Shao, 2007). As Figure

4 shows, volume of trading in secondary markets has risen in step with the growth in the

syndicated lending market itself.



CONCLUSIONS

       Banks provide both funding liquidity and market liquidity in various ways. Some of

these liquidity-producing activities are unique to banking (or are dominated by banks), such as

holding deposits and issuing lines of credit. Others are similar to liquidity provision by non-bank

intermediaries like investment banks. For example, both securitization and loan syndication

share features in common with bond underwriting. The differences are related to the greater

information asymmetry and incentive problems – in the case of bond and equity underwriting,

investment banks sell all of an issuance to arm’s length investors; in securitization and

syndication, only a portion of the funding comes at arm’s length. Moreover, both commercial as

well as investment banks and unregulated finance companies are active securitizers. Both

investment banks and large commercial banks also make markets in over-the-counter derivatives

such as interest rate swaps and foreign exchange, which enhance market liquidity of those assets.

In general, market liquidity production is something that is not unique to banking.

       What is different about commercial banks, what distinguishes them from other

intermediaries, are products like checkable deposits and loan commitments. These products

                                                28
supply funding liquidity to customers; they offer cash on demand. Banks ‘special role’ lies

mainly in providing this funding liquidity, but their day-to-day business has increasingly

involved provision of market liquidity as a consequence of the growth and deepening of

securities markets. This changing role can be seen in the evolution of syndicated lending, where

banks typically continue to dominate in the market for credit lines, in both the primary and

secondary markets (Gatev and Strahan, 2008). In contrast, non-bank institutional investors play

an important role in term lending in the syndicated market.

                                       [FIGURE 5 HERE]

       Looking ahead, banks will likely continue to provide liquidity in both dimensions, but the

traditional asset transformation role of banks – holding loans financed with liquid deposits –

seems to be on the wane. The growth of capital markets simply offers many cheaper ways to

finance loans, and technology has reduced the amount of financing available to banks in running

the payments system. Figure 5 reports the share of total private credit from banks for the median

developed country and the median developing country. Banks’ share of credit is consistently

higher in the developed countries, but in both groups the trend away from banks and toward

markets is clear and inexorable. These trends do not imply that ‘banks are dead’, or even dying.

Much of the growth in securities markets has happened because banks provide both back-up

liquidity support and credit enhancement to allow otherwise illiquid assets to receive most of

their funding at arm’s length.




                                                29
         Figure 1: Bank Liquidity Production to GDP
40.00%

35.00%

30.00%

25.00%

20.00%

15.00%

10.00%

5.00%

0.00%
      90

      91

      92

      93

      94

      95

      96

      97

      98

      99

      00

      01

      02

      03

      04

      05

      06
    19

    19

    19

    19

    19

    19

    19

    19

    19

    19

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20

    20
                   Transactions Deposits       Consumer Commitments
                   Business Loan Commitments
                                                                                   Figure 2
                                                                 Securitization of Loans in the US Economy
The Figure presents the percentage of loans securitized relative to total loans outstanding for six categories of loans: (i) home mortgages, (ii) multifamily residential mortgages,
(iii) commercial mortgages, (iv) consumer credit, (v) business loans, and (vi) farm mortgages. The data are from Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States.


                                        1976   1978    1981      1983      1986        1988         1991         1993         1996        1998         2001
                                    0.63

                                    0.58

                                    0.53

                                    0.48

                                    0.43

                                    0.38
                SHARE SECURITIZED




                                    0.33

                                    0.28

                                    0.23

                                    0.18

                                    0.13

                                    0.08

                                    0.03

                                    -0.02

                                    -0.07
                                                                               HORIZON QUARTERS

                                                Home mortgages                                               Multifamily residential mortgages
                                                Commercial mortgages                                         Farm mortgages
                                                Business Loans                                               Consumer credit
                                                  Table 1: Securitization and Residential Mortgage Markets in Europe

                                                   Total                                                                2005 Securitization by Collateral
                                               Securitization                      Annual                                                   Total
Year                                            (€ million)                      Growth Rate                     Collateral              (€ million)         Share
2000                                                78.2                               -               Auto Loans                             4.1             1.3%
2001                                               152.6                            95.1%              Credit Card                           11.7             3.6%
2002                                               157.7                             3.3%              CDOs                                  48.9            15.0%
2003                                               217.3                            37.8%              Commercial Mortgages                  38.6            11.8%
2004                                               243.5                            12.1%              Loans & Leases                        55.1            16.9%
2005                                               327.0                            34.3%              Residential Mortgages                144.9            44.3%
2006                                               458.9                            40.3%              Other                                 23.7             7.2%
                                                                                                       Total                                327.0           100.0%
Sources: Thomson Financial, Dealogic, JP Morgan, Merrill Lynch, Structured Finance International, Bloomberg
           Figure 3: Commitments in Syndicated Lending / Total
                            Commitments
80.00%

75.00%

70.00%

65.00%

60.00%

55.00%

50.00%

45.00%

40.00%
         1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006
                          Billions




                   $100
                            $150
                                     $200
                                            $250
                                                   $300




             $50

        $0
19
   91
19
   92
19
   93
19
   94
19
   95
19
   96
19
   97
19
   98
19
   99
20
   00
20
   01
20
   02
20
                                                          Figure 4: Volume of Syndicated Loan Sales




   03
20
   04
20
   05
20
   06
             Figure 5: Bank Share of Financial Assets
100.0%

95.0%

90.0%

85.0%

80.0%

75.0%

70.0%
       90

              91

                     92

                            93

                                   94

                                          95

                                                 96

                                                        97

                                                               98

                                                                      99

                                                                             00

                                                                                    01

                                                                                           02

                                                                                                  03

                                                                                                         04

                                                                                                                05
     19

            19

                   19

                          19

                                 19

                                        19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                             19

                                                                    19

                                                                           20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                                20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                              20
            Median - High-Income Countries                           Median - Low-Income Countries
                                             REFERENCES

Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet and J. C. Driscoll (2004). Loan commitments in private firms,
mimeo.

Agarwal, S., B. W. Ambrose, S. Chomsisengphet and C. Liu (2006). An empirical analysis of
home equity loan and line performance, Journal of Financial Intemerdiation 15, 444-69.

Akrelof, G. (1970). The market for lemons, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488-500.

Almeida, H., M. Campello and M. Weisbach (2004). The cash flow sensitivity of cash,” Journal
of Finance 59, 1777-1804.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000). Financial contagion, Journal of Political Economy 108.

Ambrose, B.W., M. LaCour-Little, and A. Sanders (2004). The effects of conforming loan status
on mortgage yield spreads: A loan level analysis, Real Estate Economics, 32, 541-569.

Ashcraft, A., J. J. McAndrews and D. Skeie (2007). Precautionary reserves and the interbank
market, mimeo, August 2007.

Ayotte, K. and S. Gaon (2006). Asset-backed securities: Costs and benefits of bankruptcy
remoteness, mimeo.

Bagehot, Walter (1873). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (reprinted, Dodo
Press, 2006).

Brunnemeir, M. and L. Pedersen (2007). Market liquidity and funding liquidity,” forthcoming at
the Review of Financial Studies.

Berger, A.N. and C.H.S. Bouwman (2006). The measurement of bank liquidity creation and the
effect of capital, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=672784.

Berger, A.N., N. Miller, M. Petersen, R. G. Rajan and J. Stein (2005). Does function follow
form? Evidence from the lending practices of large and small banks, Journal of Financial
Economics.

Berger, A. N. and G. Udell (1992). Some evidence on the empirical significance of credit
rationing, Journal of Political Economy 100, 1047-77.

Berlin, M. and L. J. Mester (1999). Deposits and relationship lending, Review of Financial
Studies 12, 579-607.


                                              30
Bernanke, B. S. (1983). Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in propogation of the Great
Depression, American Economic Review 73(3), 257-276.

Bernanke, B. S. and C. Lown (1991). The credit crunch, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2, 205-247.

Calomiris, C. (1989). The motivations for loan commitments backing commercial paper,
Journal of Banking and Finance 13, 271-277.

Calomiris, C. (1994). Is the discount window necessary: A Penn Central perspective, Federal
Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Review, 31-55.

Calomiris, C., and C. Kahn (1991). The role of demandable debt in structuring optimal banking
arrangements, American Economic Review 81, 497-513.

Calomiris, C. and J. P. Mason (1997). Contagion and bank failures during the Great Depression:
The Chicago banking panic of June 1932, American Economic Review 87, 863-84.

Calomiris, C. and J. P. Mason (2004). Credit card securitization and regulatory arbitrage,
Journal of Financial Services Research 26, 5-27.

Chava, S. and A. K. Purnanandam (2006). The effect of banking crisis on bank-dependent
borrowers, EFA 2006 Zurich Meetings Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=821804.

Cole, R. A. (1998). The importance of relationship to the availability of credit, Journal of
Banking and Finance 22(6/8), 959-977.

Cole, R. A., L. G. Goldberg, and L. J. White (2004). Cookie cutter vs. character: The micro
structure of small business lending by large and small banks, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 39(2), 227-251.

Dennis, S. A. and D. J. Mullineaux (2000). Syndicated loans, Journal of Financial
Intermediation 9, 404-26.

Demarzo, P. (2005). The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed
intermediation, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1-35.

Diamond, D. (1984). Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review of Economic
Studies 51, 393-414.

Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig (1983). Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity, Journal of
Political Economy 91, 401-419.

Diamond, D., and R. G. Rajan (2001). Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial fragility: A
theory of banking, Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

                                                31
Drucker, S. and M. Puri (2005). On the benefits of concurrent lending and underwriting,”
forthcoming at the Journal of Finance.

Drucker, S. and M. Puri (2007). On loan sales, contracting and lending relationships, available
at SSRN: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=920877.

Edwards, F. (1999). Hedge funds and the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 13, 189-209.

Estrella, A. (2002). Securitization and the efficacy of monetary policy,” Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, Economic Policy Review, 1-13.

Fama, E. F. (1985). What’s different about banks? Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 29-39.

Flannery, M. (1994). Debt maturity and the deadweight costs of leverage: Optimally financing
banking firms, American Economic Review 84, 320-331.

Frame, W. S. and L. J. White (2005). Fussing and fuming about Fannie and Freddie: How much
smoke, how much fire? Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2005.

Franke, G. and J. P. Krahnen (2004). Default risk-sharing between banks and markets: The
contribution of collateralized loan obligations,” in Mark Carey and René Stulz (eds.), Risks of
Financial Institutions, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 603-31.

Furfine, C. (2002). The costs and benefits of moral suasion: Evidence from the rescue of Long-
Term Capital Management, forthcoming, Journal of Business.

Garber, P., and D. Weisbrod (1990). Banks in the market for liquidity, working paper no. 3381,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gatev. E. (2006). Liquidity risk and limited arbitrage: Are taxpayers helping hedge funds get
rich? Working paper, Carroll School of Management, Boston College.

Gatev, E. and P. E. Strahan (2006). Banks advantage in hedging liquidity risk: Theory and
evidence from the commercial paper market, Journal of Finance 61(2), 867-892.

Gatev, Evan and Philip E. Strahan (2007). Liquidity risk and loan syndicates, mimeo.

Gatev, E., T. Schuermann, and P. E. Strahan (2006). How do banks manage liquidity risk?
Evidence from the equity and deposit markets in the Fall of 1998,” in Mark Carey and René
Stulz (eds.), Risks of Financial Institutions, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 105-127.

Gatev, E., T. Schuermann, and P. E. Strahan (2007). Managing liquidity risk: How deposit-loan
synergies vary through market conditions, forthcoming at the Review of Financial Studies.

                                                32
Goodfriend, M. and R. G. King (1988). Financial deregulation, monetary policy and central
banking, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Review (May/June), 3-22.

Gorton, G. (1988). Banking panics and business cycles, Oxford Economic Papers 40(4), 751-
781.

Gorton, G. and G. Pennacchi (1995). Bank loan sales: Marketing non-marketable assets, Journal
of Monetary Economics 35, 389-411.

Gorton, G. and N. Souleles (2005). Special purpose vehicles and securitization, in Mark Carey
and René Stulz (eds.), Risks of Financial Institutions, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
549-97.

Greenspan, A. (2004). Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 24, 2004.

Gropp, R., J. K. Schulz and M. J. White (1997). Personal bankruptcy and supply and demand for
credit, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 217-51.

Güner, Barak (2006). Loan sales and the cost of corporate borrowing, Review of Financial
Studies 19, 687-716.

Higgins, E. J. and Mason, J. R. (2004). What is the value of recourse to asset backed securities?
A clinical study of credit card banks, Journal of Banking and Finance 28, 857-74.

Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (1997). Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real
sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.

Ivashina, V. (2006). Agency effects on syndicated loan rates, unpublished working paper,
Harvard Business School.

Ivashina, V. and Z. Sun (2007). Institutional stock trading on loan market information, mimeo.

Iyer, R. and M. Puri (2007). Who runs? The importance of relationships in bank panics, mimeo.

Jensen, M. (1986). Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers, American
Economic Review 76, 323-29.

Jimenez, G., J. A. Lopez and J. Saurina (2007). Empirical analysis of corporate lines of credit,
mimeo.

Jones, J., W. Lang and P. Nigro (2005). Agent bank behavior in bank loan syndications, Journal
of Financial Research 28, 385-402.


                                                33
Kane, E. and A. Demirguc-Kunt (2002). Deposit insurance around the world: Where does it
work? Journal of Economic Perspectives (Spring), 175-95.

Kane, E. (2007). Incentive conflict in central-bank responses to sectoral turmoil in financial hub
countries, mimeo.

Khwaja, A. I. and A. Mian (2005). Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks, mimeo, June
2005.

Kashyap, A., R. G. Rajan and J. Stein (2002). Banks as liquidity providers: An explanation for
the co-existence of lending and deposit-taking, Journal of Finance 57(1), 33-73.

Lee, S. and D. J. Mullineaux (2004). Monitoring, financial distress, and the structure of
commercial lending syndicates, Financial Management 33, 107-30.

Leland, H. and D. E. Pyle (1977). Information asymmetries, financial structure and financial
intermediation, Journal of Finance 32(2), 371-387.

Loutskina, E. (2005). Does securitization affect bank lending? Evidence from bank responses to
funding shocks, mimeo, March 2005.

Loutskina, E., and P. E. Strahan (2007). Securitization and the declining impact of bank
financial condition on loan supply: Evidence from mortgage acceptance rates, forthcoming,
Journal of Finance.

McAndless, G., M. F. Gabrielli and M. J. Rouillet (2003). Determining the causes of bank runs
in Argentina during the crisis of 2001, Revista de Analisis Economico 18(1), 87-102.

McAndrews, J. J. and S. M. Potter (2002). Liquidity effects of September 11, 2001, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review 8(2), 59-79.

Mester, L., L. Nakamura, M. Renault (2006). Transactions accounts and loan monitoring,
forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Morgan, D. P. (1998). The credit effects of monetary policy: Evidence from loan commitments,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.

Myers, S. C., and R. G. Rajan (1998). The paradox of liquidity, Quarterly Journal of Economics
113, 733-71.

Nandy, D. and P. Shao (2007). Institutional investment in syndicated loans,” mimeo.

Norden, L. and M. Weber (2007). Checking account information and the credit risk of bank
customers,” mimeo.


                                                34
O’Hara, M., and W. Shaw (1990). Deposit insurance and wealth effects: The benefit of being
too big to fail, Journal of Finance 45, 1587-1600.

Paravisini, D. (2007). Local financial constraints and firm access to external finance,
forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Passmore, W., S. M. Sherlund, and G. Burgess (2005). The effect of housing Government-
Sponsored Enterprises on mortgage rates, Real Estate Economics 33, 427-63.

Pennacchi, G. (2006). Deposit insurance, bank regulation and financial system risk, Journal of
Monetary Economics 53, 1-30.

Saidenberg, M. R., and P. E. Strahan (1999). Are banks still important for financing large
businesses? Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Current Issues in Economics and Finance
5(12), 1-6.

Standard & Poors’s (2006). A Guide to the Loan Market, September 2006.

Sufi, A. (2007a). Information asymmetry and financing arrangements: Evidence from
syndicated loans, Journal of Finance, April 2007, 62(2), 629-668.

Sufi, A. (2007b). Bank lines of credit in corporate finance: An empirical investigation,
forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Rochet, J. C. and X. Vives (2004). Coordination failures and lender of last resort: Was Bagehot
right after all? Journal of the European Economic Association 2, 1116-47.

Townsend, R. M. (1979). Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state
verification, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 1-29.

Udell, G. (2004). Asset-Based Finance: Proven Disciplines for Prudent Lending, New York:
Commercial Finance Association

Wittenberg-Moerman, R. (2006). The role of information asymmetry and financial reporting
quality in debt contracting: Evidence from secondary loan market, mimeo.




                                                35
