                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 OIL PRICE MOVEMENTS AND THE GLOBAL ECONOMY:
                            A MODEL-BASED ASSESSMENT

                                           Selim Elekdag
                                            Rene Lalonde
                                           Douglas Laxton
                                             Dirk Muir
                                            Paolo Pesenti

                                        Working Paper 13792
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13792


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




We thank Ryan Felushko, Laura Leon, Lei Lei Myaing, Susanna Mursula and Chris Tonetti for invaluable
research assistance. This paper has benefited from helpful comments from Riccardo Cristadoro of
the Banca d?Italia and participants to the Bank of Canada Workshop on Commodity Price Issues, the
IMF Workshop on Open Economy Models for Policy Evaluation and presentations at the Bank of
Japan, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the European Central Bank. This paper should not
be reported as representing the views of the IMF, its Executive Board or any member government.
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IMF, IMF
policy, the Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System,
 the National Bureau of Economic Research or any other institution mentioned herein or with which
the authors are affiliated.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Selim Elekdag, Rene Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir, and Paolo Pesenti. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Oil Price Movements and the Global Economy: A Model-Based Assessment
Selim Elekdag, Rene Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir, and Paolo Pesenti
NBER Working Paper No. 13792
February 2008
JEL No. E66,F32,F47

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a five-region version (Canada, a group of oil exporting countries, the United States, emerging
Asia and Japan plus the euro area) of the Global Economy Model (GEM) encompassing production
and trade of crude oil, and use it to study the international transmission mechanism of shocks that
drive oil prices. In the presence of real adjustment costs that reduce the short- and medium-term responses
of oil supply and demand, our simulations can account for large endogenous variations of oil prices
with large effects on the terms of trade of oil-exporting versus oil-importing countries (in particular,
emerging Asia), and result in significant wealth transfers between regions. This is especially true when
we consider a sustained increase in productivity growth or a shift in production technology towards
more capital- (and hence oil-) intensive goods in regions such as emerging Asia. In addition, we study
the implications of higher taxes on gasoline that are used to reduce taxes on labor income, showing
that such a policy could increase world productive capacity while being consistent with a reduction
in oil consumption.


Selim Elekdag                                        Dirk Muir
International Monetary Fund                          Bank of Canada
700 19th Street                                      234 Wellington Street, Ottawa ON Canada K1A 0G9
Washington, DC 20431                                 dmuir@bank-banque-canada.ca
selekdag@imf.org
                                                     Paolo Pesenti
Rene Lalonde                                         Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Bank of Canada                                       33 Liberty Street
234 Wellington Street                                New York, NY 10045
Ottawa ON Canada K1A 0G9                             and NBER
LALX@bank-banque-canada.ca                           paolo.pesenti@ny.frb.org

Douglas Laxton
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street
Washington, DC 20431
dlaxton@imf.org
1    Introduction
Over the last few years, the persistent surge in oil prices in both the spot and futures markets
has represented perhaps the most striking challenge to the forecasting abilities of private
and public institutions worldwide. Even as the average monthly spot price of oil increased
from US$19 per barrel at end-2001 to US$43 at end-2004, market participants expected
prices to decline over time to "more reasonable levels". However, since 2005, there have
been striking upward revisions of near- and longer-term price expectations from the futures
markets, and the oil spot price in 2006 occasionally rose above US$70 per barrel, and has
stayed persistently above US$50 per barrel.
    The course of events has led to policy-making institutions to ask: what has been the
cause in the run-up in oil prices since 2003, and is the run-up fundamentally di¤erent from
that experienced during the two oil price shocks in the 1970s? Candidate explanations come
from both demand and supply trends. On the demand side, robust global growth supported
by the rapid (and continual) economic expansion in emerging Asia has been cited as a
fundamental break with the past, particularly in China and India,where the actual rate at
which these economies are expanding seems to have surprised market participants. Overall,
there have been signi…cant upward revisions in global growth prospects and, in fact, global
growth is expected to exceed four percent for the fourth year in a row (IMF (2006)).
    On the supply side, market participants have also revised their views about how quickly
supply will respond to higher prices, given low levels of investment and the fact that the
big oil companies are …nding it more di¢ cult to replenish their reserves. Indeed, as it takes
on average eleven years before an oil discovery is commercially operational, it has not been
surprising to some analysts that oil prices have soared when OPEC spare capacity has fallen
to very low levels. The more controversial concern of the “peak oil theory”— the concept
that the world has reached the natural limits of oil exploitation — is nowadays given more
consideration than in the past.
    This paper provides a preliminary assessment of these issues — and their relevance for
the world macroeconomy — by developing an extended version of the Global Economy
Model (GEM) developed at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) that explicitly encom-
passes consumption, production and trade in oil. The simulation model allows us to study
developments in the world economy that have signi…cant e¤ects on oil prices, the interna-
tional transmission mechanism through terms of trade ‡uctuations, and the related wealth
transfers between oil-importing and oil-exporting regions. We address two key questions.
First, what are the underlying causes of the oil price run-up since 2003? And given those
causes, what are some potential policy measures that could reduce oil prices with the least
amount of (negative) impact on global welfare?
    The remainder of this paper is organized in the following way. Section 2 presents some
basic stylized facts on the state of the oil sector. Section 3 provides a brief summary
of the model while Section 4 discusses its calibration. Section 5 then uses the model to
present some preliminary simulation results that we consider to be likely candidates in
explaining the run-up in oil prices since 2004, that we expect will extend into the foreseeable
future. Speci…cally, we consider shocks that a¤ect either the demand or supply for oil and
discuss their implications for growth in di¤erent regions of the world. Section 6 suggests
some policy responses to help ameliorate the upward climb in oil prices. In particular, we
study the implications of higher taxes on gasoline, that are used to reduce taxes on labor
income, showing that such a policy could increase world productive capacity while reducing
oil consumption. The …nal section o¤ers some concluding remarks about possible future


                                               1
extensions.


2     Oil and the world economy: some stylized facts
This section reviews recent developments in the oil market and the world economy as back-
ground to the shocks we will use in GEM to explain those developments.

2.1     Oil prices
There has been a persistent upward trend in oil prices over the last few years. Figure 1
depicts the evolution of the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) projections and the
actual average petroleum spot price (APSP).1
    Focusing …rst on the Winter 2003 vintage in the top panel, we observe a short-term hump,
owing to the events unfolding in Iraq. Afterward, oil prices were projected to converge to a
much lower level, hovering around $20 per barrel. There seemed to be an expectation that
supply would accommodate market needs once the short-term disruptions were resolved.
According to the projections made in Winter 2004, a milder uptick in price expectations
was accompanied by an upward revision in longer-term prices by about twenty percent
relative to the previous projection, as shown in the bottom panel. Next, in 2005 there
was both a large near- and longer-term revision to oil prices, owing to signi…cant changes
in the oil market.2 Notice in particular that the long end of the projected oil price curve
increased by nearly 100 percent, likely caused by a disappointing supply response. Most
recently, compared to the Winter 2003 projections, the longer-term oil price has been revised
upwards by about 200 percent. In contrast with the three other curves, the Winter 2006
projections are almost constant going forward, primarily because of heightened concerns
over the supply of oil.

2.2     Oil supply and demand
Several mutually reinforcing developments have resulted in low levels of oil supply. The most
prominent of these is that OPEC spare capacity (including Iraq) has bottomed out. This
fact is highlighted in Figure 2, which shows quarterly …gures for OPEC spare capacity as a
percent of total supply, and the APSP. Starting in mid-2003, there is a divergence between
oil prices and spare capacity (which by June 2006, is estimated at around 1.3 to 1.8 million
barrels per day (EIA (2006))). At the same time, lagging investment in infrastructure and
re…nery construction, as well as the aforementioned fact that it takes on average eleven
years before an oil discovery is ready for production, have further compounded supply-side
rigidities. Markets have also been keen to note that big oil companies are …nding it more

   1 The APSP is the simple arithmetic average of the U.K. Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate

spot oil prices. The projection of oil prices is based on oil price future contracts traded on the New York
Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX).
   2 Technical factors did partially account for this phenomenon in 2005. For instance, the Organization of

the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) suspended its price band mechanism which served to maintain
expectations of a future downward correction in prices. The price band mechanism was set up by OPEC
at its March 2000 meeting. When the OPEC oil-price basket was above US$28 per barrel for 20 consecutive
trading days or below US$22 per barrel for 10 consecutive trading days, there would be production adjust-
ments. However, during its January 2005 meeting, OPEC decided that market developments had rendered
the band unrealistic, and temporarily suspended the mechanism.




                                                    2
di¢ cult to replenish their reserves. Along with heightened geopolitical risks, oil supply has
become markedly binding, making it excessively vulnerable to even minor disruptions.
    Probably the most important driver of world demand for oil is rapid — and underes-
timated — growth in emerging Asia. Table 1 underscores this point. It reports both the
current year forecasts and actual real GDP growth rates from 2003 to 2005 for China and
India. For both countries, growth forecasts have been consistently lower than the realized
rates. Moreover, solid growth in the United States and the recovery in Japan have led to
signi…cant upward revisions in global growth prospects. This is clearly conveyed in Figure
3, which shows the projections for world real GDP growth from the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook in the top panel and the revisions relative to the Winter 2003 forecasts in the
bottom one. In turn, Figure 4 emphasizes this point by focusing on the cumulative growth
rates: the compounded e¤ects of seemingly minor revisions can be quite large. To drive
home this point, we also show the cumulative growth rates for the emerging Asian countries
in Figure 5.
    Taking a more historical perspective, we note that there has been a gradual downward
trend in oil intensity. As measured in kilograms of oil per unit of PPP-adjusted GDP,
Figure 6 shows declining oil intensities for selected countries and regions. Although after
the 1970s the decline accelerated, the overall decrease in oil intensity has been protracted.
As shown in both panels, advanced countries tend to have higher oil intensities. With
populations exceeding one billion each and sustained growth rates well over …ve percent
per year (usually near 10 percent for China), manufacturers and consumers in China and
India have been importing energy at ever-increasing rates. As they approach "advanced
economy" status, a shift towards production of, and demand for, higher oil-intensity goods
is expected (and is occurring). This will probably adversely a¤ect future and — through
forward-looking behavior — current oil market developments.


3      The theoretical framework of the model
This section provides a synthetic overview of our simulation model.3 The world economy
consists of …ve country blocs (‘regions’), divided in two groups. The oil-exporting regions
consists of Canada and the group of oil-exporting countries (GOEC) which includes OPEC,
Mexico, Norway, and Russia.4 The oil-importing group consists of the United States, emerg-
ing Asia5 , and the bloc of remaining countries which includes Japan and the European
Union. In each region, there are households, …rms, and a government. The overall structure
of the model is illustrated in Figure 7, and each sector is described in turn below.6
     Each household consumes a non-tradable …nal good (C in Figure 7), and is the monopo-
listic supplier of a di¤erentiated labor input (L) to all domestic …rms. Some households have
low monopoly power, are liquidity-constrained, and do not have access to capital markets.

   3 For a more complete presentation of the model equations see Pesenti (2008) for the tradable and non-

tradable sectors, and Lalonde and Muir (2007) for the oil and gasoline sectors.
    4 This
         version of the model was built to originally include both energy and non-energy commodities.
Therefore GOEC also includes other major commodity exporters such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, South
Africa, Australia and New Zealand.
    5 Indonesia   is excluded and is part of the group of oil exporting countries.
   6 For an algebraic exposition of the model (excluding the treatment of the gasoline and oil sectors) we

reader is referred to the Appendices of Faruqee, et al (2007, 2008). A simpli…ed variant encompassing both
downstream and upstream intermediate goods is presented in Laxton and Pesenti (2003).




                                                         3
They …nance their consumption exclusively through disposable labor incomes. The remain-
ing households own domestic …rms and the domestic capital stock (K), which they rent to
domestic …rms. They also own two short-term nominal bonds, one denominated in domestic
currency and issued by the region’s government, and another denominated in U.S. currency
and issued in zero net supply worldwide. There are intermediation costs for national house-
holds transacting in the international bond market. Labor and physical capital are immobile
internationally. The market for capital is competitive, and capital accumulation is subject
to adjustment costs. In the labor market wage contracts are subject to nominal rigidities.
    On the production side, there are three layers of production: …nal goods, downstream
intermediate goods (such as semi-…nished products), and upstream intermediate goods (such
as re…ned oil products in our setting, and more generally commodities and raw materials).
    Perfectly competitive …rms produce two …nal goods — a consumption good (A) and an
investment good (E). The …nal goods are not traded internationally. Both the demand
for the consumption good and the investment good is split between private agents (C and
I respectively) and the public sector (GC and GI respectively). The two …nal goods are
produced by using downstream intermediate goods as inputs.
    There are three downstream intermediate goods: re…ned petroleum products such as
gasoline for transportation and fuel used for heating (‘gasoline’ for short, or GAS), other
non-traded goods and services (N ), and internationally traded goods (T ). Domestic trad-
ables used by domestic …rms are denoted Q, imports from all other country blocs are de-
noted M . To model realistic dynamics of trade volumes, we assume that imports are subject
to short-term adjustment costs that temporarily lower the response of import demand to
changes in relative prices. Intermediate goods are di¤erentiated, with each variety produced
by a single …rm under conditions of monopolistic competition worldwide. The prices of
intermediate goods are subject to adjustment costs (nominal price rigidities). Gasoline,
nontraded and traded intermediate goods are all produced with domestic labor inputs, do-
mestic capital and oil. Oil can be imported (M O) or produced domestically (QO); in both
cases the use of oil in production is subject to short-term adjustment costs.
    In our model, re…ned oil (‘oil’for short) is the only tradable upstream intermediate good
(T O). It is produced with capital, labor, and natural resources (LAN D). As with other
intermediate goods, oil producers have market power that can change over time. Di¤erent
from intermediate goods prices or labor wages, oil prices are not subject to nominal rigidities.
However, there are real adjustment costs in the supply of oil that result in very limited short-
term responses of oil production to changes in demand. As a caveat, the fact that oil is
assumed not to be a storable commodity whose price is linked to the rate of return on other
assets implies that its price is determined entirely on its use value. Since the model does
not include oil inventories, oil prices may respond too strongly to temporary shocks. With
this in mind, it should be emphasized that the model is not meant to explain short-run
variations in oil prices due to market disruption: rather, it has been designed to explain the
interaction of oil prices and the world economy over the medium term.
    Finally, the government purchases the two …nal goods as well as nontradable services
GN . As treasury, the government …nances the excess of its expenditures over net taxes
by borrowing from the domestic private sector. In the long run the government targets a
given ratio of public debt to income, adjusting the tax rate on labor incomes as appropriate.
As central bank, the government manages the national short-term nominal interest rate.
Monetary policy is speci…ed in terms of a credible commitment to an interest rate rule that




                                               4
targets in‡ation.7


4     Calibration
This section describes the calibration of the GEM, with particular attention to the oil and
gasoline sectors. In this paper the calibration builds upon work already presented in Faruqee
et al. (2007, 2008). However, there are some notable di¤erences in terms of the composition
of regions and the addition of the oil and gasoline sectors. The notation adopted in this
section and in Tables 2 through 10 is usually self-explanatory: for a fuller presentation the
reader is referred to the Appendices of Faruqee et al. (2007, 2008).
    Table 2 includes the parameters relevant for the consumers’ and …rms’ optimization
problems. As mentioned above, in each region there are two types of consumers — liquidity-
constrained, low-monopoly power households and forward-looking, high-monopoly power
households. Their shares di¤er across regions, with liquidity-constrained consumers being
as low as 15 percent of households in the United States, to 50 percent in emerging Asia.
Both types of consumers have similar preferences, with a high elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (1= ) of 5, coupled with a high level of habit persistence in consumption (bc )
of 0.92. This parameterization yields very sluggish consumption behavior in the short-run,
with a hump-shaped response that is ‡exible in the long run. Conversely, for labor we have
a low Frisch elasticity of labour supply (1= ) of 0.2 coupled with habit persistence in leisure
(bL ) of 0.75.
    Table 3 contains the calibration of the production side of the model. Labor and capi-
tal are assumed to be mobile across sectors, but immobile internationally. The tradable
and nontradable sectors are calibrated in much the same manner as Faruqee et al. (2007),
although the substitutability among factors is more inelastic, in line with recent work on
Canada (Perrier (2005)) and the United States (Gosselin and Lalonde (2005)). The elastic-
ity of substitution among factors used in oil production ( O ) is 0.6, but it is 0.7 in gasoline
production ( GAS ). The higher degree of inelasticity in oil production re‡ects some of the
long-term costs in switching production technology, whereas the higher degree in gasoline
production re‡ects the fact that there are several methods of varying e¢ ciency (and hence
capital and labour intensity) to obtain gasoline from oil. In sum, while the long-run elastic-
ities in the oil-related sectors are low, they may not be su¢ cient to provide realistic price
responses in the short run. The latter require strong short-run real adjustment costs to
signi…cantly lower short-term elasticities toward near-Leontief levels, as will be described
below.
    The regions are di¤erentiated from one another by their economic size, the composition
of their domestic economies, and their trade patterns (see Tables 5 and 6). These data
are mostly derived from the National Income and Production Accounts of the countries of
each region, and then mapped into the corresponding bias parameters in the production
functions for tradables, nontradables, oil and gasoline (Table 3) and the demand functions
for …nal goods (consumption and investment) and intermediate goods (domestically pro-
duced and imported tradables, nontradables, gasoline and oil, Tables 4 and 3). The role
played by di¤erences in technology is immediately evident when we take into account fac-
tor incomes in the oil sector (Table 6). Some oil-exporting countries (GOEC) have the
least capital-intensive technology, but other oil-exporting countries (Canada in our setup)

   7 Another version of the interest rate rule can limit the ‡exibility of the nominal exchange rate against

the U.S. dollar, which will be used in future simulation exercises for the emerging Asia bloc.



                                                     5
have a relatively capital-intensive technology, meant to capture realistic features of the oil
extraction process in the country (i.e. the Athabasca tar sands or the o¤shore oil-rigs of
Hibernia).
    Figures 8 and 9 illustrate our calibration of the world trade ‡ows for all goods and for oil,
respectively.8 The aggregate import to GDP ratios re‡ect the levels of imports in 2003 in
the …ve regions, whereas the aggregate export to GDP ratios are those necessary to support
the net foreign asset to GDP ratios we have chosen (Table 5). The United States is a large
net debtor (50.0 per cent of GDP), Canada is a small net debtor (7.5 per cent of GDP),
while the other three regions are all net creditors of varying degrees (with emerging Asia
being the largest net creditor at 35.0 per cent of GDP). The decomposition of aggregate
trade ‡ows into bilateral trade ‡ows is also based on 2003 trading patterns found in the
IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics and UN’s COMTRADE database of commodity-based
trade ‡ows.
    For aggregate trade, exports plus imports to GDP are 74.1 percent in Canada, 48.0
percent in GOEC, 27.9 percent in the United States, 52.6 percent in emerging Asia and
only 17.8 percent in the remaining countries. The higher trade is as a percent of GDP, the
more likely an economy will be a¤ected strongly by foreign shocks. Canada is very open,
as is emerging Asia, while the United States, the European Union and Japan (part of the
remaining countries’ bloc) are much more insulated from foreign disturbances. However,
this is not necessarily the case in the oil market. Here, not only does the degree of openness
matter, but the direction of trade as well. The net exporters are Canada at 3.7 percent
of GDP and GOEC at 8.1 percent of GDP, while the other regions are net importers at
1.4 percent of GDP for the United States, 1.9 percent of GDP for emerging Asia and 0.4
percent of GDP for remaining countries. Additionally, the group of oil-exporting countries
has the largest amount of its GDP coming from oil production (12.0 percent).
    For tradable goods across all regions, imported goods are fairly substitutable with their
domestically produced counterparts ( A and E = 2.5). Imports of tradable goods can
originate from di¤erent export countries, and the elasticities of substitution between alter-
native exporters ( A and E ) are equal to 1.5. By contrast, there is a very low elasticity of
substitution between tradable and nontradable goods in all regions ( A and E = 0.5), and
a very high elasticities of substitution between domestic and imported oil ( OT , ON and
  OGAS =10). For imported oil, there is less preference as to the region of origin ( O = 3.0).
    As in all previous work on the GEM, the calibration of markups follows Martins et
al. (1996) for prices in the monopolistically competitive tradable and nontradable sectors ,
and Jean and Nicoletti (2002) for wages (see Table 8). However, we have assumed almost
no markup in the oil sector for any region, with the exception of the group of exporting
countries, which has a markup of 476 percent. It is estimated that the cost of oil production
for OPEC countries is somewhere around $2 to $5 per barrel, while for a country like
Canada it is closer to $25. So, for any given oil price in the world market that we are
considering in the paper, the group of the oil-exporting countries has the largest markup
to sustain the price of oil and guarantee production in the other regions where production
cost are much higher. For gasoline, the markup is 16 percent in Canada and Japan and
the European Union (i.e. the remaining countries) and 17 percent everywhere else. This
excludes government taxes on gasoline, which we set for illustrative purposes at 30 percent
in Canada and the remaining countries bloc and 15 percent elsewhere (including the United
States).

  8 The   bias parameters associated with the import demand CES aggregators can be found in Table 7.



                                                   6
    The dynamics of the model are further a¤ected by nominal rigidities and real adjust-
ment costs, as found in Table 9. Nominal rigidities in prices and real adjustment costs in
investment and trade are calibrated to match moments of other models such as ToTEM
for Canada (Murchison and Rennison (2006)), MUSE for the United States (Gosselin and
Lalonde (2005)), previous work on the GEM for the United States (Julliard et al. (2006)),
and the new Area-Wide Model (Coenen et al. (2005)) and Smets and Wouters (2005) for
the European Union.
    The most important real adjustment costs for this paper are those associated with the
energy sectors. On the supply side, there are adjustment costs associated with changes in
capital ( KO and KGAS ) and labor ( LO and LGAS ) in the production of oil and gasoline.
On the demand side, there are adjustment costs associated with changes in the use of oil in
the production of intermediate tradables, nontradables and gasoline ( OT , ON and OGAS
respectively), and in the use of gasoline as a component of the …nal consumption bundle
( GAS ). These real adjustment costs are modeled as quadratic adjustment costs following
the Rotemberg (1982) formulation. The parameters associated with the adjustment costs
are set at 300, a value high enough to to generate considerably muted short-term price
responses of supply and demand for gasoline and oil to changes in fundamentals.9 This
implies that, for any shock a¤ecting the demand or supply of oil, oil prices respond rapidly
but volumes remain relatively unchanged for around 5 to 10 years.
    The last key element in the dynamics of the model is the conduct of monetary policy,
found in Table 10. For simplicity, all regions are assumed to be in‡ation targeters that follow
an in‡ation-forecast-based (IFB) rule.10 In order to hit a target of 2 percent (2.5 percent in
the United States) for core consumer price in‡ation four to six quarters in the future, the
change in the interest rate must be twice as large as the deviation of core in‡ation from its
target level.11


5     Why oil prices have increased: some illustrative ex-
      periments
This section starts by presenting some simulation results showing the importance of ad-
justment costs that limit the short-run responses of demand and supply for crude oil, and
their implications for the response of oil prices to productivity shocks. We show that in
the presence of these adjustment costs an upward shift in productivity growth can result
in the combination of high oil prices and robust global growth Next, we investigate the
implications of higher oil reserves in the future. As an extension of the productivity shock,
we illustrate how the model can be used to assess major risks to the future demand for crude
oil that are the result of uncertainty about future levels of oil intensity and real incomes in
emerging Asia. Finally, we analyze the e¤ects of a pure supply-induced shock that increases
oil prices through raising the market power of oil producers. Taken in combination, these

   9 However, Canada is assumed to have stronger real rigidities in oil production (because of the di¢ culty

of exploiting the Athabasca tar sands) while the group of oil exporting countries is assumed to have weaker
real rigidities (because of the ease with which the abundant near-surface oil in the Middle East can be
extracted).
  1 0 In future versions of this work emerging Asia will be alternatively assumed to pursue a …xed exchange

rate target vis-à-vis the United States.
  1 1 Core in‡ation in this model excludes the e¤ect of gasoline prices on the consumption price de‡ator (a

proxy for the CPI excluding food and energy or some similar measure).




                                                     7
four experiments can provide the explanation for the increase in oil prices over the past
several years.12 In particular, productivity shocks and the types of oil usage that have been
seen in emerging Asia have been key drivers.

5.1     Higher productivity growth in oil-importing regions
To investigate the e¤ects of rising global demand for oil we consider a positive shock in the
oil-importing regions (the United States, emerging Asia, the remaining countries bloc) that
raises productivity growth in both the tradables and nontradables sectors by one percentage
point for 20 years. However, before presenting the short- and medium-term implications of
higher productivity growth on oil prices and the world economy, we develop a benchmark
scenario where all adjustment costs that limit the short-run and medium-term responses of
the demand and supply of oil to changes in the price of oil are turned o¤. The comparison
of our simulation results with the benchmark scenario is meant to emphasize two elements:
on the supply side, we introduce signi…cant real adjustment costs in the attempt to capture
the e¤ects of severe capacity constraints in the energy sector, as well as the multi-year
delay between oil discoveries and their commercial availability. On the demand side, these
adjustment costs capture the fact that it takes years to change the fuel e¢ ciency of the
stock of motor vehicles or to replace the stock of technology that is used for heating and
cooling. These real adjustment costs imply that both the demand and supply for crude oil
will be extremely inelastic in the short run, requiring large movements in crude oil prices to
clear the energy market.

5.1.1     Responses without real adjustment costs in the energy sector
Figures 10 to 12 report results where all the real adjustment costs that a¤ect the short-run
demand and supply for oil and gasoline are excluded. The oil-importing regions obviously
bene…t from higher levels of productivity in their own region, but the increase in oil prices
over time also results in a favorable terms-of-trade shock for regions that are net exporters
of oil (Canada and the group of oil-exporting countries (GOEC)) and a negative terms of
trade shock for the regions that are net importers of oil. To interpret these results it is
important to recall that, in the baseline, net exports of oil in Canada and the group of
oil-exporting countries are equal to 3.6 and 8.1 percent of GDP, while emerging Asia, the
United States and the remaining countries bloc are assumed to be net importers of oil, with
oil trade balances equal to –1.9, -1.4, -0.4 percent of GDP, respectively.
    The price of oil trends upward in tandem with the increase in the demand for oil, re-
‡ecting the assumption of diminishing returns in the production of oil because of a …xed
factor (land). For example, for the group of oil-exporting countries, Figure 12 shows that oil
prices barely move in the short run, but then rise gradually over time reaching a level that is
about 15 percent higher after 15 years. Oil production increases by only 1.5 percent in the
group of oil-producing countries. It is important to emphasize that in this simulation we are
assuming that there are no new discoveries of oil and that production can only be increased
by adding more capital and labor based on existing reserves. It is worth emphasizing that
this experiment is based on purely arti…cial assumptions to be relaxed later.

  1 2 It is understood that the current level of oil prices is not totally explicable in the context of these three

shocks, as some of the volatility in the price of oil has nothing to do with the fundamentals of the market.
Rather, they are linked to the perceived political risks attached to the various players (such as the Middle
East or sub-Saharan African countries). Quanti…cation of such uncertainty, by de…nition, has no role in a
structural model such as the GEM.



                                                        8
    The gradual rise in oil prices results in an improvement in the oil trade balance for
Canada and the GOEC and a deterioration in the regions that import oil. The rise in the
price of oil results in an upward trend in the relative price of gasoline. While monetary
policy is successful at keeping core in‡ation close to the assumed target, headline in‡ation
is systematically higher than in the baseline.
    The dynamics for consumption, investment and GDP are relatively straightforward. In
those regions that experience higher productivity growth, investment trends upwards until
the capital stock in these economies adjusts to its new higher level. In the medium term,
high investment rates in these regions crowd out investment in the oil-exporting countries as
their rates of return on non-oil investment projects are signi…cantly lower. However, these
e¤ects are eventually o¤set by higher rates of return in the oil sectors in these economies
and aggregate investment rises above baseline. Consumption rises by more than GDP in
the oil-exporting regions and by less than GDP in the oil-importing regions, which simply
re‡ects the terms-of-trade improvement that the latter experiences.
    There are two major forces that require the real e¤ective exchange rates for the oil-
importing regions to depreciate in the long run. The …rst is a result of the improvement in
the terms of trade in the oil-exporting regions and the second re‡ects the assumption that
higher growth in the oil-importing regions stems from higher levels of productivity in both
the tradables and nontradables sector. In this case, equal-sized productivity shocks in both
the nontradables and tradables sectors lead to a depreciation of the exchange rate in the
long run, while the standard Balassa-Samuelson e¤ect — which predicts a real exchange
rate appreciation in the long run — relies on productivity growth in the tradables sector
exceeding that of the nontradables sector.
    Perhaps surprisingly, for the United States the real exchange rate appreciates in the
short run. This re‡ects the fact that this region must absorb most of the depreciation in
emerging Asia and the remaining countries bloc, both blocs being characterized by strong
trade linkages with the United States. The appreciation also explains the short-run fall in
U.S. net foreign liabilities measured as a ratio of nominal GDP, even as the trade balance
worsens. In the very long run the desired stock of U.S. net foreign liabilities is actually
higher than in the baseline, a fact that contributes to generate pressure toward a long-run
depreciation. The latter is needed to generate a trade surplus that …nances the higher
interest burden on the larger stock of net foreign liabilities.

5.1.2   Responses with real adjustment costs in the energy sector
Figures 13 to 15 report the e¤ects of the productivity shock, except in this case the real
adjustment costs that limit the short-run oil supply and oil demand responses are fully
operational. Oil prices now jump up on impact, decline over the …rst year, before rising
steadily over time. A comparison of Figures 12 and 15 show that oil prices are substantially
higher over the medium term, re‡ecting the sluggish response of the supply of crude oil.
As can be seen in the …gures, higher oil prices greatly magnify the near-term and medium-
term e¤ects of the terms-of-trade e¤ects and increase the magnitude of the wealth transfer
between regions that import oil and regions that export oil.
    While this has signi…cant e¤ects on the short-run dynamics, the basic macro dynamics
presented earlier remain. Although the magnitudes of the real exchange rate responses are
di¤erent than in the case without real adjustment costs, they follow the same basic pattern.
In spite of the large oil price increase, the stance of monetary policy is adjusted in all regions
to keep core in‡ation close to the target. This requires an increase in nominal interest rates



                                                9
that is larger than the increase in headline in‡ation, as higher productivity growth increases
the marginal product of capital and implicitly shifts up the neutral policy rate.13
   While we have not performed a detailed accounting of the role of demand shocks behind
the hike in oil prices since 2004, this illustrative scenario shows that it is possible in principle
to account broadly for the combination of high oil prices and robust global growth, once
the role of stronger fundamentals driving underlying productivity growth is appropriately
considered.14

5.2     An expectation of greater availability of oil reserves in the fu-
        ture
The previous results are likely to overestimate the e¤ects of persistent productivity growth
shocks on oil prices in the future because they assume that the available level of reserves is
…xed. Our modelling strategy in fact treats available oil reserves as an exogenous variable,
without attempting to model new oil discoveries.15 In addition to …nding new oil …elds,
there are two additional reasons why available reserves could increase in response to higher
oil prices. First, the latter create incentives to develop new technology to increase the
production of crude oil from existing …elds. Second, when access to oil …elds has been
restricted by governments, they may choose to relax these restrictions either to raise the
levels of revenue or because of concerns about energy security.
    Figure 16 reports results where we assume a gradual increase in available reserves in the
oil-exporting regions starting in the sixth year of the simulation. This results in an increase
in oil production after 15 years by about 6 percent in Canada and by about 8 percent in the
group of oil exporters. Re‡ecting the larger supply, there is a downward shift in oil prices
by about 10 percent from the sixth year onward. This expected improvement in the terms
of trade for oil-importing regions raises consumption, investment and GDP in the short run
and reduces consumption in the oil-exporting regions. In the short run, investment also
rises in the oil-exporting countries, as the oil extraction process in the future is expected to
require additional levels of capital.
    The pattern of oil prices clearly shows a potential weakness of the model, which assumes
that oil is not a storable commodity but derives its value only from its use in production and
consumption. Extending the model to allow for oil inventories would obviously smooth out
the decline in oil prices observed after the sixth year. Also, allowing for trade in oil stocks
would create an arbitrage condition that would link changes in oil prices to the rates of
return on other assets. Unfortunately, both of these assumptions would greatly complicate
the structure of the model.

  1 3 While we do not have a neutral policy rate in the reaction function, the latter is speci…ed in such a way

that allows the real interest rate to depart from its long-run equilibrium value when there are shocks that
change the marginal product of capital over long periods of time. This, of course, is necessary condition to
keep core in‡ation close to the target.
  1 4 Once the calibration of the model has been …nalized, we plan to develop estimates of demand and supply

shocks that can account for high oil prices and the pattern of growth and savings behavior observed over
the last few years — for a similar exercise that ignored the role of oil prices see Faruqee et al. (2007).
  1 5 In a future versions we may add an option where available oil reserves will behave as quasi-…xed factor

that responds with very long lags to changes in oil prices.




                                                      10
5.3    Increase in the demand for oil in emerging Asia
Long-term projections of the demand for oil depend critically on assumptions about the
future use of motor vehicles in emerging Asia. Given its substantial population as well
as the potential uncertainty associated with the speed at which its real per capita income
is likely to bridge the gap with the OECD countries. Studies that have focused on the
implications of this uncertainty have usually taken energy prices as given and assumed that
the supply of oil will be su¢ cient to smoothly accommodate variations in its demand —
see for example IMF (2005b). Our simulation introduces the endogenous response of energy
prices. To consider the implications of permanent shocks to the future demand for oil in
emerging Asia, we …rst consider a scenario in which the increased demand for oil is the result
of two factors: a taste shift that raises consumers’ demand for gasoline, and a technology
shift that increases the amount of oil needed to produce tradables and nontradables. The
shock is phased in slowly over time, and raises the real level of oil consumption by roughly
2.5 percent of GDP by the …fteen year of the simulation. We then consider an alternative
scenario that combines the increase of intensity in oil usage with higher productivity growth
in emerging Asia.
    Figures 17 to 19 report the results. An increase in demand for gasoline in emerging Asia
raises oil prices and shifts the terms of trade in favor of the oil-exporting regions and against
the oil-importing regions. As a result, consumption increases in the regions that are net
exporters of oil and eventually declines in the regions that are net importers.
    In terms of quantitative magnitudes, crude oil prices rise by about 10 percent on impact,
decline over the …rst year and then trend upwards over time reaching a peak that is around
25 percent higher than baseline. Again, the pro…le for oil prices re‡ects very low short-run
elasticities of supply and demand for crude oil, which means that oil prices have to bear all
of the burden of adjustment in the short run. The e¤ects on oil trade balances are much
larger in the short run for the GOEC and Canada relative to the baseline (equal to 8.1 and
3.6 percent of GDP, respectively). The negative e¤ects on the oil trade balance in emerging
Asia builds up over time and reaches about 5 percentage points of GDP after about 15
years.
    This analysis assumes that the shock represents a pure shift in tastes toward consumption
of transportation services that use gasoline intensively. Obviously, the interaction of higher
growth combined with increased intensity of oil usage could have much more important
implications for the demand for oil and the world economy. Conventional econometric
estimates of the demand for motor vehicles suggest that these goods are luxury items whose
consumption shares expand with higher levels of wealth and real income. To understand the
importance of this interaction, we consider a scenario where productivity growth is higher
in emerging Asia in both the tradable and nontradables sectors and there is a concomitant
increase in the intensity of oil usage (Figure 20). The e¤ects of the oil-intensity shock are
ampli…ed by the increase in productivity, and vice-versa — the results of the two shocks are
closer to being multiplicative, rather than additive. We see the world price of oil increasing
almost 20 percent on impact (twice that of the oil demand shock alone) and 60 percent in
the long run.

5.4    Supply-induced oil price hike
Figures 21 to 23 report the results for a supply shock that raises the price of oil by about
50 percent after 10 quarters and by about one half as much after 15 years. The decline in



                                               11
oil prices after its initial upward spike, is consistent with a markup over marginal producer
costs in the oil sector that rises gradually over time, but faces a loosening of short-run
adjustment costs in the adjustment of oil supply.
    The increase in the terms of trade in favor of the oil-exporting regions leads to an increase
in consumption in the short run. However, to mimic the qualitative behavior of actual
current account surpluses in the recent past, we assume that this change is accompanied
by an upward shift in the desired net foreign asset positions of all oil-exporting regions.
This limits the rise of consumption over the medium term, but allows consumption to be
permanently higher in the long run.
    Higher wealth also leads to a fall in labor supply, as it results in an increase in time
devoted to leisure. For the group of oil exporters, since oil is such an important part of their
economy (12 percent of production), real GDP actually falls permanently (by about 2.5
percent) as export volumes drop. This e¤ect may be o¤set partially by special circumstances
in the labor market in these economies — for instance ,because their economies depend
heavily on migrant labor.16 Therefore, we assume a shift in the labor supply function that
allows a slight increase in labor e¤ort in the group of oil-exporting countries rather than
allowing it to fall over time. The oil-importing regions are clearly worse o¤, as they face a
negative terms-of-trade shock that increases the cost of producing goods and services, which
over time results in a decline in investment and lower levels of productive capacity.


6     Some potential policy responses
Given the long-run nature (i.e. usually a minimum of 15 years) of the scenarios o¤ered
above, it is appropriate to provide some normative suggestions as to how policymakers
(particularly the regions’governments) can help reduce dependence on oil, and reduce the
negative impacts that still-increasing and high oil prices will have on future world output
growth We focus on concrete policy measures, not regulatory measures or legal restrictions
on fuel usage in the automobile sector or industry, since these can be hard to quantify in
a model-consistent fashion. While several policy experiments could be carried out with
our model involving both (or either) …rms and individuals, we demonstrate below that the
governments can use a global hike in tax rates on gasoline, in tandem with a reduction in
taxes on labor income to achieve a notable reduction in oil prices and use of oil.

6.1     A global increase in gasoline tax rates
We focus on the e¤ects of a 25 percentage point increase in gasoline tax rates in all regions
of the world. In each region, it is assumed that the additional tax revenue is used to reduce
distortionary taxes on labor income. As a result, productive capacity increases, with positive
e¤ects on aggregate employment and investment. The results are reported in Figures 24 to
26.
    The tax hike on gasoline eventually results in a substitution away from consumption
of energy, but this is a very long and slow process given the low short-run elasticities of
demand for oil. Oil prices decline by almost …ve percent. This decline in prices results in a
reduction in the oil trade balance in the group of oil-producing countries that is about twice
the e¤ect for Canada, re‡ecting di¤erences in their initial oil trade balances. The reduction

 1 6 This is particularly true of the OPEC countries. For example, in 2003, 79 percent of workers in Saudi

Arabia were non-Saudi nationals.




                                                   12
in labor tax rates raises the aggregate real wage and results in higher investment and GDP
in the oil-importing countries, but this e¤ect is also quite signi…cant in Canada, where the
expansion in employment in the non-oil sector outweighs the decline in employment in the
oil sector.
    Consumption in the oil-importing (oil-exporting) regions increases (decreases) because
lower oil prices represent a positive terms of trade shock and a wealth transfer from oil-
exporting regions to oil-importing regions. In Canada, this negative terms of-trade shock
results in decline in consumption in the short run, but over time the expansion in produc-
tive capacity and real income results in higher levels of consumption. Real exchange rates
depreciate in the oil-exporting regions and appreciate in the oil-consuming regions.
    Many of the short-run e¤ects are re‡ected in the long-run implications of the shock, as
consumption and investment gradually move towards their new equilibrium values, without
overshooting during the transition. We consider the long-run e¤ects by calculating the
change in consumers’welfare, as shown in Table 11.17 The steady-state implications of the
global gasoline tax among the regions is fairly small, being at most -0.4 percent of consump-
tion. Not surprising, the biggest loser is the group of oil exporting countries. Canada loses
the consumption equivalent of 0.29 percent in the long run - less than the other oil exporters
because of its more diversi…ed economy. In contrast, oil importers experience minimal wel-
fare losses (less than 0.1 percent of consumption) as they do not face the direct wealth e¤ect
that the oil exporters experience from lower oil revenues. In general, liquidity-constrained
consumers bene…t, as their tax burden falls signi…cantly relative to forward-looking con-
sumers, who bear more of the burden of the gasoline tax (and are owners of the oil wealth
which decreases). Welfare declines in all regions as the majority of consumers are forward-
looking. In general, the declines in welfare are small, and are not a de…nitive reason to
reject a tax hike on gasoline, particularly since these e¤ects could be easily overturned if the
increased tax burden on gasoline also resulted in a fall in oil intensity in production (which
could have additional bene…cial e¤ects on levels of production, and returns on investment).


7     Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a …ve-region model of the global economy and carried out
scenario analyses to study the implications of di¤erent shocks driving oil prices worldwide.
The model introduces signi…cant real adjustment costs in the energy sector, making both
the demand and supply for crude oil extremely inelastic in the short run, thus requiring
large movements in crude oil prices to clear the energy market.
    To answer the …rst question about the underlying causes of the oil price run-up since 2003,
the model properties o¤er a story based on stronger productivity growth in oil importing
regions coupled with shifts in oil intensity in production (emerging Asia), and (to a much
lesser extent) pure price increases by oil producers. Oil price shocks stemming from higher
growth in the oil-importing regions are accompanied by wealth transfers through terms-
of-trade movements, leading consumption to grow slower than output in the oil-importing
regions. In the medium term, high investment rates in the high-growth regions crowd out
investment in the oil-exporting regions. These results need not hold if higher oil prices bring

  1 7 Welfare is measured in terms of consumption equivalents, de…ned as the amount of consumption required

to achieve a certain level of utility, holding labour supply (leisure) at its pre-shock steady-state level. There
may be further bene…ts that are not quanti…ed, such as any shift to new (less polluting) fuel sources that
could occur (but are not captured) in face of the tax shock. Moreover, this section only considers the
long-run welfare implications, not those occuring on impact of the tax increase.



                                                       13
about expectations of a larger availability of oil reserves in the future. Moreover, the positive
e¤ects of higher oil prices on consumption need not translate into reduced current account
surpluses in the oil-exporting regions, to the extent that they are accompanied by an upward
shift in the desired net foreign asset positions. The conclusions about the role of increased
productivity in the oil-importing regions can be reinforced by considering emerging Asia in
particular, with its increased intensive use of oil in the production of tradable goods.
    Our second question about whether policy can be used to ameliorate many of negative
impacts of increasing and higher oil prices is answered by exploring the implications of a
global tax hike on gasoline. Such a measure reduces oil prices by almost …ve percent, and
results in a positive terms-of-trade shock for the oil-importing regions, as well as a wealth
transfer from oil-exporting regions to oil-importing regions. This leads to an increase in
consumption in the oil-importing regions and decreases everywhere else. Furthermore, the
reduction in labor tax rates raises the aggregate real wage and results in higher investment
and GDP. On net, the world su¤ers a small welfare loss, but this masks regional variations,
where the e¤ects are negligible in the oil importing regions, but notable in the oil-exporting
regions.
    Going forward, a number of extensions can be suggested. First, it would be useful to
develop a more detailed assessment of the role of demand and supply shocks and their
contribution to explaining the rise in oil prices over the last three years. Second, it would
be useful to extend the results of Faruqee et al. (2007) by developing a baseline scenario
for the world economy, which could be used as a reference for studying the implications of
alternative policies.




                                               14
References
 [1] Bayoumi, T., D. Laxton and P. Pesenti, 2004, “Bene…ts and Spillovers of Greater
     Competition in Europe: A Macroeconomic Assessment”, NBER Working Paper No.
     10416, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

 [2] Coenen, G., P. McAdam and R. Straub, 2008,“Tax Reform and Labour-Market Per-
     formance in the Euro Area: A Simulation-Based Analysis Using the New Area-Wide
     Model”, forthcoming in Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, special volume
     from the conference "DSGE Modelling at Policymaking Institutions: Progress and
     Prospects", Federal Reserve Board, Washington DC, December 2005.

 [3] Faruqee, H., D. Laxton, D. Muir and P. Pesenti, 2007, “Smooth Landing or Crash?
     Model-based Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebalancing”in R. Clarida (ed.), G7
     Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, NBER conference volume:
     University of Chicago Press.

 [4] Faruqee, H., D. Laxton, D. Muir and P. Pesenti, 2008, “Would Protectionism Defuse
     Global Imbalances and Spur Economic Activity? A Scenario Analysis” forthcoming
     in Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, special volume from the conference
     "DSGE Modelling at Policymaking Institutions: Progress and Prospects", Federal Re-
     serve Board, Washington DC, December 2005 (longer version issued as NBER Working
     Paper No. 12704, November 2006).

 [5] Gosselin, M.-A. and R. Lalonde, 2005, “MUSE: The Bank of Canada’s New Projec-
     tion Model of the U.S. Economy”, Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 96, Bank of
     Canada.

 [6] Energy Information Administration, 2006, Short-Term Energy Outlook— June 2006,
     http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/steo/pub/3atab.html.

 [7] International Monetary Fund, 2005a, World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Ex-
     ternal Imbalances, IMF: Washington, D.C. (April).

 [8] International Monetary Fund, 2005b, World Economic Outlook: Building Institutions,
     IMF: Washington, D.C. (September).

 [9] International Monetary Fund, 2006, World Economic Outlook: Globalization and In-
     ‡ation, IMF: Washington, D.C. (April).

[10] Jean, S. and G. Nicoletti, 2002, “Product Market Regulation and Wage Premia in Eu-
     rope and North America”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper 318, OECD
     Economics Department.

[11] Juillard, M., P. Karam, D. Laxton and P. Pesenti, 2006, “Welfare-based Monetary
     Policy Rules in an Estimated DSGE Model of the US Economy”, ECB Working Paper
     613, European Central Bank.

[12] Lalonde, R. and D. Muir, 2007, “The Bank of Canada’s Version of the Global Economy
     Model (BoC-GEM) ”, Bank of Canada Technical Report 98, Bank of Canada

[13] Laxton, D., and P. Pesenti, 2003, “Monetary Policy Rules for Small, Open, Emerging
     Economies”, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, (July), pp. 1109-1146.


                                          15
[14] Martins, J.O., S. Scarpetta, and D. Pilat, 1996, “Mark-up Pricing, Market Structure
     and the Business Cycle”, OECD Economic Studies 27 (II), p.71-106.

[15] Murchison, S. and A. Rennison, 2006, “ToTEM: The Bank of Canada’s New Projection
     and Policy Analysis Model”, Bank of Canada Technical Report 97, Bank of Canada

[16] Perrier, P., 2005, “La fonction de production et les données canadiennes”, Bank of
     Canada Working Paper 2005-20, Bank of Canada.

[17] Pesenti, P., 2008, “The Global Economy Model (GEM): Theoretical Framework”forth-
     coming in IMF Sta¤ Papers.

[18] Rotemberg, J., 1982, "Sticky Prices in the United States", Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, 90(6), pp.1187–1211.

[19] Smets, F. and R. Wouters, 2005, “Comparing Shocks and Frictions in Business Cycles:
     A Bayesian DSGE Approach”, Journal of Applied Econometrics 20 (2), p.161-183.




                                           16
   Table 1: Growth Forecasts for China and India from Consensus Economics

                                     2003   2004    2005
                       China
                         Forecast    7.4    8.3     8.6
                         Actual      10.0   10.1    9.9

                       India
                          Forecast   5.6    6.8     6.9
                          Actual     7.2    8.1     8.3




                    Table 2: Core Parameters of the GEM

 Parameter                                    CA   OE     US    AS    RC
                               4
 Rate of time preference 1=        1 100      1.9  1.9    1.9   1.9   1.9
 Depreciation rate                            0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02
 Intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1=  5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00
 Habit persistence in consumption bc          0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92
 Frisch elasticity of labor 1=                5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00
 Share of liquidity-constrained consumers SLC 0.20 0.25 0.15 0.50 0.25
 Habit persistence in labor b`                0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.75
 CA = CAnada, OE = group of Oil-Exporting countries, US =United States,
 AS = emerging ASia and RC = Remaining Countries (incl. Japan and EU)




            Table 3: Parameterization of the Production Functions

Parameter                                          CA      OE     US     AS     RC
Tradable Intermediate Goods
Substitution between factors of production T       0.70    0.70   0.70   0.70   0.70
Bias towards capital KT                            0.71    0.80   0.70   0.75   0.79
Bias towards oil OT                                0.06    0.07   0.04   0.03   0.04
Nontradable Intermediate Goods
Substitution between factors of production N       0.70    0.70   0.70   0.70   0.70
Bias towards capital KN                            0.68    0.73   0.60   0.68   0.74
Bias towards oil ON                                0.04    0.06   0.03   0.03   0.02
Oil
Substitution between factors of production O       0.60    0.60   0.60   0.60   0.60
Bias towards capital KO                            0.68    0.14   0.53   0.42   0.59
Bias towards natural resources (LAN D) LAN D       0.31    0.85   0.46   0.52   0.40
Gasoline
Substitution between factors of production GAS     0.70    0.70   0.70   0.70   0.70
Bias towards capital KGAS                          0.45    0.42   0.47   0.43   0.46
Bias towards oil OGAS                              0.54    0.57   0.51   0.52   0.53




                                      17
             Table 4: Parameterization of the Final Demand Functions

Parameter                                                         CA       OE       US     AS     RC
Final Consumption Goods
Substitution between domestic and imported goods A                2.5      2.5      2.5    2.5    2.5
Bias towards domestic goods A                                     0.28     0.58     0.86   0.02   0.93
Substitution between domestic tradables and nontradables "A       0.5      0.5      0.5    0.5    0.5
Bias towards tradable goods A                                     0.65     0.65     0.65   0.42   0.65
Substitution between gasoline and the rest "GAS                   0.3      0.3      0.3    0.3    0.3
Bias towards gasoline GAS                                         0.15     0.12     0.15   0.07   0.16
Final Investment Goods
Substitution between domestic and imported goods E                2.5      2.5      2.5    2.5    2.5
Bias towards domestic goods E                                     0.25     0.33     0.86   0.02   0.92
Substitution between domestic tradables and nontradables "E       0.5      0.5      0.5    0.5    0.5
Bias towards tradable goods E                                     0.81     0.75     0.75   0.79   0.75
Demand for Oil in Production
Substitution between domestic and imported oil OT , ON , OGAS     10.0     10.0     10.0   10.0   10.0
Bias towards domestic oil for producing tradables OT              0.09     0.00     0.97   0.00   0.86
Bias towards domestic oil for producing nontradables ON           0.03     0.00     0.91   0.00   0.60
Bias towards domestic oil for producing gasoline OGAS             0.19     0.00     0.99   0.00   0.98




            Table 5: Steady-State National Accounts - Expenditure Side

  Ratio of GDP                                    CA     OE     US       AS       RC
  Total Consumption A + PN GN                     80.0   81.4   81.0     64.4     79.5
   Private C                                      56.5   64.3   65.8     50.1     58.8
   Public GC + PN GN                              23.5   17.1   15.2     14.3     20.7
  Total Investment PE E                           19.9   18.8   18.4     36.0     20.8
   Private PE I                                   17.4   16.8   16.4     34.5     18.3
   Public PE GI                                   2.5    2.0    2.0      1.5      2.5
  Trade balance T BAL                             0.1    -0.2   0.5      -0.4     -0.2
  Imports IM                                      37.0   24.0   13.7     26.5     9.0
   Consumption Goods PM A M A                     23.2   13.8   8.0      11.2     4.6
   Investment Goods PM E M E                      11.6   8.4    4.0      12.5     3.2
  Oil for producing Gasoline POGAS M OGAS         0.4    0.3    0.3      0.6      0.2
   Other Oil POT M OT + PON M ON                  1.8    1.4    1.4      2.3      1.0
  Oil Demand POT OT + PON ON + POGAS OGAS         3.9    3.9    3.5      5.0      2.7
  Gasoline Demand PGAS (1 + GAS )GAS              3.0    2.3    3.3      2.5      3.1
  Government Debt B                               25.0   24.0   15.0     24.0     67.0
  Net Foreign Assets B                            -7.5   21.4   -50.0    35.0     23.0
  Share of World GDP (percent)                    2.4    9.3    30.1     10.6     47.6




                                        18
             Table 6: Steady-State National Accounts - Production Side

                  Ratio of GDP     CA     OE     US     AS    RC
                  Tradables        43.9 36.2 48.2 65.1 45.8
                  Nontradables     49.5 53.4 50.0 34.3 50.0
                  Gasoline         2.3    2.0    2.9    2.2   2.4
                  Oil Production 7.5      11.9 3.1      2.3   2.1
                  Factor Incomes (% share of oil production)
                   Capital         29.7 12.9 20.7 24.0 26.5
                   Labor           10.8 8.1      8.3    16.2 9.9
                   Land            59.5 79.0 71.0 59.8 63.6
                  Columns will not sum to 100, as gasoline
                  and oil production overlap as a share of GDP.




                   Table 7: Calibrating the International Linkages

Parameter                                                CA     OE     US     AS     RC
Substitution between imports from di¤erent regions   A   1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5
Bias towards imported consumption goods bA from
Canada                                                   ...    0.02   0.22   0.02   0.03
Group of oil-exporting countries                         0.06   ...    0.16   0.12   0.21
United States                                            0.71   0.45   ...    0.28   0.69
Emerging Asia                                            0.02   0.04   0.07   ...    0.07
Remaining countries                                      0.21   0.49   0.55   0.58   ...
Substitution between imports from di¤erent regions   E   1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5    1.5
Bias towards imported investment goods bE from
Canada                                                   ...    0.01   0.14   0.01   0.02
Group of oil-exporting countries                         0.06   ...    0.21   0.04   0.09
United States                                            0.64   0.59   ...    0.31   0.74
Emerging Asia                                            0.04   0.06   0.14   ...    0.15
Remaining countries                                      0.26   0.33   0.51   0.64   ...
Substitution between imports from di¤erent regions   o   3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0
Bias towards imported oil bo from
Canada                                                   ...    0.00   0.22   0.00   0.01
Group of oil-exporting countries                         0.31   ...    0.45   0.38   0.81
United States                                            0.41   0.26   ...    0.05   0.16
Emerging Asia                                            0.00   0.01   0.00   ...    0.01
Remaining countries                                      0.29   0.73   0.33   0.57   ...
Net Foreign Liabilities
Short-run dynamics B1                                    0.25   0.25   0.25   0.25   0.25
Short-run dynamics B2                                    0.07   0.07   0.07   0.07   0.07
percent related to domestic government debt F 1          0.50   0.50   0.50   0.50   0.50




                                         19
                           Table 8: Price and Wage Markups

            Parameter                           CA     OE     US       AS      RC
            Tradables
            Markup T =(     T     1)            1.20   1.18   1.15     1.14    1.20
             T                                  6.00   6.56   7.67     8.00    5.89
            Nontradables
            Markup N =(      N        1)        1.42   1.23   1.28     1.25    1.38
             N                                  3.38   5.34   4.58     5.00    3.63
            Oil
            Markup   O =( O           1)        1.01   476    1.01     1.01    1.01
             O                                  100    1.21   100      100     100
            Gasoline
            Markup GAS =( GAS              1)   1.16   1.17   1.17     1.17    1.16
             Markup and Taxes                   1.51   1.34   1.34     1.34    1.51
             GAS                                7.15   7.00   7.00     7.00    7.15
            Wages
            Markup    =(         1)             1.20   1.30   1.16     1.16    1.30
                                                6.00   4.30   7.30     7.30    4.30



             Table 9: Real Adjustment Costs and Nominal Rigidities

Parameter                                                   CA       OE       US      AS     RC
Real Adjustment Costs
 Capital accumulation I1                                    1.00     1.00     1.00    1.00   1.00
 Investment changes I2                                      100      100      100     100    100
 Imports of consumption goods M A                           0.95     0.95     0.95    0.95   0.95
 Imports of investment goods M E                            0.95     0.95     0.95    0.95   0.95
 In the Oil and Gasoline Sectors
   Capital for producing oil KO                             375      225      300     300    300
  Capital for producing gasoline KGAS                       300      300      300     300    300
   Labor for producing oil LO                               375      225      300     300    300
  Labor for producing gasoline LGAS                         300      300      300     300    300
   Demand for oil in production. OT , ON                    300      300      300     300    300
Nominal Rigidities
 Weight on past versus steady-state in‡ation                0.5      0.5      0.5     0.5    0.5
 Wages for liquidity-constrained consumers W LC             900      800      800     1050   800
 Wages for forward-looking consumers W F L                  900      800      800     1050   800
 Price of domestically-produced tradables P Q               700      700      700     900    700
 Price of nontradables P N                                  700      700      700     900    700
 Price of imported intermediate goods P M                   4000     4000     4000    4000   4250



             Table 10: Monetary Policy Reaction Function Parameters

                     Parameter                                IFB Rule
                     Lagged interest rate at t-1 ! i          1.00
                     Core in‡ation gap at t+3 ! 1             2.00




                                                20
Table 11: Steady-State Welfare Implications of a Global Increase in Gasoline Tax Rates of
25 Percentage Points (Percent Change)

        Welfare (Consumption Equivalent)        CA      OE      US      AS      RC
        All consumers                           -0.29   -0.40   -0.02   -0.04   -0.09
        Forward looking consumers               -0.30   -0.42   -0.03   -0.07   -0.10
        Liquidity-constrained consumers         1.02    0.66    0.56    1.01    0.70




                                           21
                             Figure 1: Oil Price Revision



                                Oil Price Projections From Futures Market
                                                    (US Dollars per Barrel)
                           Winter 2003            Winter 2004             Winter 2005      Winter 2006
 65                                                                                                                     65

 60                                                                                                                     60

 55                                                                                                                     55

 50                                                                                                                     50

 45                                                                                                                     45

 40                                                                                                                     40

 35                                                                                                                     35

 30                                                                                                                     30

 25                                                                                                                     25

 20                                                                                                                     20
      2000   2001   2002      2003         2004       2005         2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                                         Revisions in Oil Price Projections
                                          (Percent Deviations from Winter 2003 WEO)
                           Winter 2004            Winter 2005             Winter 2006
250                                                                                                                     250


200                                                                                                                     200


150                                                                                                                     150


100                                                                                                                     100


 50                                                                                                                     50


  0                                                                                                                     0


-50                                                                                                                     -50
      2000   2001   2002      2003         2004       2005         2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                                                     22
                         Figure 2: OPEC-11 Spare Capacity and Oil Prices, 2000 to 2005




                                 OPEC 11 Spare Capacity             Average Spot Price of Brent, Dubai and WTI
                    20                                                                                           65


                    18                                                                                           60


                    16                                                                                           55


                    14                                                                                           50


                    12                                                                                           45
% of Total Supply




                                                                                                                      $/barrel
                    10                                                                                           40


                     8                                                                                           35


                     6                                                                                           30


                     4                                                                                           25


                     2                                                                                           20


                     0                                                                                           15
                             2000             2001        2002   2003             2004                 2005




                                                            23
                     Figure 3: World Real GDP Growth Revisions



                         World (All WEO countries): Real GDP Growth Projections
                                                           (In percent)
                              Winter 2003          Winter 2004              Winter 2005      Winter 2006
5.5                                                                                                                       5.5


5.0                                                                                                                       5.0


4.5                                                                                                                       4.5


4.0                                                                                                                       4.0


3.5                                                                                                                       3.5


3.0                                                                                                                       3.0


2.5                                                                                                                       2.5


2.0                                                                                                                       2.0
       2000   2001     2002      2003       2004       2005          2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                                     Revisions in Output Growth Projections
                                              (Deviations from Winter 2003 WEO)
                              Winter 2004          Winter 2005              Winter 2006
1.4                                                                                                                       1.4

1.2                                                                                                                       1.2

1.0                                                                                                                       1.0

0.8                                                                                                                       0.8

0.6                                                                                                                       0.6

0.4                                                                                                                       0.4

0.2                                                                                                                       0.2

0.0                                                                                                                       0.0

-0.2                                                                                                                      -0.2

-0.4                                                                                                                      -0.4
       2000   2001     2002      2003       2004       2005          2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                                                      24
             Figure 4: World Cumulative Real GDP Growth Revisions



                     World (All WEO countries): Cumulative Real GDP Growth Projections
                                                              (In percent)
                                Winter 2003          Winter 2004               Winter 2005      Winter 2006
1.7                                                                                                                          1.7

1.6                                                                                                                          1.6

1.5                                                                                                                          1.5

1.4                                                                                                                          1.4

1.3                                                                                                                          1.3

1.2                                                                                                                          1.2

1.1                                                                                                                          1.1

1.0                                                                                                                          1.0

0.9                                                                                                                          0.9
      2000    2001       2002      2003       2004        2005          2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                                Revisions in Cumulative Output Growth Projections
                                              (Percent Deviations from Winter 2003 WEO)
                                Winter 2004          Winter 2005               Winter 2006
4.5                                                                                                                          4.5

4.0                                                                                                                          4.0

3.5                                                                                                                          3.5

3.0                                                                                                                          3.0

2.5                                                                                                                          2.5

2.0                                                                                                                          2.0

1.5                                                                                                                          1.5

1.0                                                                                                                          1.0

0.5                                                                                                                          0.5

0.0                                                                                                                          0.0
      2000    2001       2002      2003       2004        2005          2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                                                         25
       Figure 5: Emerging Asia Cumulative Real GDP Growth Revisions



             Asia excluding Japan including NIEs: Cumulative Real GDP Growth Projections
                                                          (In percent)
                            Winter 2003          Winter 2004               Winter 2005      Winter 2006
2.4                                                                                                                      2.4

2.2                                                                                                                      2.2

2.0                                                                                                                      2.0

1.8                                                                                                                      1.8

1.6                                                                                                                      1.6

1.4                                                                                                                      1.4

1.2                                                                                                                      1.2

1.0                                                                                                                      1.0

0.8                                                                                                                      0.8
      2000   2001    2002      2003       2004        2005          2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                            Revisions in Cumulative Output Growth Projections
                                          (Percent Deviations from Winter 2003 WEO)
                            Winter 2004          Winter 2005               Winter 2006
10                                                                                                                       10


 8                                                                                                                       8


 6                                                                                                                       6


 4                                                                                                                       4


 2                                                                                                                       2


 0                                                                                                                       0


 -2                                                                                                                      -2
      2000   2001    2002      2003       2004        2005          2006         2007    2008       2009   2010   2011




                                                     26
                                            Figure 6: Oil Intensity

                                    Oil Consumption per Unit of Output
                         (Kilograms per unit of real PPP-adjusted GDP, 1971-2004)


 0.2
         Global O il Inte nsity
0.18

0.16
                                       OECD
0.14      World

0.12

 0.1
          Non-OECD
0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

   0
   71

          73

                 75

                        77

                               79

                                      81

                                               83

                                                      85

                                                             87

                                                                    89

                                                                           91

                                                                                  93

                                                                                         95

                                                                                                97

                                                                                                       99

                                                                                                              01

                                                                                                                     03
        19

               19

                      19

                             19



                                             19

                                                    19

                                                           19

                                                                  19



                                                                                19

                                                                                       19



                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                   20
 19




                                    19




                                                                         19




                                                                                              19



0.25
         O il Intensitie s in Selecte d Countries
                       and Regions

 0.2

         World

0.15


                                                                   Japan                                United States
 0.1
          China
                                                                                        Euro Area

0.05
                                    India


  0
   71

          73

                 75

                        77

                               79

                                      81

                                              83

                                                      85

                                                             87

                                                                    89

                                                                           91

                                                                                  93

                                                                                         95

                                                                                                97

                                                                                                       99

                                                                                                              01

                                                                                                                     03
 19

        19

               19

                      19



                                    19

                                            19

                                                    19

                                                           19



                                                                         19



                                                                                       19

                                                                                              19



                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                   20
                             19




                                                                  19



                                                                                19




                                                                                                     19




                                        27
 Source: IMF's World Economic Outlook, April 2005.
Figure 7: Production Structure of the GEM




                   28
Figure 8: International Trade Linkages (all goods; steady-state calibration; percent of world
GDP)




                                             29
Figure 9: International Trade Linkages (oil sector; steady-state calibration; percent of world
GDP)




                                             30
Figure 10: Higher Productivity Growth in Oil Importing Regions (Without Oil Rigidities)
- Part I


                                                                   (Deviation From Control)



                GDP, Consumption, and Investment
                                  (Percent)                                                            Nominal Trade Balances
                                                                                                                (Percent of GDP)

                                 Canada                                                                             Canada
                 GDP               Consumption        Investment
       15                                                               15                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                      1.0                                                                   1.0

       10                                                               10
                                                                                      0.5                                                                   0.5
        5                                                               5

                                                                                      0.0                                                                   0.0
        0                                                               0

       -5                                                               -5            -0.5                                                                  -0.5
            0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                  Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                               Group of Oil Exporting Countries
                 GDP               Consumption        Investment
        6                                                               6                           Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                      1.5                                                                   1.5

        4                                                               4             1.0                                                                   1.0

        2                                                               2             0.5                                                                   0.5

        0                                                               0             0.0                                                                   0.0

       -2                                                               -2            -0.5                                                                  -0.5
            0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                              United States                                                                  United States
                 GDP               Consumption        Investment
       40                                                               40                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                      0.2                                                                   0.2

       30                                                               30            0.0                                                                   0.0

       20                                                               20            -0.2                                                                  -0.2


       10                                                               10            -0.4                                                                  -0.4

        0                                                               0             -0.6                                                                  -0.6
            0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                           Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
                 GDP               Consumption        Investment
       40                                                               40                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                      0.4                                                                   0.4

       30                                                               30

                                                                                      0.2                                                                   0.2
       20                                                               20

       10                                                               10
                                                                                      0.0                                                                   0.0
        0                                                               0

      -10                                                               -10           -0.2                                                                  -0.2
            0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                        Remaining Countries                                                             Remaining Countries
                 GDP               Consumption        Investment
       40                                                               40                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                      0.3                                                                   0.3

       30                                                               30
                                                                                      0.2                                                                   0.2
       20                                                               20
                                                                                      0.1                                                                   0.1
       10                                                               10

                                                                                      0.0                                                                   0.0
        0                                                               0

      -10                                                               -10           -0.1                                                                  -0.1
            0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60




                                                                        31
Figure 11: Higher Productivity Growth in Oil Importing Regions (Without Oil Rigidities)
- Part II


                                                                       (Deviation From Control)



                       Stocks of Debt Holdings                                                         Real Effective Exchange Rate
                                  (Percent of GDP)                                                                    (Percent)

                                    Canada                                                                          Canada
                 Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
        1                                                                   1               2                                                       2

        0                                                                   0               0                                                       0

       -1                                                                   -1             -2                                                       -2


       -2                                                                   -2             -4                                                       -4

       -3                                                                   -3             -6                                                       -6
             0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                 Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                    Group of Oil Exporting Countries
                 Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
      1.5                                                                   1.5             5                                                       5



      1.0                                                                   1.0             0                                                       0



      0.5                                                                   0.5            -5                                                       -5


      0.0                                                                   0.0           -10                                                       -10
             0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                                 United States                                                                United States
                 Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
      0.5                                                                   0.5           0.5                                                       0.5

      0.0                                                                   0.0
                                                                                          0.0                                                       0.0
      -0.5                                                                  -0.5

                                                                                          -0.5                                                      -0.5
      -1.0                                                                  -1.0

      -1.5                                                                  -1.5          -1.0                                                      -1.0
             0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                             Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
                 Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
      0.8                                                                   0.8           2.0                                                       2.0

      0.6                                                                   0.6
                                                                                          1.5                                                       1.5
      0.4                                                                   0.4
                                                                                          1.0                                                       1.0
      0.2                                                                   0.2
                                                                                          0.5                                                       0.5
      0.0                                                                   0.0

      -0.2                                                                  -0.2          0.0                                                       0.0
             0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                         Remaining Countries                                                               Remaining Countries
                 Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
      0.4                                                                   0.4             3                                                       3

      0.2                                                                   0.2
                                                                                            2                                                       2
      0.0                                                                   0.0

      -0.2                                                                  -0.2
                                                                                            1                                                       1
      -0.4                                                                  -0.4

      -0.6                                                                  -0.6            0                                                       0
             0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60




                                                                            32
Figure 12: Higher Productivity Growth in Oil Importing Regions (Without Oil Rigidities)
- Part III


                                                                    (Deviation From Control)



                                                                                                        Inflation and Interest Rate
                     Oil Production and Prices                                                                     (Percentage Points)
                                (Percent, incl. tax)
                                   Canada                                                                             Canada
                     Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                      0.25                                                                     0.25
                     Oil
       15                                                                6
                                                                                      0.20                                                                     0.20

       10                                                                4            0.15                                                                     0.15

                                                                                      0.10                                                                     0.10
        5                                                                2
                                                                                      0.05                                                                     0.05
        0                                                                0
                                                                                      0.00                                                                     0.00
       -5                                                                -2          -0.05                                                                     -0.05
            0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                   Group of Oil Exporting Countries
                     Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                      0.20                                                                     0.20
                     Oil
       20                                                                2.0
                                                                                      0.15                                                                     0.15
       15                                                                1.5
                                                                                      0.10                                                                     0.10
       10                                                                1.0
                                                                                      0.05                                                                     0.05
        5                                                                0.5

        0                                                                0.0          0.00                                                                     0.00

       -5                                                                -0.5        -0.05                                                                     -0.05
            0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                               United States                                                                       United States
                     Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                       0.5                                                                     0.5
                     Oil
       40                                                                4
                                                                                       0.4                                                                     0.4
       30                                                                3             0.3                                                                     0.3
       20                                                                2             0.2                                                                     0.2
       10                                                                1             0.1                                                                     0.1

        0                                                                0             0.0                                                                     0.0
      -10                                                                -1            -0.1                                                                    -0.1
            0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                           Emerging Asia                                                                        Emerging Asia
                     Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                       0.8                                                                     0.8
                     Oil
       25                                                                8
                                                                                       0.6                                                                     0.6
       20                                                                6
                                                                                       0.4                                                                     0.4
       15                                                                4
                                                                                       0.2                                                                     0.2
       10                                                                2

        5                                                                0             0.0                                                                     0.0

        0                                                                -2            -0.2                                                                    -0.2
            0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                       Remaining Countries                                                                   Remaining Countries
                     Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                       0.6                                                                     0.6
                     Oil
       30                                                                6
                                                                                       0.4                                                                     0.4
       20                                                                4

                                                                                       0.2                                                                     0.2
       10                                                                2

        0                                                                0             0.0                                                                     0.0

      -10                                                                -2            -0.2                                                                    -0.2
            0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60




                                                                         33
      Figure 13: Higher Productivity Growth in Oil Importing Regions - Part I


                                                             (Deviation From Control)



          GDP, Consumption, and Investment
                            (Percent)                                                            Nominal Trade Balances
                                                                                                          (Percent of GDP)

                           Canada                                                                             Canada
           GDP               Consumption        Investment
10                                                                10                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  4                                                                   4
  8                                                               8
                                                                                  3                                                                   3
  6                                                               6
                                                                                  2                                                                   2
  4                                                               4
                                                                                  1                                                                   1
  2                                                               2

  0                                                               0               0                                                                   0

 -2                                                               -2             -1                                                                   -1
      0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

            Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                               Group of Oil Exporting Countries
           GDP               Consumption        Investment
15                                                                15                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  6                                                                   6

10                                                                10              4                                                                   4

  5                                                               5               2                                                                   2

  0                                                               0               0                                                                   0

 -5                                                               -5             -2                                                                   -2
      0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                        United States                                                                  United States
           GDP               Consumption        Investment
30                                                                30                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                0.5                                                                   0.5
25                                                                25
                                                                                0.0                                                                   0.0
20                                                                20

15                                                                15            -0.5                                                                  -0.5
10                                                                10
                                                                                -1.0                                                                  -1.0
  5                                                               5
  0                                                               0             -1.5                                                                  -1.5
      0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                     Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
           GDP               Consumption        Investment
40                                                                40                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                0.5                                                                   0.5

30                                                                30            0.0                                                                   0.0

20                                                                20            -0.5                                                                  -0.5

10                                                                10            -1.0                                                                  -1.0

  0                                                               0             -1.5                                                                  -1.5

-10                                                               -10           -2.0                                                                  -2.0
      0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                  Remaining Countries                                                             Remaining Countries
           GDP               Consumption        Investment
40                                                                40                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                0.4                                                                   0.4

30                                                                30
                                                                                0.2                                                                   0.2
20                                                                20
                                                                                0.0                                                                   0.0
10                                                                10

                                                                                -0.2                                                                  -0.2
  0                                                               0

-10                                                               -10           -0.4                                                                  -0.4
      0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60




                                                                  34
   Figure 14: Higher Productivity Growth in Oil Importing Regions - Part II


                                                                 (Deviation From Control)



                 Stocks of Debt Holdings                                                         Real Effective Exchange Rate
                            (Percent of GDP)                                                                    (Percent)

                              Canada                                                                          Canada
           Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
  1                                                                   1               2                                                       2

  0                                                                   0               0                                                       0

 -1                                                                   -1             -2                                                       -2


 -2                                                                   -2             -4                                                       -4

 -3                                                                   -3             -6                                                       -6
       0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

           Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                    Group of Oil Exporting Countries
           Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
2.0                                                                   2.0             5                                                       5

1.5                                                                   1.5
                                                                                      0                                                       0
1.0                                                                   1.0
                                                                                     -5                                                       -5
0.5                                                                   0.5
                                                                                    -10                                                       -10
0.0                                                                   0.0

-0.5                                                                  -0.5          -15                                                       -15
       0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                           United States                                                                United States
           Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
0.5                                                                   0.5           1.0                                                       1.0



0.0                                                                   0.0           0.5                                                       0.5



-0.5                                                                  -0.5          0.0                                                       0.0


-1.0                                                                  -1.0          -0.5                                                      -0.5
       0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                       Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
           Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
1.0                                                                   1.0             4                                                       4


                                                                                      3                                                       3
0.5                                                                   0.5

                                                                                      2                                                       2

0.0                                                                   0.0
                                                                                      1                                                       1

-0.5                                                                  -0.5            0                                                       0
       0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                   Remaining Countries                                                               Remaining Countries
           Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
0.4                                                                   0.4             3                                                       3

0.2                                                                   0.2
                                                                                      2                                                       2
0.0                                                                   0.0

-0.2                                                                  -0.2
                                                                                      1                                                       1
-0.4                                                                  -0.4

-0.6                                                                  -0.6            0                                                       0
       0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60




                                                                      35
  Figure 15: Higher Productivity Growth in Oil Importing Regions - Part III


                                                               (Deviation From Control)



                                                                                                   Inflation and Interest Rate
                Oil Production and Prices                                                                     (Percentage Points)
                           (Percent, incl. tax)
                              Canada                                                                             Canada
                Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                  0.4                                                                     0.4
                Oil
100                                                                 2.5
                                                                                  0.3                                                                     0.3
 80                                                                 2.0
                                                                                  0.2                                                                     0.2
 60                                                                 1.5
                                                                                  0.1                                                                     0.1
 40                                                                 1.0

 20                                                                 0.5           0.0                                                                     0.0

   0                                                                0.0           -0.1                                                                    -0.1
       0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

           Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                   Group of Oil Exporting Countries
                Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                  0.5                                                                     0.5
                Oil
 80                                                                 2.5
                                                                                  0.4                                                                     0.4
 60                                                                 2.0
                                                                                  0.3                                                                     0.3
 40                                                                 1.5           0.2                                                                     0.2
 20                                                                 1.0           0.1                                                                     0.1

   0                                                                0.5           0.0                                                                     0.0
 -20                                                                0.0           -0.1                                                                    -0.1
       0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                          United States                                                                       United States
                Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                  0.8                                                                     0.8
                Oil
100                                                                 2.5
                                                                                  0.6                                                                     0.6
 80                                                                 2.0
                                                                                  0.4                                                                     0.4
 60                                                                 1.5
                                                                                  0.2                                                                     0.2
 40                                                                 1.0

 20                                                                 0.5           0.0                                                                     0.0

   0                                                                0.0           -0.2                                                                    -0.2
       0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                      Emerging Asia                                                                        Emerging Asia
                Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                  1.0                                                                     1.0
                Oil
100                                                                 5

 80                                                                 4             0.5                                                                     0.5
 60                                                                 3

 40                                                                 2             0.0                                                                     0.0

 20                                                                 1
   0                                                                0             -0.5                                                                    -0.5
       0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                  Remaining Countries                                                                   Remaining Countries
                Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                  1.0                                                                     1.0
                Oil
150                                                                 2.5
                                                                                  0.8                                                                     0.8
100                                                                 2.0
                                                                                  0.6                                                                     0.6
 50                                                                 1.5           0.4                                                                     0.4
   0                                                                1.0           0.2                                                                     0.2

 -50                                                                0.5           0.0                                                                     0.0
-100                                                                0.0           -0.2                                                                    -0.2
       0   10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60




                                                                    36
           Figure 16: Expectation of More Oil Reserves Available in the Future


                                                                  (Deviation From Control)



            GDP , Consumption, and Investment
                             (Percent)                                                               Oil P roduction and P rices
                                                                                                                (Percent, incl. tax)
                            Canada                                                                                Canada
             GDP              Co nsu mption        Inv estmen t                                      Gasoline                          Production
0.5                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                     Oil
                                                                                       5                                                                 8

0.0                                                                    0.0             0                                                                 6

                                                                                      -5                                                                 4

-0.5                                                                   -0.5          -10                                                                 2

                                                                                     -15                                                                 0
-1.0                                                                   -1.0          -20                                                                 -2
       0      10     20        30             40    50            60                       0    10        20           30         40       50       60

              Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                 Group of Oil Exporting Countries
             GDP              Co nsu mption        Inv estmen t                                      Gasoline                          Production
1.0                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                     Oil
                                                                                       5                                                                 8
0.5                                                                    0.5
                                                                                       0                                                                 6
0.0                                                                    0.0
                                                                                      -5                                                                 4
-0.5                                                                   -0.5
                                                                                     -10                                                                 2
-1.0                                                                   -1.0          -15                                                                 0
-1.5                                                                   -1.5          -20                                                                 -2
       0      10     20        30             40    50            60                       0    10        20           30         40       50       60

                          United States                                                                        United States
             GDP              Co nsu mption        Inv estmen t                                      Gasoline                          Production
0.6                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                     Oil
                                                                                       5                                                                 0.2
0.4                                                                    0.4
                                                                                       0                                                                 0.0

0.2                                                                    0.2
                                                                                      -5                                                                 -0.2

0.0                                                                    0.0           -10                                                                 -0.4

-0.2                                                                   -0.2          -15                                                                 -0.6
       0      10     20        30             40    50            60                       0    10        20           30         40       50       60

                       Em erging Asia                                                                      Emerging Asia
             GDP              Co nsu mption        Inv estmen t                                      Gasoline                          Production
1.0                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                     Oil
                                                                                     10                                                                  0.2
0.8                                                                    0.8
                                                                                       5                                                                 0.0
0.6                                                                    0.6
                                                                                       0                                                                 -0.2
0.4                                                                    0.4
                                                                                      -5                                                                 -0.4
0.2                                                                    0.2           -10                                                                 -0.6
0.0                                                                    0.0           -15                                                                 -0.8
       0      10     20        30             40    50            60                       0    10        20           30         40       50       60

                    Rem aining Countries                                                               Remaining Countries
             GDP              Co nsu mption        Inv estmen t                                      Gasoline                          Production
0.4                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                     Oil
                                                                                     10                                                                  0.2
0.3                                                                    0.3
                                                                                       5                                                                 0.0
0.2                                                                    0.2
                                                                                       0                                                                 -0.2
0.1                                                                    0.1
                                                                                      -5                                                                 -0.4
0.0                                                                    0.0           -10                                                                 -0.6
-0.1                                                                   -0.1          -15                                                                 -0.8
       0      10     20        30             40    50            60                       0    10        20           30         40       50       60




                                                                       37
           Figure 17: Increase in the Demand for Oil in Emerging Asia - Part I


                                                               (Deviation From Control)



            GDP, Consumption, and Investment
                              (Percent)                                                            Nominal Trade Balances
                                                                                                            (Percent of GDP)

                             Canada                                                                             Canada
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
1.5                                                                 1.5                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  1.5                                                                   1.5


                                                                                  1.0                                                                   1.0
1.0                                                                 1.0

                                                                                  0.5                                                                   0.5
0.5                                                                 0.5
                                                                                  0.0                                                                   0.0

0.0                                                                 0.0           -0.5                                                                  -0.5
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

              Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                               Group of Oil Exporting Countries
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
  4                                                                 4                           Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                    3                                                                   3

  3                                                                 3
                                                                                    2                                                                   2
  2                                                                 2
                                                                                    1                                                                   1
  1                                                                 1

                                                                                    0                                                                   0
  0                                                                 0

 -1                                                                 -1             -1                                                                   -1
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                          United States                                                                  United States
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
0.4                                                                 0.4                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  0.1                                                                   0.1
0.2                                                                 0.2
                                                                                  0.0                                                                   0.0
0.0                                                                 0.0

-0.2                                                                -0.2          -0.1                                                                  -0.1
-0.4                                                                -0.4
                                                                                  -0.2                                                                  -0.2
-0.6                                                                -0.6
-0.8                                                                -0.8          -0.3                                                                  -0.3
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                       Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
 30                                                                 30                          Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                    1                                                                   1

 20                                                                 20              0                                                                   0

                                                                                   -1                                                                   -1
 10                                                                 10
                                                                                   -2                                                                   -2
  0                                                                 0
                                                                                   -3                                                                   -3

-10                                                                 -10            -4                                                                   -4
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                    Remaining Countries                                                             Remaining Countries
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
0.4                                                                 0.4                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                 0.10                                                                   0.10

0.2                                                                 0.2

0.0                                                                 0.0          0.05                                                                   0.05


-0.2                                                                -0.2
                                                                                 0.00                                                                   0.00
-0.4                                                                -0.4

-0.6                                                                -0.6        -0.05                                                                   -0.05
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60




                                                                    38
            Figure 18: Increase in the Demand for Oil in Emerging Asia - Part II


                                                                     (Deviation From Control)



                     Stocks of Debt Holdings                                                         Real Effective Exchange Rate
                                (Percent of GDP)                                                                    (Percent)

                                  Canada                                                                          Canada
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
  1.5                                                                     1.5           0.5                                                       0.5

  1.0                                                                     1.0           0.0                                                       0.0

  0.5                                                                     0.5           -0.5                                                      -0.5


  0.0                                                                     0.0           -1.0                                                      -1.0

 -0.5                                                                     -0.5          -1.5                                                      -1.5
        0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

               Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                    Group of Oil Exporting Countries
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
   3                                                                      3               2                                                       2

   2                                                                      2               0                                                       0


   1                                                                      1              -2                                                       -2


   0                                                                      0              -4                                                       -4

   -1                                                                     -1             -6                                                       -6
        0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                               United States                                                                United States
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
  0.8                                                                     0.8           1.0                                                       1.0

  0.6                                                                     0.6           0.8                                                       0.8

  0.4                                                                     0.4           0.6                                                       0.6

  0.2                                                                     0.2           0.4                                                       0.4

  0.0                                                                     0.0           0.2                                                       0.2

 -0.2                                                                     -0.2          0.0                                                       0.0
        0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                           Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
  0.5                                                                     0.5             3                                                       3


                                                                                          2                                                       2
  0.0                                                                     0.0

                                                                                          1                                                       1

 -0.5                                                                     -0.5
                                                                                          0                                                       0

 -1.0                                                                     -1.0           -1                                                       -1
        0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                       Remaining Countries                                                               Remaining Countries
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
0.05                                                                      0.05          1.0                                                       1.0



0.00                                                                      0.00          0.5                                                       0.5



-0.05                                                                     -0.05         0.0                                                       0.0


-0.10                                                                     -0.10         -0.5                                                      -0.5
        0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60




                                                                          39
          Figure 19: Increase in the Demand for Oil in Emerging Asia - Part III


                                                                  (Deviation From Control)



                                                                                                      Inflation and Interest Rate
                   Oil Production and Prices                                                                     (Percentage Points)
                              (Percent, incl. tax)
                                 Canada                                                                             Canada
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.20                                                                     0.20
                   Oil
30                                                                     1.5
                                                                                    0.15                                                                     0.15

20                                                                     1.0          0.10                                                                     0.10

                                                                                    0.05                                                                     0.05
10                                                                     0.5
                                                                                    0.00                                                                     0.00

  0                                                                    0.0         -0.05                                                                     -0.05
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

             Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                    Group of Oil Exporting Countries
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.25                                                                     0.25
                   Oil
40                                                                     1.0
                                                                                    0.20                                                                     0.20
30                                                                     0.8
                                                                                    0.15                                                                     0.15
20                                                                     0.6          0.10                                                                     0.10
10                                                                     0.4          0.05                                                                     0.05

  0                                                                    0.2          0.00                                                                     0.00
-10                                                                    0.0         -0.05                                                                     -0.05
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                             United States                                                                       United States
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.04                                                                     0.04
                   Oil
40                                                                     2.0
                                                                                    0.03                                                                     0.03

30                                                                     1.5          0.02                                                                     0.02

                                                                                    0.01                                                                     0.01
20                                                                     1.0
                                                                                    0.00                                                                     0.00
10                                                                     0.5
                                                                                   -0.01                                                                     -0.01
  0                                                                    0.0         -0.02                                                                     -0.02
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                         Emerging Asia                                                                        Emerging Asia
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                     1.5                                                                     1.5
                   Oil
50                                                                     2.5
                                                                                     1.0                                                                     1.0
40                                                                     2.0

30                                                                     1.5           0.5                                                                     0.5
20                                                                     1.0
                                                                                     0.0                                                                     0.0
10                                                                     0.5
  0                                                                    0.0           -0.5                                                                    -0.5
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                     Remaining Countries                                                                   Remaining Countries
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.04                                                                     0.04
                   Oil
40                                                                     2.5
                                                                                    0.03                                                                     0.03
30                                                                     2.0
                                                                                    0.02                                                                     0.02
20                                                                     1.5
                                                                                    0.01                                                                     0.01
10                                                                     1.0

  0                                                                    0.5          0.00                                                                     0.00

-10                                                                    0.0         -0.01                                                                     -0.01
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60




                                                                       40
          Figure 20: Higher Growth and Oil Intensity in Emerging Asia


                                                   ( Deviation From Control)
                                           Solid = Productivity Only; Dashed = Com bined Shocks



                     Real GDP                                                                     Oil Trade Balance
                       (Percent)                                                                        (Percent of GDP)
90                                                           90               1                                                           1

80                                                           80               0                                                           0

70                                                           70              -1                                                           -1

60                                                           60              -2                                                           -2

50                                                           50              -3                                                           -3

40                                                           40              -4                                                           -4

30                                                           30              -5                                                           -5

20                                                           20              -6                                                           -6

10                                                           10              -7                                                           -7

 0                                                           0               -8                                                           -8
      0   10    20         30         40      50        60                        0      10        20          30          40   50   60

               Real Consumption                                                                   Real Investment
                       (Percent)                                                                           (Percent)
30                                                           30            120                                                            120


25                                                           25
                                                                           100                                                            100

20                                                           20

                                                                             80                                                           80
15                                                           15


10                                                           10              60                                                           60


 5                                                           5
                                                                             40                                                           40

 0                                                           0

                                                                             20                                                           20
 -5                                                          -5

-10                                                          -10              0                                                           0
      0   10    20         30         40      50        60                        0      10        20          30          40   50   60

               Real P rice of Oil                                                                   Core Inflation
                     (Percent, USD)                                                                     (Percent, Y-o-Y)
70                                                           70            0.10                                                           0.10


60                                                           60
                                                                           0.05                                                           0.05

50                                                           50


                                                                           0.00                                                           0.00
40                                                           40


30                                                           30
                                                                          -0.05                                                           -0.05


20                                                           20

                                                                          -0.10                                                           -0.10
10                                                           10


 0                                                           0            -0.15                                                           -0.15
      0   10    20         30         40      50        60                        0      10        20          30          40   50   60




                                                             41
           Figure 21: Supply-Induced Permanent Increase in Oil Prices - Part I


                                                               (Deviation From Control)



            GDP, Consumption, and Investment
                              (Percent)                                                            Nominal Trade Balances
                                                                                                            (Percent of GDP)

                             Canada                                                                             Canada
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
  3                                                                 3                           Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  2.0                                                                   2.0

  2                                                                 2             1.5                                                                   1.5

                                                                                  1.0                                                                   1.0
  1                                                                 1
                                                                                  0.5                                                                   0.5
  0                                                                 0
                                                                                  0.0                                                                   0.0

 -1                                                                 -1            -0.5                                                                  -0.5
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

              Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                               Group of Oil Exporting Countries
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
  4                                                                 4                           Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                    4                                                                   4

  2                                                                 2               3                                                                   3

                                                                                    2                                                                   2
  0                                                                 0
                                                                                    1                                                                   1
 -2                                                                 -2
                                                                                    0                                                                   0

 -4                                                                 -4             -1                                                                   -1
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                          United States                                                                  United States
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
0.2                                                                 0.2                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  0.2                                                                   0.2
0.0                                                                 0.0
                                                                                  0.0                                                                   0.0
-0.2                                                                -0.2
                                                                                  -0.2                                                                  -0.2
-0.4                                                                -0.4
                                                                                  -0.4                                                                  -0.4
-0.6                                                                -0.6

-0.8                                                                -0.8          -0.6                                                                  -0.6

-1.0                                                                -1.0          -0.8                                                                  -0.8
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                       Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
0.5                                                                 0.5                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  0.5                                                                   0.5

0.0                                                                 0.0
                                                                                  0.0                                                                   0.0
-0.5                                                                -0.5
                                                                                  -0.5                                                                  -0.5
-1.0                                                                -1.0

                                                                                  -1.0                                                                  -1.0
-1.5                                                                -1.5

-2.0                                                                -2.0          -1.5                                                                  -1.5
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                    Remaining Countries                                                             Remaining Countries
             GDP               Consumption        Investment
0.2                                                                 0.2                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                  0.1                                                                   0.1

0.0                                                                 0.0

-0.2                                                                -0.2          0.0                                                                   0.0


-0.4                                                                -0.4
                                                                                  -0.1                                                                  -0.1
-0.6                                                                -0.6

-0.8                                                                -0.8          -0.2                                                                  -0.2
       0      10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60




                                                                    42
           Figure 22: Supply-Induced Permanent Increase in Oil Prices - Part II


                                                                    (Deviation From Control)



                    Stocks of Debt Holdings                                                         Real Effective Exchange Rate
                               (Percent of GDP)                                                                    (Percent)

                                 Canada                                                                          Canada
              Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
  1                                                                      1             0.5                                                       0.5

  0                                                                      0             0.0                                                       0.0

 -1                                                                      -1            -0.5                                                      -0.5


 -2                                                                      -2            -1.0                                                      -1.0

 -3                                                                      -3            -1.5                                                      -1.5
       0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

              Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                    Group of Oil Exporting Countries
              Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
  5                                                                      5             1.0                                                       1.0

                                                                                       0.5                                                       0.5
  0                                                                      0

                                                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
 -5                                                                      -5
                                                                                       -0.5                                                      -0.5
-10                                                                      -10
                                                                                       -1.0                                                      -1.0

-15                                                                      -15           -1.5                                                      -1.5
       0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                              United States                                                                United States
              Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
  6                                                                      6             0.2                                                       0.2

  4                                                                      4
                                                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
  2                                                                      2

                                                                                       -0.2                                                      -0.2
  0                                                                      0

 -2                                                                      -2            -0.4                                                      -0.4
       0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                          Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
              Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
1.0                                                                      1.0           0.8                                                       0.8

                                                                                       0.6                                                       0.6
0.5                                                                      0.5
                                                                                       0.4                                                       0.4

                                                                                       0.2                                                       0.2
0.0                                                                      0.0
                                                                                       0.0                                                       0.0

-0.5                                                                     -0.5          -0.2                                                      -0.2
       0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                      Remaining Countries                                                               Remaining Countries
              Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
0.6                                                                      0.6           0.3                                                       0.3

                                                                                       0.2                                                       0.2
0.4                                                                      0.4

                                                                                       0.1                                                       0.1
0.2                                                                      0.2
                                                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
0.0                                                                      0.0
                                                                                       -0.1                                                      -0.1

-0.2                                                                     -0.2          -0.2                                                      -0.2
       0      10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60




                                                                         43
          Figure 23: Supply-Induced Permanent Increase in Oil Prices - Part III


                                                                  (Deviation From Control)



                                                                                                      Inflation and Interest Rate
                   Oil Production and Prices                                                                     (Percentage Points)
                              (Percent, incl. tax)
                                 Canada                                                                             Canada
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                     0.4                                                                     0.4
                   Oil
100                                                                    1.0
                                                                                     0.3                                                                     0.3
 80                                                                    0.8
                                                                                     0.2                                                                     0.2
 60                                                                    0.6
                                                                                     0.1                                                                     0.1
 40                                                                    0.4

 20                                                                    0.2           0.0                                                                     0.0

  0                                                                    0.0           -0.1                                                                    -0.1
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

             Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                    Group of Oil Exporting Countries
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                     0.3                                                                     0.3
                   Oil
 60                                                                    0.8
                                                                                     0.2                                                                     0.2
 40                                                                    0.6

                                                                                     0.1                                                                     0.1
 20                                                                    0.4

  0                                                                    0.2           0.0                                                                     0.0

-20                                                                    0.0           -0.1                                                                    -0.1
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                             United States                                                                       United States
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.10                                                                     0.10
                   Oil
100                                                                    1.0
                                                                                    0.08                                                                     0.08
 80                                                                    0.8          0.06                                                                     0.06
 60                                                                    0.6          0.04                                                                     0.04
 40                                                                    0.4          0.02                                                                     0.02

 20                                                                    0.2          0.00                                                                     0.00
  0                                                                    0.0         -0.02                                                                     -0.02
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                         Emerging Asia                                                                        Emerging Asia
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.10                                                                     0.10
                   Oil
 60                                                                    1.5
                                                                                    0.05                                                                     0.05

 40                                                                    1.0
                                                                                    0.00                                                                     0.00

 20                                                                    0.5
                                                                                   -0.05                                                                     -0.05

  0                                                                    0.0         -0.10                                                                     -0.10
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                     Remaining Countries                                                                   Remaining Countries
                   Gasoline                          Production                                 Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.10                                                                     0.10
                   Oil
 60                                                                    2.0
                                                                                    0.08                                                                     0.08

 40                                                                    1.5          0.06                                                                     0.06

                                                                                    0.04                                                                     0.04
 20                                                                    1.0
                                                                                    0.02                                                                     0.02
  0                                                                    0.5
                                                                                    0.00                                                                     0.00
-20                                                                    0.0         -0.02                                                                     -0.02
      0       10        20           30         40        50      60                        0    10         20          30         40   50              60




                                                                       44
Figure 24: A Global Increase in Gasoline Tax Rates by 25 Percentage Points - Part I


                                                                 (Deviation From Control)



              GDP, Consumption, and Investment
                                (Percent)                                                            Nominal Trade Balances
                                                                                                              (Percent of GDP)

                               Canada                                                                             Canada
               GDP               Consumption        Investment
    0.3                                                               0.3                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                    0.1                                                                   0.1

    0.2                                                               0.2
                                                                                    0.0                                                                   0.0
    0.1                                                               0.1
                                                                                    -0.1                                                                  -0.1
    0.0                                                               0.0

   -0.1                                                               -0.1          -0.2                                                                  -0.2

   -0.2                                                               -0.2          -0.3                                                                  -0.3
          0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                               Group of Oil Exporting Countries
               GDP               Consumption        Investment
    0.2                                                               0.2                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                    0.1                                                                   0.1

    0.0                                                               0.0           0.0                                                                   0.0

   -0.2                                                               -0.2          -0.1                                                                  -0.1

   -0.4                                                               -0.4          -0.2                                                                  -0.2

   -0.6                                                               -0.6          -0.3                                                                  -0.3

   -0.8                                                               -0.8          -0.4                                                                  -0.4
          0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                            United States                                                                  United States
               GDP               Consumption        Investment
    0.6                                                               0.6                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                   0.10                                                                   0.10
    0.5                                                               0.5

    0.4                                                               0.4          0.05                                                                   0.05
    0.3                                                               0.3

    0.2                                                               0.2          0.00                                                                   0.00
    0.1                                                               0.1
    0.0                                                               0.0         -0.05                                                                   -0.05
          0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                         Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
               GDP               Consumption        Investment
    0.6                                                               0.6                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                   0.15                                                                   0.15

    0.4                                                               0.4          0.10                                                                   0.10

    0.2                                                               0.2          0.05                                                                   0.05

    0.0                                                               0.0          0.00                                                                   0.00

   -0.2                                                               -0.2        -0.05                                                                   -0.05
          0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60

                      Remaining Countries                                                             Remaining Countries
               GDP               Consumption        Investment
    0.5                                                               0.5                         Trade Balance                  Oil Trade Balance
                                                                                   0.03                                                                   0.03

    0.4                                                               0.4
                                                                                   0.02                                                                   0.02
    0.3                                                               0.3
                                                                                   0.01                                                                   0.01
    0.2                                                               0.2

                                                                                   0.00                                                                   0.00
    0.1                                                               0.1

    0.0                                                               0.0         -0.01                                                                   -0.01
          0     10     20         30           40    50          60                        0    10       20         30           40       50         60




                                                                      45
Figure 25: A Global Increase in Gasoline Tax Rates by 25 Percentage Points - Part II


                                                                     (Deviation From Control)



                     Stocks of Debt Holdings                                                         Real Effective Exchange Rate
                                (Percent of GDP)                                                                    (Percent)

                                  Canada                                                                          Canada
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
    0.2                                                                   0.2          0.25                                                       0.25

    0.1                                                                   0.1          0.20                                                       0.20

    0.0                                                                   0.0          0.15                                                       0.15

    -0.1                                                                  -0.1         0.10                                                       0.10

    -0.2                                                                  -0.2         0.05                                                       0.05

    -0.3                                                                  -0.3         0.00                                                       0.00
           0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

               Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                    Group of Oil Exporting Countries
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
    0.2                                                                   0.2           1.0                                                       1.0

    0.1                                                                   0.1           0.8                                                       0.8

    0.0                                                                   0.0           0.6                                                       0.6

    -0.1                                                                  -0.1          0.4                                                       0.4

    -0.2                                                                  -0.2          0.2                                                       0.2

    -0.3                                                                  -0.3          0.0                                                       0.0
           0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                               United States                                                                United States
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
    0.2                                                                   0.2           0.1                                                       0.1

    0.0                                                                   0.0           0.0                                                       0.0


    -0.2                                                                  -0.2          -0.1                                                      -0.1


    -0.4                                                                  -0.4          -0.2                                                      -0.2

    -0.6                                                                  -0.6          -0.3                                                      -0.3
           0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                           Emerging Asia                                                                    Emerging Asia
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
    0.1                                                                   0.1           0.1                                                       0.1

    0.0                                                                   0.0           0.0                                                       0.0


    -0.1                                                                  -0.1          -0.1                                                      -0.1


    -0.2                                                                  -0.2          -0.2                                                      -0.2

    -0.3                                                                  -0.3          -0.3                                                      -0.3
           0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60

                       Remaining Countries                                                               Remaining Countries
               Net Foreign Liabilities             Government Debt                                              (+=depreciation)
    0.1                                                                   0.1          0.02                                                       0.02

    0.0                                                                   0.0
                                                                                       0.00                                                       0.00
    -0.1                                                                  -0.1
                                                                                      -0.02                                                       -0.02
    -0.2                                                                  -0.2
                                                                                      -0.04                                                       -0.04
    -0.3                                                                  -0.3

    -0.4                                                                  -0.4        -0.06                                                       -0.06
           0   10         20          30           40       50       60                        0    10     20          30          40   50   60




                                                                          46
Figure 26: A Global Increase in Gasoline Tax Rates by 25 Percentage Points - Part III


                                                                  (Deviation From Control)



                                                                                                     Inflation and Interest Rate
                   Oil Production and Prices                                                                    (Percentage Points)
                              (Percent, incl. tax)
                                 Canada                                                                            Canada
                   Gasoline                          Production                                Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.05                                                                    0.05
                   Oil
     30                                                                0.1
                                                                                    0.04                                                                    0.04
     20                                                                0.0          0.03                                                                    0.03
     10                                                                -0.1         0.02                                                                    0.02
      0                                                                -0.2         0.01                                                                    0.01

    -10                                                                -0.3         0.00                                                                    0.00
    -20                                                                -0.4        -0.01                                                                    -0.01
          0   10        20           30         40        50      60                       0    10         20          30         40   50              60

              Group of Oil Exporting Countries                                                  Group of Oil Exporting Countries
                   Gasoline                          Production                                Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.06                                                                    0.06
                   Oil
     30                                                                0.1
                                                                                    0.04                                                                    0.04
     20                                                                0.0
                                                                                    0.02                                                                    0.02

     10                                                                -0.1
                                                                                    0.00                                                                    0.00

      0                                                                -0.2        -0.02                                                                    -0.02

    -10                                                                -0.3        -0.04                                                                    -0.04
          0   10        20           30         40        50      60                       0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                             United States                                                                      United States
                   Gasoline                          Production                                Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.10                                                                    0.10
                   Oil
     30                                                                0.1
                                                                                    0.08                                                                    0.08
     20                                                                0.0          0.06                                                                    0.06
     10                                                                -0.1         0.04                                                                    0.04
      0                                                                -0.2         0.02                                                                    0.02

    -10                                                                -0.3         0.00                                                                    0.00
    -20                                                                -0.4        -0.02                                                                    -0.02
          0   10        20           30         40        50      60                       0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                         Emerging Asia                                                                       Emerging Asia
                   Gasoline                          Production                                Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.15                                                                    0.15
                   Oil
     30                                                                0.2
                                                                                    0.10                                                                    0.10
     20                                                                0.0

                                                                                    0.05                                                                    0.05
     10                                                                -0.2

      0                                                                -0.4         0.00                                                                    0.00

    -10                                                                -0.6        -0.05                                                                    -0.05
          0   10        20           30         40        50      60                       0    10         20          30         40   50              60

                     Remaining Countries                                                                  Remaining Countries
                   Gasoline                          Production                                Headline               Core             Interest Rate
                                                                                    0.08                                                                    0.08
                   Oil
     30                                                                0.1
                                                                                    0.06                                                                    0.06
     20                                                                0.0
                                                                                    0.04                                                                    0.04
     10                                                                -0.1
                                                                                    0.02                                                                    0.02
      0                                                                -0.2

    -10                                                                -0.3         0.00                                                                    0.00

    -20                                                                -0.4        -0.02                                                                    -0.02
          0   10        20           30         40        50      60                       0    10         20          30         40   50              60




                                                                       47
