                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ACTING WHITE OR ACTING BLACK:
                 MIXED-RACE ADOLESCENTS' IDENTITY AND BEHAVIOR

                                         Christopher Ruebeck
                                            Susan Averett
                                         Howard Bodenhorn

                                         Working Paper 13793
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13793


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2008




The authors thank David Stifel for comments and KoKo Maung and Mevan Jayasinghe for helpful
research assistance. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project designed by J. Richard
Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and funded by a grant P01-HD31921 from the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 17 other
agencies. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance
in the original design. Persons interested in obtaining data files from Add Health should contact Add
Health, Carolina Population Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (addhealth@unc.edu).
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Christopher Ruebeck, Susan Averett, and Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Acting White or Acting Black: Mixed-Race Adolescents' Identity and Behavior
Christopher Ruebeck, Susan Averett, and Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 13793
February 2008
JEL No. J11,J13,J15,Z13

                                              ABSTRACT

Although rates of interracial marriage are on the rise, we still know relatively little about the experiences
of mixed-race adolescents. In this paper, we examine the identity and behavior of mixed-race (black
and white) youth. We find that mixed-race youth adopt both types of behaviors -- those that can be
empirically characterized as “black” and those that can be characterized as "white". When we combine
both types of behavior, average mixed-race behavior is a combination that is neither white nor black,
and the variance in mixed-race behavior is generally greater than the variance in behavior of monoracial
adolescents, especially as compared to the black racial group. Adolescence is the time during which
there is most pressure to establish an identity, and our results indicate that mixed-race youth are finding
their own distinct identities, not necessarily "joining" either monoracial group, but in another sense
joining both of them.


Christopher Ruebeck                                   Howard Bodenhorn
Simon Center                                          Department of Economics & Business
Department of Economics                               William Simon Center
Lafayette College                                     Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042                                      Easton, PA 18042-1776
ruebeckc@lafayette.edu                                and NBER
                                                      bodenhoh@lafayette.edu
Susan Averett
Simon Center
Dept. of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042
AVERETTS@LAFAYETTE.EDU
1. Introduction

       The constant of the postwar American family is change. Abundant scholarship documents the increasing

likelihood of divorce and single parenthood, later age at first marriage, and the rise of extramarital cohabitation,

same-sex unions, and interracial marriage (Stevenson and Wolfers 2007). The rise of interracial marriage since

the US Supreme Court struck down state anti-miscegenation laws in 1967 is notable. Between 1970 and 2000

the number of black-white marriages increased five-fold (Rosenfeld and Kim 2005). By 2000 over seven

percent of black men were married to white women, and nearly 3 percent of black women were married to

white men (Fryer 2007). Although interracial marriage remains relatively rare it is on the rise.

       Scholars have focused on several features of interracial marriage, including sociological and economic

studies of the marriage market (Rosenfeld and Kim 2005; Joyner and Kao 2005; Fryer 2007), how the law

accommodates nontraditional unions (Kennedy 2003; Romano 2003), the consequences of interracial mating for

the psychological health and sociological adjustments of these unions’ mixed-race offspring (Tizard and

Phoenix 2002); the educational achievement of mixed-race children (Kao 1999; Harris and Thomas 2002;

Herman 2002); risk taking by mixed-race youth (Udry et al 2003); as well as the personal and social

construction of mixed-race identities (Harris 2001; Harris 2002; Harris and Sim 2002). Our study addresses the

last three of these issues in that we investigate how a mixed-race identity influences a wide range of teenage

academic and risk-taking behaviors relative to the behaviors of their monoracial peers.

       The first systematic social science studies of mixed-race people in the early twentieth century argued

that, because they were perpetual outsiders, mixed-race individuals were more prone to psychological disorders

and social pathologies than monoracial individuals (Park 1929; Park 1931; Stonequist 1937). But recent

increases in interracial marriage and the number of mixed-race children have spawned a new interest in their

experiences and development. While the modern literature accepts that modern mixed-race individuals must

navigate certain strains, conflicts and ambiguities not faced by monoracial individuals, there is abundant

evidence that mixed-race youth develop positive self-images and healthy identities (Daniel 1996; Tizard and

Phoenix 2002).


                                                                                                                   2
       We investigate the extent to which mixed-race youth adopt the behavioral norms of their white or black

peers or whether they sometimes adopt distinct behaviors that are neither stereotypically black nor white. We

find that mixed-race youth struggle to establish a unique identity in at least some dimensions. It is important not

to equate identity with behavior, of course, but much behavior is purposeful and designed to project a public

image or persona not inconsistent with the person’s beliefs or the salience an association holds for that

individual.

       One of this study’s contributions to the literature is our rejection of the standard economic practice of

viewing race, like sex, as immutable and an exogenously determined datum. Sociology and psychology have

long recognized that race, like any other personal characteristic, is socially constructed and therefore

changeable. Economists have only recently begun to investigate the extent to which economic processes

influence racial determination and vice versa (Darity et al 2006). Although macro-level social processes

establish the choice set of identities available to the individual, there remains an element of choice in racial

identification. Moreover, racial identification and the resulting behaviors translate physical characteristics into

human capital with an economic value.

       It is also important to emphasize that this study focuses on mixed-race youth defined by ancestry or

parents’ races. It addresses issues of complexion or phenotype indirectly, if at all. An emergent economic

literature connects phenotype and outcomes, and generally finds that lighter complected individuals earn higher

incomes, accumulate more wealth, and generally fare better in several dimensions that their darker complected

peers (Bodenhorn 2003; Goldsmith et al 2006; Hersch 2006; Gyimah-Brempong and Price 2006; Bodenhorn

and Ruebeck 2007; Goldsmith et al 2007). We cannot draw a connection between mixed-race individuals and

complexion-based differentials because, as Rangel (2007) shows, race mixing does not uniquely map into

phenotype because parents of given phenotypes produce offspring drawn from a distribution of potential

complexions. The data we employ identify mixed-race individuals, but reveal nothing definitive about their

complexions.

       Specifically, we use a rich data set on adolescents to test hypotheses about differences in mixed-race and

monoracial behaviors as evidence for differences in identity. Although complexion is not definitively measured,
                                                                                                              3
the data do allow us to use a number of different definitions and so compare our findings across the various

measures of adolescents’ racial group. The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we introduce a

model of identity and behavior which provides a framework for our empirical analysis. In section 3, we discuss

our data and our different measures of race. Section 4 presents our empirical model and summary statistics.

Section 5 presents the results of our classification of adolescent behavior along racial lines, while section 6

presents our results aimed at determining the variation in mixed-race individual’s identities. Section 7 provides

the results of a sensitivity analysis while section 8 concludes our analysis.



2. Conceptual apparatus

       In this section, we outline a stylized model of identity and behavior inspired by Akerlof and Kranton

(2000; 2002), one that follows from Benjamin et al. (2007). The model organizes our thinking about the issues

of racial identity and behavioral choices among mixed-race children, but we do not provide a formal test of the

theory per se. It nevertheless remains a useful heuristic and the empirical results reported below are consistent

with the model’s predictions. In our framework, peer and familial pressures to adopt certain identity-related

behaviors influence the individual’s choice of activities, based on his or her personal preferences and the

salience of racial identification. Models based on Akerlof and Kranton’s framework (see also Bodenhorn and

Ruebeck, 2003) also recognize that economic incentives can influence the choice of identity directly. In fact, it

is the tension between pecuniary and psychic incentives that motivate these and related theories.

       Let x be some decision variable, such as how much of a certain activity an individual may engage in.

The choice of activities may or may not be associated with existing racial behavioral norms. Individuals identify

with a given racial category R with salience s. Let x0 denote the optimal engagement in activity x absent racial

identity considerations. Similarly, let xR denote the existing racial behavioral norm associated with an activity

and prescribed for members of race R by the members of each race. The behaviors are stereotypical in the sense

that members of each race collectively define what they believe to be appropriate behavior for others of the

same race.


                                                                                                                    4
        We assume there are two races, R = w (white) or b (black), each with reasonably well established

behavioral norms. There exist as well members of a third, emergent mixed-race group for whom a prescribed

norm does not yet exist. Mixed-race individuals face peer and familial pressures to adopt behaviors consistent

with one of the existing racial norms, while personal preferences and economic incentives may imply higher

levels of utility from alternative behaviors consistent with neither existing racial norm. Assume further that

mixed-race individuals place weights 0 ! wb (s) , ww (s) ! 1 on conforming to either the black or white

behavioral norms, where s represents the salience or strength of a particular racial identity to the individual.

        The individual chooses x to maximize



(1)         U = ! (1! ww(s) ! wb(s))(x!x0)2 ! ww(s)(x!xw)2 ! wb(s)(x!xb)2 .



We further assume that wb (0) = ww (0) = 0 and that w "b (s), w "w (s) > 0. The assumptions and the form of the

utility function imply that deviations from a racial norm prescribed by peers or family members cause disutility
                                              !
that is increasing in the salience of racial identity!s , the power of the individual’s affiliation with a racial norm,

and the distance between a given activity and the racial norm. The individual also suffers disutility when she

deviates from her personal optimum level of activity x. Thus, the individual faces a tradeoff between being true

to herself and being true to social expectations regarding her behavior based on the racial image she projects.

        The first-order condition of (1) defines the optimal level of x,



(2)         x* = (1 ! ww(s) ! wb(s))x0 + ww(s)xw + wb(s)xb ,



a weighted average of the individual optimum and the existing racial norms. This specification does not limit

mixed-race individuals to adopt behaviors that are convex combinations of existing black and white behaviors,

rather they are convex combination of existing black behaviors, white behaviors and behaviors consistent with

the individual’s personal optimum behavior absent identity pressures. The first right-hand side term affords the


                                                                                                                      5
mixed-race youth the opportunity to adopt behaviors that are neither stereotypically black nor stereotypically

white, behaviors that may be “outside” the established racial norms.

        The model yields two predictions that bear on our study of mixed-race youth.



Prediction 1: The stronger the salience of a given racial behavioral norm, the closer the individual x* will be to

either xb or xw.

        An example, although not one that we test directly here, is the still-controversial “acting white”

hypothesis (Fordham and Ogbu 1986; Austen-Smith and Fryer 2005; Fryer and Torelli 2005; Ferguson 2006;

Tyson and Darity 2005). If a mixed-race youth faces peer pressures to express black identity through

engagement in stereotypically black behaviors, and black behaviors are “oppositional” in that they reject white

norms of academic achievement, peer pressure may lead him to achieve a lower grade point averages. If the

“acting white” phenomenon is real and black racial salience is powerful for mixed-race youth in academic

matters, we may observe lower grade point averages among mixed-race youth than would be predicted by

observable family, personal and school characteristics. Although Ferguson (2006) fails to find evidence of

them, sociologists and psychologists report pressures placed on mixed-race youth by monoracial youth to

demonstrate racial authenticity in various dimensions, so we may observe multi-race youth adopting a wide

range of behaviors, depending on the salience of white or black race in a particular circumstance (Tizard and

Phoenix 2002; Williams 1996; Root 1997).



Prediction 2: The responsiveness of the individual’s engagement in activity x to racial salience is determined

by



(3)         !x*/!s = w "w (s)(xw"x0) + w "b (s)(wb"x0) .



         ! which depends,
The sign of            ! of course, on the signs of (x "x ) and (w "x ) and the relative magnitudes of the
                                                      w 0         b 0


relevant terms, which cannot be known absent a specific parameterization of the model. Nevertheless, the
                                                                                                                  6
general result reveals that the individual’s adjustment to changes in salience depends on the relative distances of

the mixed-race youth’s personal optimum engagement in an activity and the prescribed racial behavioral norms.

       Suppose, without loss of generality, that xw – x0 > 0 and xb - x0 < 0 (or, that the mixed-race youth’s

personal optimum is closer to the black than the white behavioral norm), then the effect of racial salience on the

behavioral choice will be determined by



(4)        !2x*/!s2 = w w"" (s)(xw"x0) + w b""(s)(wb"x0) .



          ! (x – x ) > (x
By assumption          ! - x ) and we then have
              w   0      b  0




(5)        !2x*/!s2 > 0 if and only if w w"" (s), w b""(s) > 0 and w w"" (s) > w b""(s) .



                           ! (5)!implies that the
Given the assumptions, equation                ! salience
                                                       ! of whiteness for mixed-race youth increases more

rapidly the greater the initial distance between the white norm and the youth’s optimum engagement in x. But

depending on the forms of the w(s)’s and the value of s itself, !2x*/!s2 might be either positive or negative. As

Benjamin et al (2007) note, it may be that individuals with greater racial salience are more accepting of racial

norms (w" > 0); or it might be that individuals become saturated with the racial norm (w" < 0).

       To summarize, mixed-race youth behaviors may reveal greater diversity than monoracial behaviors.

Because they face conflicting familial and peer pressures regarding “correct” behavior, mixed-race youth will

sometimes engage in stereotypically white behaviors, stereotypically black behaviors, and unique behaviors that

are neither black nor white. Moreover, because the salience of race is likely to vary more across mixed-race

than monoracial youth in at least some circumstances, we expect to observe a greater variance of mixed-race

behaviors driven by the absence of established mixed-race behavioral norms.




                                                                                                                    7
3. Data

       To assess the connection between behaviors and identity among mixed-race individuals, we use data

collected by the Adolescent Health Survey (commonly referred to as AddHealth), a school-based nationally

representative survey of students, parents, and school administrators concerning the health-related behaviors of

adolescents in grades 7 through 12. Research dating to at least Erikson (1968) reveals that the initial steps

toward identity formation are taken in adolescence, when youth have accumulated enough experience to

adequately assess life goals and personal values (see Furstenberg 2000 for a recent review). Archer (1982)

argues that adolescence, especially early to mid-adolescence, represents a critical period in identity formation

because the physical changes surrounding puberty and the widening of the circle of acquaintances typically

result in self-appraisal and emergent concerns about behavior. Given the increasing number of mixed-race

individuals going through the process of identity development, sociologists and psychologists have grown

increasingly interested in their experiences (Tizard and Phoenix 2002). We consider the choices that

adolescents make, choices that are not only a function of their emergent identity but determinants of their future

livelihoods as well. Thus, our research contributes to this emergent literature because it is among the first to

offer an empirical assessment of mixed-race behaviors and identity formation through the lens of “the

economics of identity.”

       Adolescents were interviewed for the AddHealth study in consecutive academic years, 1994-95 (Wave

1) and 1995-96 (Wave 2). In each wave, information on a wide range of risky and pro-social behaviors,

academic outcomes, and family characteristics was collected. The Wave 1 survey included two components: an

in-school survey and an at-home survey. The in-school survey was given during one class period (45 to 60

minutes) to more than 90,000 students and was administered between September 1994 and April 1995. The at-

home survey, a sub-sample of the in-school sample, was administered to 20,745 adolescents, and was typically

conducted in the adolescent’s home in a one to two hour period. The Wave 1 survey was administered between

September 1994 and December 1995. To reduce the likelihood of purposive misreporting on sensitive topics,

interviewers assured students that their answers could not be matched to their names and questions were

                                                                                                                   8
answered on a computer controlled by the adolescent student. Wave 2, which was also conducted at-home, was

administered to nearly 15,000 of the same students surveyed in Wave 1 approximately one year later. At Wave

1, the mother (or other female head of the household) of the originally-sampled adolescent was asked to

participate in a 40-minute, interviewer-administered survey regarding the health status and behaviors of the

adolescent, home environment, and the adolescent’s interpersonal relationships. AddHealth preferred to have

the mother fill out the parent’s questionnaire because mothers are generally believed to be more familiar than

fathers with the schooling, health status, and health behaviors of their children.

         We make use of responses collected from the in-school, at-home, and parental components of the

survey. Our first task is to identify mixed-race adolescents, and towards this purpose AddHealth provides

multiple sources. Although the in-school survey asked each adolescent to self-report her or his race with the

option to select more than one racial category, self-reported race is potentially endogenous to identity

development and to the observable behaviors and other outcomes we study. We thus use as our primary source

of racial identity the parental survey conducted in the Wave 1 at-home survey in which a parent (usually the

mother as explained above), was asked to report their own race, as well as the race of their partner. Information

on the parents’ races should be less endogenous than the adolescent’s self-reported race is to the adolescent’s

outcomes. Parents, too, could select more than one racial category. Because our interest is in the black/white

dichotomy which characterizes the “acting white” research, we limit ourselves to considering those respondents

who noted that they were black and/or white. Respondents who did not check either black or white are not

included in our analysis. Note that if an individual marked white, black, or both but also marked one of the

other three categories that AddHealth records (asian, American Indian, other), we did not drop them because we

already have a small sample of mixed race adolescents. Thus, when we use the term “mixed race”, we use it to

refer to those individual who are reported (by themselves or their parents) to at least be both black and white.1




1
  We label this group “mixed-race” for convenience and expositional clarity. In so doing, we sacrifice precision, but because no
generally acceptable terminology has yet emerged, we trade precision for a greater rhetorical clarity. Other studies have investigated
the experiences of children from racially mixed parents and have drawn parallels between their experiences and those of black-white
mixed race (Kao 1999; Harris and Sim 2002).
                                                                                                                                         9
       Our use of parental-based adolescent race forces us to limit our sample to adolescents living in intact

families because single parents are not asked to report the other biological parent’s race. Although this poses

some disadvantages, mostly because black youth are significantly less likely to live in intact families and

children in single-parent homes are more likely to engage in risky behaviors than children in traditional two-

parent households (McLanahan and Sandefur 1994), focusing our attention on this group reduces racial

identification endogeneity and eliminates at least one confounding source of variation (Bryson 1995). Another

disadvantage to using the at-home sample is that we have few adolescents whose parents report a racially mixed

relationship. To address this drawback, we merge the data from both Waves 1 and 2 of AddHealth so that each

mixed-race adolescent is observed twice. As is typical in longitudinal data sets, the racial identification

questions were asked at baseline (Wave 1) and not at Wave 2. After linking the parental race information with

the adolescent information in Waves 1 and 2 (we refer to the combination of Waves 1 and 2 as the at-home

sample) and dropping those observations without a sample weight, we identified 63 adolescents who had one

white parent and one black parent and from whom we draw our principal conclusions about mixed-race

behavior and identity. We take care not to draw sweeping generalizations based on our modest sample size. To

address the more general population and increase the sample size of all racial groups, but at the potential

expense of endogenous racial identification, we then repeat our analysis with racial group identified directly by

the surveyed adolescent, widening the sample to include non-intact families in Waves 1 and 2 and then the

larger in-school sample. The advantage of the in-school data is that is includes responses from more than

90,000 respondents and about 800 of these self-report being mixed-race. We will report on results using the

following five samples: (1) Waves 1 & 2 at-home survey, intact families, race based on parents; (2) Waves 1 &

2 at-home survey, intact families, race based on adolescents’ self-report; (3) Waves 1 & 2 at-home survey, all

adolescents, self-reported race; (4) in-school survey, intact families, self-reported race; and (5) in-school survey,

all adolescents, self-reported race. We choose these samples to logically expand beyond the first (preferred)

sample and make relevant comparisons among the results. The at-home samples have, in addition to parents’

race, a more rich set of behaviors; our analysis of the two in-school samples thus depends on a smaller set of

behaviors and control variables.
                                                                                                                  10
         Using our preferred sample (intact families from Waves 1 and 2 of the at-home sample), Table 1 reveals

that there is not perfect agreement between adolescents’ self-reports and parental racial categorizations. Of the

63 adolescents in Wave 1 from intact inter-racial families, 26 identified themselves as mixed-race: 3 with a

black mother and white father, and 23 with a white mother and black father. The thirty-seven remaining with

racially mixed parents mostly identified as “Black” (17), some as “White” (7) and the rest as “Other” (13). The

category “Other” is small because we have excluded adolescents whose parents did not check either black or

white. Although it captures potential errors in coding or completing the survey, most of these “Other”

observations are purposive choices by adolescents of one of the other three categories provided by AddHealth.


Table 1: Adolescents’ and parents’ self-reported racial categories—Wave 1 only, intact families

                                    Parents’ reported race
                   Mother:         B     W     Mix   Mix                 B        W          B         W
                                                                                                              Tot.
                   Father:         B     W      B     W                 Mix      Mix         W         B
    Adolescent’s
Self-reported race:
          Black                  935                 4                   2                   3         8       952

          White                          5532                   1                            3         3      5539
  Mixed (black and
                                   5        3                                                3        23        34
       white)
          Other                                      1                                       4         8        13

           Totals                 940 5535             5         1        2                  13         42       6538
Notes to Table 1: The grey cells are the 63 adolescents identified as mixed-race by their parents’ racial identification. B = black; W =
white; Mix = mixed-race for parents. Parents, like their adolescent children, could self-report more than one racial identifier and
several did. We consider that person’s child to be mixed-race (black and white) if one parent selected black as at least one identifier
and the other chose white as at least one identifier. We have a greater number of observations in later tables that use both Waves 1 and
2; this table only reports on Wave 1 observations.



         Our focus is on the adolescents’ race as implied by parental race and we find results robust to our

methods of measuring adolescent race when we extend our results to include samples in which adolescent race

is self-reported, but we conclude this section with a discussion of the disagreements between the measures.

Using a different subset of the AddHealth data, Harris and Sim (2002) conclude that race is fluid among a

significant proportion of adolescents. Their study finds that, whereas 6.8 percent of survey respondents report a

mixed racial heritage when completing the in-school survey, only 3.6 percent responded similarly on the at-

home portion. When considering intact, two-parent families they find 4.8% of students come from mixed-race
                                                                                                          11
backgrounds. Hitlin et al. (2006) extend the work of Harris and Sim by using Waves 1 and 3 of the Addhealth

survey and report that between Waves 1 and 3 there are racial identification changes.2

         AddHealth interviewers were also asked to “Code the race of the respondent based on your observation

alone.” Unlike respondents, however, interviewers were not allowed to select more than one racial category in

describing respondents, and they answered this question after respondents provided their self-identification. As

it stands, interviewers coded 14 of those who self-reported black as white and 18 of those self-reporting white

as black. Of those who self-reported mixed, 70 percent were classified as black by the interviewers, indicating

that the classification heuristic used by the interviewers appears consistent with Davis’ (1991) contention that

the “one-drop rule” still holds sway in modern America. That is, any individual with any trace of black heritage

is more likely to be viewed as black. When we use parental race reports (the group described in Table 1), we

find that of the 63 adolescents with one black and one white parent, 31 are categorized as black by interviewers,

20 as white, and the remaining 11 as one of the other three racial categories. It appears that when the parental

race reports are used to classify the adolescent the “one-drop rule” tended to break down.3



4: Empirical method and summary statistics

         Our analysis of mixed-race behaviors and their relationship to identity choices unfolds in three steps. We

first look for differences in average behaviors between the monoracial white and black adolescents. These

differences are predominant or typical rather than stereotypical because our data-driven method sometimes

produces results that differ from popular portrayals. That first step allows us to empiricially identify behaviors

that are predominantly white, predominantly black, or neither. Our second step investigates differences in mean

behavior between the black, white, and mixed-race groups, allowing us to categorize mixed-race behavior


2
  We not make use of the Wave 3 data for our analysis as the youth were no longer adolescents at the time Wave 3 was fielded.
3
  To offer some insight into the factors influencing adolescent racial self-reporting, we regressed a binary identifier of the adolescent’s
self-reported mixed-race identity against mother’s race, father’s race, whether the parent was born in the U.S., parents’ social status,
and parental education using a standard probit specification. The results (not reported here) reveal that adolescents with black mothers
and white fathers are significantly less likely to self-report as mixed-race than adolescents with white mothers and black fathers, as
Table 1 would lead us to expect. Those with native-born fathers are also more likely to report being mixed. When parental education is
included, we find that those with college-educated mothers are more likely to report being mixed-race, as are those with mother’s who
receive welfare.

                                                                                                                                        12
    relative to other racial groups. Our analysis then turns to inter-group differences in the intra-group variance of

    behaviors. Throughout these analyses, we investigate the sensitivity of the results to alternative samples of the

    AddHealth data and alternative measures of racial identity.

               Our empirical model is


    (6)        Yits = " + # b Bis + # bw M is + X its
                                                  $ % + &s + 'ist ,


    where i subscripts individuals, s subscripts schools, and t subscripts time (Waves 1 and 2). AddHealth is a
!
    school-based sampling design, so ! controls for school-level fixed effects4 to net out time invariant

    heterogeneity that may be correlated with unobservables in the idiosyncratic error " . Y represents the behavior

    under study, and X is a vector of demographic characteristics. Our explanatory variables of interest are the
                                                                                !
    racial categories: white is the omitted category, B = 1 if the individual is identified as black by their parents and

    zero otherwise, and M = 1 if the respondent is identified as mixed (black and white) by their parents and zero

    otherwise. Note that race is only subscripted over i and s because individuals were only asked their race in

    Wave 1. Because Y is sometimes measured as a dichotomous variable and sometimes as an index or the

    frequency of an event, we estimate the parameters in (6) using linear probability models. This specification

    (rather than probit or logit) is also necessary in order to include the school fixed effects. Because we observe

    some adolescents more than one, robust standard errors are reported.

               Table 2 presents the variable definitions and the sample means for the more than 40 behaviors and

    attitudes we analyzed as dependent variables. The variables can be grouped into five broad behavioral

    categories: sexual activity, substance abuse, delinquent behaviors, time use and school-related behaviors. Most

    responses to survey questions regarding behavioral choices are recorded as dichotomous variables; for example,

    “Have you ever been a regular cigarette smoker?” Some, however, are recorded as frequencies; for example,

    “How many hours did you spend watching television last week?”

               In addition (and included in Table 2), we also created three behavior indices by summing a student’s

    responses across several survey items and then dividing by the number of items over which the index was

    4
        Random effects specifications were rejected by the Hausman test in almost every case.
                                                                                                                       13
created. The question groups were implied by the survey structure because they were asked in a sequential

manner, as in: “How often have you had trouble at school with: homework? teachers?” etc. The first index

combines attitudes towards school and includes six questions. The second index summarizes four negative

school-related troubles, such as having difficulties with teachers, with fellow students, with paying attention in

class, or with completing homework assignments. A third index averages over nine behaviors to create a

delinquency scale similar to that created by Resnick et al. (1997). In every case, a calculation of Cronbach’s

alpha produced a statistic exceeding 0.7, a commonly used cutoff for inferring that the indices are internally

consistent.

       Taken on their own and without controlling for any other factors, the behavioral questions and the

behavior indices summarized in Table 2 present a complex portrait of mixed-race behaviors. Although mixed-

race adolescents, on average, report higher satisfaction with school than whites or blacks, they simultaneously

report having more troubles in school and skipping school more often. Mixed-race adolescents are also more

likely than either blacks or whites to report having had sexual intercourse, to watch more television, and to

exhibit higher delinquency rates. If behavioral choices are indicative of identity development, the simple

averages reported in Table 2 suggest that, as a group, mixed-race adolescents are engaged in a wide range of

activities. The averages conceal whether each mixed-race individual is experimenting with a wider range of

behaviors or whether there is a wider variance of behaviors across individuals. The third step of our empirical

analysis confronts this issue.

       Racial behavioral differences documented elsewhere for adolescents are evident here. We find that, for

example, white adolescents are more likely to have regularly smoked cigarettes, drank alcohol, and smoked

marijuana in the 30 days prior to the survey, while blacks were more likely to report having been sexually

active. These differences are consistent with data from the 2005 National Youth Risk Behavior Survey. Because

our preferred sample includes only intact families, the results are not necessarily representative of adolescents in

other family types. As explained in Section 3, we also expand our investigations to include wider samples from

the AddHealth data. In the appendix, Tables A1 and A2 report summary statistics for the behaviors and


                                                                                                                  14
attitudes of our four additional samples; Table A1 for the at-home samples and Table A2 for the in-school

samples. For details, see the discussion in the appendix.

       Table 3 presents the means of our control variables: the adolescent’s age, sex, place of residence, and

religiosity, as well as controls for parental income, age, education, nativity and occupation. Dummy variables

are included to account for missing data in the relevant cells. Similar tables for the other samples are reported in

the appendix Tables A3 and A4. The controls reveal some additional notable differences between mixed-race

adolescents and their monoracial peers. Mixed-race youth reside in households with lower average incomes, are

more likely to live in an urban environment, are more likely than black youth to be Catholic, are more likely to

have foreign-born parents, to have an unemployed parent, and to live in a household receiving welfare

payments.



5: Race and behavioral propensities: Which behaviors are “black”? Which behaviors are “white”?

       Figure 1 provides a heuristic for interpreting the first step in our analysis. Behaviors are classified as

predominantly black or white depending on the statistical significance of the coefficient on the black indicator

variable estimated by Equation 6 for each behavior or attitude. The first significant contribution of our research

is that this approach itself yields some interesting and potentially counterintuitive results. Those behaviors that

are not associated with either monoracial group are not included in subsequent analyses.


Figure 1. Classifying behavior as Black or White




       Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c present the results of classifying behaviors according to Figure 1. To conserve

space, we do not report the estimated coefficients on the control variables for our preferred sample in Table 4a.
                                                                                                                    15
For the same reason, we summarize only the classifications from Figure 1 for our other four samples in Tables

4b and 4c, omitting the estimated coefficients entirely. The classification results from Table 4a are repeated in

Table 4b, along with the other two samples from the at-home survey. Table 4c reports the classification results

for our two samples from the in-school survey. Notably, with respect to black and white behaviors, there are no

contradictions in categorization among the three samples in Table 4b, nor between the two samples in Table 4c.

We do see that larger sample sizes (recorded in Tables 2, A1, and A2) generally lead to fewer categorizations as

“Neither”. Our discussion of the results focuses on the parent-identified adolescent race results presented in

Table 4a and repeated in the first column of Table 4b.

       Of the 45 behaviors and outcomes, ceteris paribus, only five are clearly associated with black

adolescents, while 23 are associated with white adolescents, and the remaining 17 are not associated with either

monoracial group. Blacks are more likely to have engaged in sexual intercourse, to spend more hours watching

television, to spend more hours watching videos, and to spend more time playing video or computer games. One

outcome, which is more suggestive of a host of attendant behaviors rather than any one behavior (and of

particularly ambiguous causality), is that blacks are more likely to have been suspended from school during the

academic year. Predominantly white adolescent attitudes include believing that students at their school are

prejudiced, feeling close to other students at their school, feeling that teachers treat them fairly, and feeling

generally happy at school, skipping school, having difficulty paying attention in school, and completing their

homework. Whites are also more likely than blacks to engage in delinquent behaviors, including graffiti,

damaging property, and theft. Finally, whites are more likely than blacks to play sports, skate and “hang out”

with their friends.



6: Mixed-race identities implied by average behavior

       To prepare for the second step of our analysis, we aggregate the white and black behaviors. Table 5

outlines our aggregation approach. We are most interested in three new indices: one of all white behaviors, one

of all black behaviors, and one combining them all. We also take an intermediate step for each of these three

aggregates because we have both dichotomous variables and frequency variables. To aggregate the
                                                                                                                    16
dichotomous variables we simply add them. To aggregate the frequency variables, we first rescale each

variable and then divide by its maximum value so that it ranges from 0 to 1. To combine the dichotomous and

rescaled frequency variables we add them. Note that higher values of our white indices indicate acting more

“white” while higher values of the black indices indicate acting more “black”. Thus before combining the black

variables and white variables, we subtract each black index from its theoretical maximum so that both the black

and white variables (when combined) have the same direction of black and white identity. As a result, higher

values of the combined white and black indices indicate acting more “white”.



Table 5. Aggregating using the results in Tables 4b and 4c

Variable                           Definition

White Dichotomous                  The sum of the respondent’s dichotomous “white” behaviors.

White Frequency                    The sum of the respondent’s “white” frequency behaviors after each is
                                   rescaled to have maximum 1 and minimum 0.

White All                          = White Dichotomous + White Frequency

Black Dichotomous                  The sum of each respondent’s dichotomous “black” behaviors.

Black Frequency                    The sum of each respondent’s “black” frequency variables after each is
                                   rescaled to have maximum 1 and minimum 0.

Black All                          = Black Dichotomous + Black Frequency

Aggregate Dichotomous              = White Dichotomous + (NbD – Black Dichotomous),
                                   where NbD is the number of “black” dichotomous behaviors

Aggregate Frequency                = White Frequency + (NbF – Black Frequency),
                                   where NbF is the number of “black” frequency behaviors

Aggregate All                      = Aggregate Dichotomous + Aggregate Frequency


       Table 6 reports summary statistics for the indices described in Table 5, for all five of our samples. Each

samples’ indices’ components are defined based on that sample’s column in Table 4b or 4c. For example,

school_index is included in the “White” and “Aggregate” indices for the “all respondents” at-home sample

(the third column of Table 4b), but not in the other two at-home samples because the regression coefficient on


                                                                                                               17
“black” is only significantly different from zero and negative in the “all respondents” regression, not in the

other two in-school sample regressions.

       The summary statistics reported in Table 6 show two important general relationships between the

mixed-race populations and the monoracial populations. That is, although the mixed-race indices’ means are

closer to the white indices’ means than to the black indices’ means, yet the standard deviation of the mixed-race

population’s indices are generally larger than the black population’s standard deviation and smaller than the

white population’s standard deviation. We noted similar features in the separate behaviors’ means and standard

deviations in Table 2, and we will see it again in the regression residuals reported in the next section.

       With these aggregate indices in hand, we are now ready for the second stage of our analysis, classifying

average mixed-race behavior in relationship to black and white monoracial behaviors. Table 7a reports

regressions of the indices from Table 6 on the same explanatory variables as were used to generate Tables 4a,

4b, and 4c. The estimated coefficients on the control variables are again omitted for clarity and this table

considers only our preferred sample (using parents’ identification to determine the adolescent’s identity). The

first trivial result (in the row “Type of behavior”) is to confirm that our aggregated indices maintain the

underlying statistical test of significance of the black indicator variable, as depicted in Figure 1. All indices of

white behaviors remain “white” types of behavior, all black index variables are “black” types of behavior, and

the combined indices indicate “white” behavior, as each one should.

       The row in Table 7a that reports our substantive results at this stage is labeled “Identity”. Figure 2

describes the taxonomy and logic behind the “Identity” row, summarizing conditional average behavior of the

mixed-race sub-population. The classifications are based on an ordering of the coefficients "mixed and "black

relative to zero, as well as the statistical significance of their differences, implying seven possible “Identity”

outcomes. All coefficients and p-values are reported in Table 7a for our preferred sample. Table 7b reports

similar results for all five samples, without the coefficients and p-values.


Figure 2. Classifying biracial behavior, “Identity” in Tables 7a and 7b
Using p-values and signs of coefficients on the black and mixed indicator variables


                                                                                                                     18
       Remembering that the excluded racial category is white adolescents, the easiest cases to explain in

Figure 2 are the first two from the left: “Black” and “White.” Mixed-race adolescents are engaging in typically

“Black” behaviors when the coefficient on the mixed-race indicator variable ("mixed) is statistically different

from zero but is not statistically different from the estimated coefficient on the black indicator variable ("black).

Mixed-race adolescents are engaging in typically “White” behaviors when the coefficient on mixed is not

different from zero and it is statistically different from the coefficient on the black indicator variable.

(Although we use a p-value of 0.10 as our cutoff, Table 7a shows that the p-values are seldom larger than 0.05

in our preferred sample, and this is true in the other samples as well.) The next three mixed-race behavioral

characteristics, moving from the left to the right in Figure 2, are identified by ordering zero and the two racial

coefficients "mixed and "black when all three are statistically different from each other. (The coefficient "black must

be different from zero given our construction of the index.) In the case of “Blacker-than-black”, the coefficient

on the black indicator variable is greater than zero and the coefficient on mixed is larger than the black

coefficient. In the case of “Whiter-than-white” behavior, the opposite ordering holds. We label the third case,

when mixed lies between zero and black, “Unique Combination”. The final two categories occur when the

mixed indicator variable is not individually statistically different from either zero or the black indicator

variable. If the joint F-test of these two null hypotheses is also not statistically significant, then we cannot

                                                                                                                     19
reject the hypothesis that mixed-race behavior is either black or white, the “Both” case. If the joint test is

statistically significant, then we have a result in which we can only say that average mixed-race behavior is

“Neither” black nor white.

       The empirical results summarized in the “Identity” row of Table 7a indicate that mixed-race

adolescents’ behaviors are not easily characterized and that their identities may be in flux. Although the results

(in the first three columns) as regards “white” behaviors are not decisive for the frequency and dichotomous

indices separately, once the two indices are combined, we see that mixed-race adolescents on average adopt

white behaviors. The most robust result (in the second group of three columns) is that mixed-race youth follow

black behaviors with respect to those behaviors that are typically black. Once the “black” and “white” indices

are combined (in the last group of three columns,), the average behavior of mixed-race adolescents is

statistically different from both black and white adolescents, a convex combination of the two identities, not

behavior that is either “blacker than black” or “whiter than white”.

       The “Identity” rows of Table 7b report results from all samples, first repeating the information from

Table 7a, our preferred sample in which adolescent race is determined by the parents’ races. Although race is

more likely endogenous to identity and behavior in the other four samples, we can use those additional samples

to investigate the robustness of our findings in our preferred sample. Interestingly, the two “Identity” rows that

are most different from the others are the second and third samples from the in-home survey. We can speculate

on two reasons for the discrepancy. Perhaps self-identification of race “whitens”, or it may be that we are losing

statistical significance in differentiation from the few black behaviors. Looking back at Table 1, we can find

support for both these assertions: Moving from parent-defined to self-defined mixed-race excludes 17 who self-

identify as black, 7 as white, and 13 as other (a total of 37), but includes only an additional 8 (5 with black

parents and 3 with white parents). So it may be that when mixed-race identification is endogenous to behavior,

those selecting into mixed-race are more likely to be comfortable with a white identity. But this argument loses

some force when considering the two in-school samples from Table 7b, because race is still self-identified but

we have much larger sample sizes. See also the summary statistics in Tables A1 and A2 for sample sizes (after

also including Wave 2 observations in the case of the in-home samples).
                                                                                                                  20
        These five samples lend strong support to the result that the average behavior of mixed-race teens

generally follows a pattern of adopting both black and white behaviors. The result is a unique identity, one that

is different from both the average behavior of white teens and the average behavior of black teens (conditional

on our control measures, of course). This unique identity is a convex combination of the two identities, not

evidenced by behavior that is either “blacker than black” or “whiter than white”.



7: Variance in mixed-race individual identities implied by relative variance in behavior

        As we noted earlier, an analysis of average behavior may conceal the fact that mixed-race individuals

are experimenting with a wider range of identities. Certainly the previous section’s discussion reveals

important characteristics of mixed-race identity, but we can add more to our understanding of individual

behavior by moving beyond a comparison of averages. To better understand the complexities of mixed-race

behavioral choices and identities, we now consider the variance in residual errors across the three racial groups,

comparing mixed-race adolescents to black and white adolescents in turn as well as comparing mixed-race

adolescents to the monoracial (either black or white) group as a whole. The test statistics for equality of

variance that we use are robust to non-normality, and we compute them using the robvar() command in

Stata® Version 10 (Brown and Forsythe 1974, Levene 1960). We use the several tests defined by those

authors, and the statistical significance of the differences in variance between the subgroups were generally

robust to the choice of statistical test.

        Tables 7a and 7b summarize the results in the rows labeled “Differences in stdev”. The label “mix > b”

indicates, for example, that the variance in mixed-race adolescents’ behaviors is greater than the variance in

black adolescents’ behaviors, while “mix > mono” compares the variance of mixed-race adolescents’ behaviors

relative to the group composed of all monoracial adolescents. Only statistically significant differences are

reported. We again find evidence that mixed-race adolescents have less settled identities than do the

monoracial adolescents: There is more variation in behavior, and thus in definition of identity, among the

mixed-race adolescents, especially as compared to the black racial group. The intergroup differences in the


                                                                                                                 21
residual intragroup variances are again suggestive of a mixed-race group whose behavioral norms are less well

defined than for monoracial adolescents.



8: Concluding comments

       In this research, we have expanded on the previous literature by considering the behavior and identity of

mixed-race youth, adding several important new methods and findings. We do not rely solely upon self-

reported race but make use of parental identification as our preferred measure of racial group membership. We

also let the data determine which behaviors are black and which are white. The AddHealth survey allowed us to

consider a broad range of behaviors and outcomes from a nationally representative data set with a rich set of

control variables. Finally, we look at both average behavior and intragroup variance differences across the

racial categories to learn more about individuals’ choices.

       Our results indicate that mixed-race youth act both white and black by adopting both types of behaviors,

those that can be empirically characterized as “black” and those that can be characterized as “white”. When we

combine both types of behavior, average mixed-race behavior is a combination that is neither white nor black,

and the variance in mixed-race behavior is generally greater than the variance in behavior of monoracial

adolescents, especially as compared to the black racial group.

       We thus find that mixed-race identities are less well established, codified, or enforced than are

monoracial identities. Davis (1991) and Tizard and Phoenix (2002) provide anecdotal evidence supplied by

mixed-race youth that they resent the demands placed on them to exhibit a kind of racial loyalty by conforming

to prescribed norms and avoiding proscribed behaviors. In the terms of our theoretical model, both black and

white racial salience are high among the nationally-represented group of adolescents in the AddHealth data, but

the continued acceptance of the one-drop rule makes blackness somewhat more salient than whiteness. The

salience of black and white identities among mixed-race adolescents are manifested in the group’s conditional

average behavior. But the racial ambivalence reported by mixed-race youth to other researchers manifests itself

in our data as more highly variable intragroup behavior, measured by residual variance, as compared to

monoracial youths generally but especially as compared to the black group.
                                                                                                                22
       Given that adolescence is the time during which there is most pressure to establish an identity, and that

our results indicate that mixed-race youth are finding their own identities, not necessarily “joining” either

monoracial group, but in another sense joining both of them, one interpretation of our results is that multiracial

youth have the freedom to embrace both of their racial identities. We have found behaviors, providing evidence

of identities, that are more complex that those described in current interpretations of the “acting white”

hypothesis. The predominant application of “acting white” in the literature has been in the context of academic

achievement, and the next step in our research is to investigate the regularities we have uncovered here in that

more complex context.




                                                                                                                   23
Appendix: Samples in which the adolescent’s race is self-identified

       Although our preferred sample provided a measure of identity that is arguably exogenous to students’

behaviors, it was necessarily limited to intact families. We then repeated our analyses, widening the sample to

include all families and using adolescents’ self-reported race. We first used the at-home data from Waves 1 and

2 which allows us to keep the same outcome variables, beginning with our sample of intact families but

switching the racial indentification from parents’ race(s) to the adolescent’s self identification (the sample size

falls slightly because there were some who didn’t choose either black or white but had parents who did), and

then expanding the sample by dropping the requirement that the adolescents be in intact families. The

summary statistics for these two samples’ dependent variables are reported in Table A1 and for their control

variables in Table A3, matching those in Table 3. We then consider the much larger sample of students from

the inschool survey, which was considerably shorter and did not ask many of the behavior questions that were

in that at-home Waves 1 and 2. Thus, we have no questions about sexual activity or drug use in Table A2’s

summary statistics of dependent variables. Even the set of explanatory variables is not identical as can be seen

in Table A4. We can only use the adolescent self-report of race(s) since the parent race data is not available for

the in-school sample. The two samples we create from the in-school data are for “intact” families and for all

respondents. (Given the structure of this questionnaire, we cannot be sure that the two parent families are intact

biological families, although we do at least delete those adolescents who report having been adopted.) Our

analysis proceeds with these samples as with the preferred sample. In particular, the “black” and “white”

behavior indices are constructed separately for each sample. Yet there is considerable agreement across

samples in the results of Tables 4b, 4c, and 7b.




                                                                                                                  24
References
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       115 (August), 715-753.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2002. “Identity and Schooling: Some Lessons for the Economics of

       Education.” Journal of Economic Literature 40 (December), 1167-1201.

Archer, Sally L. 1982. “The Lower Age Boundaries of Identity Development.” Child Development 53:6

       (December), 1551-1556.

Austen-Smith, David and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. 2005. “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting White.’” Quarterly

       Journal of Economics 120 (month), 551-583.

Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and A. Joshua Strickland. 2007. “Social Identity and Preferences.” NBER

       working paper no. 13309 (August).

Bodenhorn, H. and C. S. Ruebeck. 2003. “The economics of identity and the endogeneity of race.” NBER

       working paper no. 9962 (September).

Brown, M. B., and A. B. Forsythe. 1974. “Robust Test for the Equality of Variances.” Journal of the American

       Statistical Association 69: 364-367.

Bryson, Ken. 1995. “Household and Family Characteristics: March 1996.” Current Population Reports,

       Population Characteristics. Accessed at http://www.census.gov/prod/2/pop/p20/p20-488.pdf.


Daniel, G. Reginald. 1996. “Black and White Identity in the New Millennium: Unsevering the Ties that Bind.”

       In The Multiracial Experience: Racial Borders at the New Frontier, pp. 121-139. Edited by Maria P. P.

       Root. Thousand Oaks, Ca.: Sage Publications.

Darity, William A., Jr., Patrick L. Mason, and James B. Stewart. 2006. “The Economics of Identity: The Origin

       and Persistence of Racial Identity Norms.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 60 (month),

       283-305.

Davis, F. James. 1991. Who Is Black? One Nation’s Definition. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State

       University Press.
                                                                                                              25
Erikson, E. H. 1968. Identity: Youth and Crisis. New York: Norton.

Ferguson, Ronald F. 2006. “New Evidence on Why Black High Schoolers Get Accused of ‘Acting White?’”

       Research Brief: Achievement Gap Initiative at Harvard University (September).

Fordham, Signithia and John U. Ogbu. 1986. “Black Students’ School Success: Coping with the Burden of

       ‘Acting White’.” The Urban Review 18 (month), 176-206.

Fryer, Roland G., Jr. 2007. “Guess Who’s Been Coming to Dinner? Trends in Interracial Marriage over the 20th

       Century. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21:2 (Spring 2007), 71-90.

Fryer, Roland G., Jr. and Paul Torelli. 2005. “An Empirical Analysis of ‘Acting White.’” Review of Economics

       and Statistics no (month), pages.

Furstenberg, Frank F. 2000. “The Sociology of Adolescence and Youth in the 1990s” A Critical Commentary.”

       Journal of Marriage and the Family 62:4 (November), 896-910.

Goldsmith, Arthur H., Darrick Hamilton, and William Darity, Jr. 2007. “From Dark to Light: Skin Color and

       Wages among African-Americans.” Journal of Human Resources 42(4): 701–738.

Gyimah-Brempong, Kwabena and Gregory Price. 2006. “Crime and Punishment: And Skin Hue Too?”

       American Economic Review 96 (May), 246-250.

Harris, David R. 2001. “Does it Matter How We Measure? Racial Classification and the Characteristics of

       Multiracial Youth. Working paper, University of Michigan (March).

Harris, David R. 2002. “In the Eye of the Beholder: Observed Race and Observer Characteristics.” PSC

       Research Report No. 02-522. Population Studies Center, University of Michigan (August).

Harris, David R. and Jeremiah Joseph Sim. 2002. “Who Is Multiracial? Assessing the Complexity of Lived

       Race.” American Sociological Review 67 (August), 614-627.

Harris, David R. and Justin L. Thomas. 2002. “The Educational Costs of Being Multiracial: Evidence from a

       National Survey of Adolescents.” PSC Research Report No. 02-521. Population Studies Center,

       University of Michigan (August).

Herman, Melissa. 2002. “The Black-White-Other Test Score Gap: Academic Achievement among Mixed-Race

       Adolescents.” Northwestern University, Institute for Policy Research working paper no. 02-31 (month).
                                                                                                          26
Hitlin, S., Elder, G., and J. Scott Brown. 2006. “Racial Self-Categorization in Adolescent: Multiracial

       Development and Social Pathways.” Child Development. 77(5):1298-1308.

Joyner, Kara and Grace Kao. 2005. “Interracial Relationships and the Transition to Adulthood.” American

       Sociological Review 70 (August), 563-581.

Kao, Grace. 1999. “Racial Identity and Academic Performance: An Examination of Biracial Asian and African

       American Youth.” Journal of Asian American Studies 2 (month), 223-249.

Kennedy, Randall. 2003. Interracial Intimacies: Sex, Marriage, Identity, and Adoption. New York: Pantheon

       Books.

Levene, H. 1960. “Robust Tests for Equality of Variances.” In Contributions of Probability and Statistics:

       Essays in Honor of Harold Hotelling. ed. I. Olkin, S. G. Ghurye, W. Hoeffding, W. G. Madow, and H.

       B. Mann, 278-292. Menlo Park, CA: Stanford University Press.

McLanahan, Sara and Gary Sandefur. 1994. Growing Up with a Single Parent: What Hurts, What Helps.

       Cambridge, Mass., press.

National Youth Risk Behavior Survey: 2005.

       http://www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/yrbs/pdf/subgroup/2005YRBSRaceEthnicitySubgroup.pdf.

       Accessed December 15, 2007.

Park, Robert E. 1928. “Human Migration and the Marginal Man,” American Journal of Sociology 33 (month),

       881-895.

Park, Robert E. 1931. “Mentality of Racial Hybrids,” American Journal of Sociology 36 (month), 534-551.

Rangel, Marcos. 2007. “Is Parental Love Colorblind? Allocation of Resources within Mixed-Race Families.”

       Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago (May).

Resnick, M.D., Bearman, P.S., Blum, R.W., Bauman, K.E., Harris, K.M., Jones, J., Tabor, J., Beurring, T.,

       Sieving, R.E., Shew, M., Ireland, M., Bearninger, L.H., and Udry, J.R. 1997. “Protesting Adolescents

       from Harm. Findings from the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent Health.” Journal of the

       American Medical Association, 278, 823-32.


                                                                                                              27
Romano, Renee. 2003. Race Mixing: Black-White Marriage in Post-War America. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard

       University Press.

Rosenfeld, Michael J. and Byung-Soo Kim. 2005. “The Independence of Young Adults and the Rise of

       Interracial and Same-Sex Unions,” American Sociological Review 70 (August), 541-562.

Stevenson, Betsy and Justin Wolfers. "Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving Forces," Journal of

       Economic Perspectives, 21(2) Spring 2007.

Stonequist, E. V. 1937. The Marginal Man: A Study in Personality and Culture Conflict. New York: Scribners.

Tizard, Barbara and Ann Phoenix. 2002. Black, White or Mixed Race? Race and Racism in the Lives of Young

       People of Mixed Parentage. Revised edition. London and New York: Routledge Press.

Tyson, Karolyn and William Darity, Jr. 2005. “It’s Not ‘a Black Thing’: Understanding the Burden of Acting

       White and Other Dilemmas of High Achievement.” American Sociological Review 70 (August), 582-

       605.

Udry, Richard, Rose Maria Li, and Janet Hendrickson-Smith. 2003. “Health and Behavior Risks of Adolescents

       with Mixed-Race Identity.” American Journal of Public Health 93 (November), 1865-1870.




                                                                                                             28
Table 2: Dependent variables, at-home sample (waves 1 and 2)
                                                                                         Black and White    Black             White
                                                                                          Obs    Mean    Obs   Mean        Obs  Mean
                                                                      Variable                   (Std)         (Std)             (Std)

ever been a regular cigarette smoker                                  smoker             106   0.170      1587   0.050     9622   0.195
smoked cigarettes in past 30 days                                     smoke_30           106   0.245      1579   0.111     9578   0.295
smoked on 15 or more days in past month                               smoker_reg         106   0.104      1588   0.016     9625   0.153
ever smoked marijuana                                                 pot                106   0.189      1559   0.108     9504   0.160
ever used other drugs                                                 odrugs             106   0.009      1570   0.006     9556   0.038
drank alcohol at least once in past month                             drank12            106   0.406      1584   0.283     9617   0.469
had five or more drinks in a row at least oonce in past year          drunken            106   0.179      1585   0.103     9615   0.288
drank weekly or more often in past year                               drank_weekly       106   0.123      1588   0.103     9625   0.131
ever had sexual intercourse                                           hadsex             104   0.471      1573   0.446     9549   0.300
suspended at least once in past year                                  suspend            101   0.139      1559   0.235     9438   0.129
ever been expelled from school                                        expelled           101   0.020      1558   0.036     9439   0.014
number of times skipped school w/o excuse in past year                school_skip        106   1.792      1587   0.799     9611   1.216
                                                                                               (7.708)           (2.654)          (4.819)
Questions below pertain to the current school year
reported feeling close to people at school                            feelclose          106   0.755      1588   0.819     9625   0.868
reported feeling part of the school                                   partschool         106   0.840      1588   0.863     9625   0.879
reported that students at school are prejudiced                       prejudiced         106   0.660      1588   0.528     9625   0.702
reported that school is safe                                          safe at school     106   0.783      1588   0.825     9625   0.885
reported that they are happy to be at their school                    happyschool        106   0.736      1588   0.805     9625   0.852
reported that they believe teachers are fair at their school          teachfaird         106   0.736      1588   0.761     9625   0.803
Index of the above 6 items (higher: more satisified with school)      school_index       97    0.995      1546   0.896     9338   0.878
                                                                                               (0.454)           (0.462)          (0.443)

reported having trouble with teachers                                 tchr_trouble       106   0.632      1588   0.559     9625   0.576
reported having trouble paying attention in school                    pay_attnd          106   0.736      1588   0.669     9625   0.786
reported trouble with getting homework done                           homeworkd          106   0.698      1588   0.627     9625   0.720
reported trouble getting along with other students                    getalongd          106   0.594      1588   0.569     9625   0.596
index of school troubles from 4 above items (higher: more troubles)   schtrouble_index   99    0.879      1548   0.776     9365   0.874
                                                                                               (0.534)           (0.509)          (0.509)

graffiti=1 if painted graffiti in past year                           graffiti           106   0.123      1577   0.047     9581   0.075
property=If damaged property                                          property           106   0.208      1577   0.107     9583   0.172
lie=1 if lied to parents about whereabouts or who with                lie                106   0.491      1575   0.502     9583   0.503
steal=1 if ever stolen anything                                       steal              106   0.245      1573   0.186     9580   0.197
drive_wo=1 if driven a car w/o permission                             drive_wo           106   0.094      1578   0.082     9585   0.078
ever entered a building/house to steal something                      enter_steal        106   0.066      1586   0.033     9616   0.037
ever stolen something worth over $50                                  steal_over50       106   0.047      1578   0.025     9587   0.037
ever stolen something worth less than $50                             steal_less50       106   0.217      1578   0.129     9583   0.172
every behaved rowdy or badly in public                                bad_public         106   0.443      1576   0.413     9582   0.454
index of delinquency created from above 9 items                       delinq_index       106   0.314      1563   0.214     9552   0.245
                                                                                               (0.387)           (0.286)          (0.327)
Questions below pertain to the previous week in reference to the
survey week
housework=1 if reported doing housework last week                     housework          106   0.981      1588 0.964       9625 0.970
# of hours watched videos last week                                   video              106   5.858      1585 5.833       9621 3.688
                                                                                               (10.331)        (9.052)          (5.652)
# hours played video or computer games last week                      computer_games 106       3.019      1586 3.484       9625 2.330
                                                                                               (6.290)         (7.773)          (5.513)
# of hours listened to the radio last week                            radio              106   11.708     1586 16.145      9601 15.432
                                                                                               (11.402)        (20.020)         (18.419)
how many hours did you watch tv last week                             watchtv            106   21.000     1578 20.561      9599 13.228
                                                                                               (17.728)        (18.81)          (12.361)
engaged in hobbies last week                                          hobbies            106   0.821      1588 0.795       9624 0.841
watched tv or played video games last week                            tv_video           106   0.981      1588 0.979       9625 0.969
rollerskated, rollerbladed, bicycles or skateboarded last week        skating            106   0.349      1588 0.299       9625 0.424
played sports last week                                               sports             106   0.726      1588 0.664       9625 0.751
exercised last week                                                   exceercise         106   0.764      1588 0.851       9624 0.838
hung out with friends last weekend                                    hangfriends        106   0.943      1588 0.899       9624 0.932
Table 3: Control variables, at-home sample (waves 1 & 2)

                                                          Parents' id race, intact families
                                                    Black/white         Black             White
                                                   Obs    Mean      Obs     Mean     Obs     Mean
                                                           (Std)             (Std)           (Std)
Income $                                            106     41.000 1588 42.179 9614 51.005
                                                          (28.236)         (35.975)         (51.182)
Age                                                 105     15.838 1587 15.639 9624 15.688
                                                            (1.760)          (1.694)         (1.666)
Female                                              106       0.434 1588       0.550 9625      0.501
Urban residence                                     106       0.528 1588       0.424 9625      0.252
Rural residence                                     106       0.113 1588       0.275 9625      0.308
Parent college graduate                             106       0.368 1588       0.395 9625      0.369
Catholic                                            106       0.236 1588       0.047 9625      0.300
No religion                                         106       0.104 1588       0.025 9625      0.058
Age of mom in years                                 106     42.500 1588 42.252 9625 41.730
                                                            (5.471)          (5.625)         (5.022)
Age of dad in years                                 106     48.547 1588 45.157 9625 44.306
                                                            (7.920)          (6.550)         (5.923)
Mom born in US                                      106       0.755 1588       0.930 9625      0.886
Dad born in US                                      106       0.764 1588       0.941 9625      0.889
Dad's job is management/professional                106       0.217 1588       0.203 9625      0.265
Dad's job other than management/professional        106       0.689 1588       0.729 9625      0.699
Dad has no job                                      106       0.094 1588       0.059 9625      0.033
Mom's job is management/professional                106       0.311 1588       0.363 9625      0.279
Mom's job other than management professional        106       0.509 1588       0.509 9625      0.589
Mom has no job                                      106       0.179 1588       0.125 9625      0.130
Parent receives welfare                             106       0.094 1588       0.061 9625      0.039
Table 4a: Classification of behavior by monoracial group (at-home sample, parents' race)

Dependent variable !        smoker          smoke_30        smoke_reg             pot              odrugs        drank12       drunken        drank_weekly   hadsex       suspend        expelled      school_skip
black                       -0.144**        -0.174**        -0.134**              -0.0423**        -0.0276**     -0.137**      -0.147**       -0.0290*       0.113**      0.0532**       0.00468       -0.598**
                            [0.011]         [0.014]         [0.0088]              [0.012]          [0.0044]      [0.017]       [0.013]        [0.011]        [0.016]      [0.013]        [0.0057]      [0.14]
mixed                       -0.0159         -0.0285         -0.0358               0.0339           -0.0226*      -0.0677       -0.116**       -0.00993       0.160**      -0.0337        -0.00452      0.266
                            [0.035]         [0.042]         [0.031]               [0.037]          [0.010]       [0.043]       [0.035]        [0.033]        [0.044]      [0.034]        [0.014]       [0.74]
Constant                    -1.241**        -1.670**        -0.950**              -0.883**         -0.307*       -2.570**      -1.326**       -0.680**       -0.818*      -1.083**       -0.165+       -1.492
                            [0.26]          [0.32]          [0.23]                [0.26]           [0.13]        [0.36]        [0.31]         [0.24]         [0.32]       [0.28]         [0.093]       [3.40]
Observations                11301           11249           11305                 11155            11218         11293         11292          11305          11212        11084          11084         11290
Type of behavior            white           white           white                 white            white         white         white          white          black        black          neither       white

Dependent variable !        feelclose       partschoold     prejudicedd           safe at school   happyschool   teachfaird    school_index   tchr_trouble   pay_attnd    homeworkd      getalongd     schtrouble_index
black                       -0.0433**       -0.0123         -0.0949**             -0.00379         -0.0547**     -0.0424**     0.0127         -0.0114        -0.0648**    -0.0609**      -0.0166       -0.0525**
                            [0.014]         [0.013]         [0.017]               [0.014]          [0.015]       [0.015]       [0.017]        [0.018]        [0.016]      [0.017]        [0.018]       [0.019]
mixed                       -0.107*         -0.0316         -0.000672             -0.0608          -0.120**      -0.0735+      0.113*         0.0596         -0.0248      -0.0327        0.0213        0.0118
                            [0.042]         [0.035]         [0.046]               [0.039]          [0.041]       [0.042]       [0.044]        [0.049]        [0.044]      [0.045]        [0.048]       [0.052]
Constant                    -0.174          -0.332          -2.930**              -0.326           -0.105        0.329         -1.257**       0.213          -0.576       -0.183         1.093**       -1.731**
                            [0.29]          [0.27]          [0.40]                [0.28]           [0.31]        [0.34]        [0.36]         [0.41]         [0.37]       [0.38]         [0.41]        [0.44]
Observations                11305           11305           11305                 11305            11305         11305         10967          11305          11305        11305          11305         10998
Type of behavior            white           neither         white                 neither          white         white         neither        neither        white        white          neither       white

Dependent variable !        graffiti        property        lie                   steal            drive_wo      enter_steal   steal_over50   steal_less50   bad_public   delinq_index
black                       -0.0227**       -0.0367**       0.00998               -0.00613         0.00924       -0.00648      -0.0142*       -0.0364**      -0.00238     -0.0174
                            [0.0088]        [0.012]         [0.018]               [0.015]          [0.010]       [0.0067]      [0.0062]       [0.013]        [0.018]      [0.011]
mixed                       0.0327          0.0347          -0.0252               0.0378           0.0134        0.0256        0.00425        0.0286         -0.00994     0.0523
                            [0.032]         [0.039]         [0.049]               [0.043]          [0.029]       [0.024]       [0.021]        [0.040]        [0.047]      [0.038]
Constant                    -0.336+         -0.840**        -3.584**              -1.139**         -1.627**      -0.187        -0.366**       -1.292**       -1.397**     -1.731**
                            [0.20]          [0.29]          [0.40]                [0.32]           [0.20]        [0.16]        [0.13]         [0.28]         [0.41]       [0.26]
Observations                11250           11252           11250                 11245            11255         11294         11257          11253          11250        11206
Type of behavior            white           white           neither               neither          neither       neither       white          white          neither      neither

Dependent variable !        housework       video           computer_games radio                   watchtv       hobbies       tv_video       skating        sports       exercise       hangfriends
black                       -0.00347        2.110**         0.974**               0.891            5.954**       -0.0220       0.00487        -0.0756**      -0.0399*     0.0187         -0.0224*
                            [0.0070]        [0.32]          [0.26]                [0.73]           [0.60]        [0.014]       [0.0057]       [0.016]        [0.016]      [0.013]        [0.010]
mixed                       0.0196          2.305*          0.474                 -3.655**         6.538**       -0.0368       0.00788        -0.0439        0.00791      -0.0790+       0.0124
                            [0.014]         [1.02]          [0.59]                [1.20]           [1.71]        [0.038]       [0.014]        [0.046]        [0.043]      [0.042]        [0.022]
Constant                    0.981**         6.810           16.27**               -57.30**         26.57*        1.216**       0.924**        3.277**        0.576+       0.766*         0.0698
                            [0.14]          [5.98]          [5.57]                [14.5]           [12.1]        [0.30]        [0.14]         [0.39]         [0.34]       [0.30]         [0.24]
Observations                11305           11298           11303                 11279            11269         11304         11305          11305          11305        11304          11304
Type of behavior            neither         black           black                 neither          black         neither       neither        white          white        neither        white

Note: All models include the full set of control variables depicted in table 4.
Robust standard errors in brackets, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Table 4b: Classification of behavior by monoracial group, at-home sample
(Same rows as Tables 2 and A1)

                           Parents' id, intact    Self-identified           Self-identified all
Dependent variable         family (from Table 4a) intact families           respondents

smoker                                         White                White                 White
smoke_30                                       White                White                 White
smoke_reg                                      White                White                 White
pot                                            White                White                 White
odrugs                                         White                White                 White
drank12                                        White                White                 White
drunken                                        White                White                 White
drank_weekly                                   White                White                 White
hadsex                     Black                       Black                Black
suspend                    Black                       Black                Black
expelled                                                                    Black
school_skip                                    White                White                 White

feelclose                                      White                White                 White
partschoold                                                                 Black
prejudicedd                                    White                White                 White
safeatschool                                                                Black
happyschoold                                   White                White                 White
teachfaird                                     White                White                 White
school_index                                                                              White

tchr_trouble
pay_attnd                                      White                White                 White
homeworkd                                      White                White                 White
getalongd                                                                                 White
schtrouble_index                               White                White                 White

graffiti                                       White                White                 White
property                                       White                White                 White
lie
steal
drive_wo
enter_steal                                                                               White
steal_over50                                   White                White                 White
steal_less50                                   White                White                 White
bad_public                                                                                White
delinq_index                                                                              White

housework
video                      Black                       Black                Black
computer_games             Black                       Black                Black
radio
watchtv                    Black                       Black                Black
hobbies                                                             White                 White
tv_video                                                                    Black
skating                                        White                White                 White
sports                                         White                White
exercise                                                                    Black
hangfriends                                    White                                      White

Note: Empty cells indicate that the coefficient on the black indicator variabe was not significant.
Table 4c: Classification of behavior by monoracial group, in-school sample
(Same rows as Table A2)
                                                                                      Self-identified    Self-identified
Dependent variable                                                                    intact families    all respondents

Smoked cigarettes at least once in past year                         cigs                        White             White
Smoked cigarettes at least weekly during past year                   cigs_week                   White             White
Smoked cigarettes at least once a month last year                    cigs_month                  White             White
Smoke cigarettes nearly every day                                    smoker                      White             White
Drank alcohol at least once in past year                             alcohol                     White             White
Drank alcohol at least weekly during past year                       alcohol_week                White             White
Drank alcohol at least once a month in past year                     alcohol_month               White             White
Been drunk at least once during past year                            drunk                       White             White
Been drunk at least weekly during past year                          drunk_week                  White             White
Was drunk at least once per month last year                          drunk_month                 White             White

Index of self-esteem, lower scores indicate better self-esteem       selfesteem                  White             White

Try very hard to do school work                                      schoolwk         Black              Black

Index of attitude towards school, higher scores=better attitude      school_index     Black              Black

Been in a fight last year                                            fight            Black              Black
Index of risky behaviors-higher scores=more risky behavior           risky_index                 White             White

Watch very little TV during school week                              tvschool                    White             White
Member of academic club                                              academic_club               White             White
Member of the band or the dance team                                 band_dance       Black              Black
Involved in school sports                                            sports           Black              Black
Member of school newspaper or yearbook                               news_year                   White             White
Member of student council                                            studentcouncil   Black              Black
Member of the honor society                                          honorsociety                White             White

Selfhealth rating 1-5 with higher scores being poorer health         selfhealth                  White             White
Index of missed activities due to health, higher #s indicates more   missactivity
Index of health troubles--higher numbers indicate more trouble       healthtrouble               White             White
Table 6: Indices of black/white behaviors, summary statistics for each racial group

At-home sample, Parent-identified race, Intact families

                     Mixed                                 Black                                  White
                     N    Mean     SD      Min    Max      N     Mean     SD Min Max              N      Mean       SD Min Max
White Dichotomous     106 8.36      2.77      2       16     1543 7.14     2.23    2    16          9415 9.01        2.86    1    21
White Frequency        99 0.46      0.30      0      1.6     1547 0.40     0.26    0 1.15           9353 0.45        0.27    0 1.99
White All              99 8.96      2.87   2.38     17.6     1506 7.58     2.34    2 16.88          9162 9.50        2.97    1 21.88
Balck Dichotomous     100 0.59      0.68      0        2     1544 0.68     0.70    0     2          9362 0.42        0.62    0     2
Black Frequency       106 0.22      0.18   0.01     1.04     1577 0.22     0.21    0 1.55           9595 0.14        0.14    0 2.20
Black All             100 0.81      0.72   0.01     2.75     1534 0.90     0.74    0 3.27           9334 0.56        0.64    0 4.20
Agg. Dichotomous      106 9.70      2.73      3       17     1543 8.46     2.21    2    17          9415 10.57       2.74    2    22
Agg. Frequency         99 3.24      0.35   2.23     4.28     1537 3.18     0.31 1.73 3.99           9328 3.31        0.29 1.55 4.87
Agg. All               99 13.17     2.70   7.25    20.79     1497 11.70    2.27 5.98 20.11          9139 13.95       2.82 5.08 25.76

At-home sample, Self-identified race, Intact families

                     Mixed                                 Black                                  White
                     N    Mean     SD      Min    Max      N     Mean     SD      Min    Max      N      Mean       SD Min Max
White Dichotomous      61 8.44      2.81      2       18     1548 7.07     2.23      1       16     9015 8.94        2.82    0    21
White Frequency        58 0.50      0.27      0     1.03     1549 0.40     0.26      0     1.38     8954 0.45        0.26    0 1.99
White All              57 9.00      3.02   2.38    19.03     1509 7.51     2.34   1.13   16.88      8776 9.44        2.92    0 21.88
Balck Dichotomous      59 0.51      0.60      0        2     1545 0.68     0.70      0        2     8960 0.42        0.62    0     2
Black Frequency        62 0.19      0.20   0.01     1.04     1580 0.22     0.21      0     1.55     9180 0.14        0.14    0 2.20
Black All              59 0.70      0.65   0.02     2.41     1535 0.90     0.74      0     3.27     8933 0.56        0.64    0 4.20
Agg. Dichotomous       61 9.87      2.77      4       19     1548 8.38     2.23      2       17     9015 10.50       2.72    1    22
Agg. Frequency         58 3.32      0.33   2.23     4.02     1539 3.17     0.32   1.73     4.13     8930 3.31        0.29 1.55 4.87
Agg. All               57 13.32     2.92   7.25    22.96     1500 11.62    2.29   4.98    20.11     8754 13.89       2.78 4.08 25.76

At-home sample, Self-identified race, All respondents

                     Mixed                                 Black                                  White
                     N    Mean     SD      Min    Max      N      Mean    SD      Min    Max      N        Mean     SD      Min  Max
White Dichotomous     331 9.79      3.12      3       21     6593 8.47     2.72      1      22     19392   10.38     3.26      1    24
White Frequency       315 1.00      0.46   0.14     2.59     6441 0.89     0.44   0.14    3.13     18773     0.95    0.45   0.14 3.33
White All             310 10.80     3.38   3.98    23.59     6274 9.42     2.94   2.10   23.84     18427    11.40    3.51   1.71 25.91
Balck Dichotomous     322 4.25      0.98      1        7     6564 4.46     1.03      0       7     19065     4.12    0.89      0     7
Black Frequency       337 0.20      0.23   0.01     2.17     6827 0.22     0.21      0    2.46     19913     0.15    0.15      0 2.19
Black All             321 4.45      0.99   1.68     7.30     6521 4.69     1.06   0.16    7.81     19006     4.27    0.90   0.10 8.17
Agg. Dichotomous      331 12.54     3.13      6       26     6593 11.02    2.68      3      25     19392   13.25     3.16      4    27
Agg. Frequency        314 3.80      0.50   1.88     5.52     6401 3.67     0.47   1.46    6.04     18721     3.81    0.46   2.10 6.30
Agg. All              309 16.34     3.41   7.88    31.52     6239 14.74    2.92   6.93   29.45     18377   17.13     3.42   7.77 32.27

In-school sample, Self-identified race, Intact families

                     Mixed                                 Black                                  White
                     N    Mean     SD      Min    Max      N     Mean     SD      Min    Max      N     Mean        SD      Min  Max
White Dichotomous     365 3.22      2.57      0       10     5928 2.37     2.22      0      11     36183 3.41        2.72      0    11
White Frequency       297 1.20      0.46   0.43     3.08     4548 1.04     0.37   0.31    3.46     31436 1.13        0.41   0.29 3.49
White All             297 4.52      2.83   0.52    13.08     4548 3.46     2.40   0.32   13.46     31436 4.59        2.95   0.30 14.46
Balck Dichotomous     347 2.44      1.02      0        5     5607 2.35     0.98      0       5     35609 2.20        0.95      0     5
Black Frequency       377 0.42      0.37      0        1     6026 0.44     0.38      0       1     36787 0.37        0.36      0     1
Black All             339 2.83      1.09    0.5        6     5381 2.79     1.07      0       6     35115 2.57        1.01      0     6
Agg. Dichotomous      365 5.76      2.63      1       13     5928 4.98     2.36      0      13     36183 6.20        2.89      0    15
Agg. Frequency        292 1.79      0.48   0.60     3.82     4439 1.63     0.49   0.31    4.41     31184 1.77        0.46   0.30 4.46
Agg. All              292 7.69      2.74   2.05    15.46     4439 6.69     2.53   0.49   15.57     31184 8.03        3.08   0.67 17.37

In-school sample, Self-identified race, All respondents

                     Mixed                                 Black                                  White
                     N    Mean     SD      Min    Max      N     Mean     SD      Min    Max      N     Mean        SD      Min  Max
White Dichotomous     733 3.63      2.80      0       11    12641 2.52     2.31      0      11     47587 3.50        2.74      0    11
White Frequency       588 1.13      0.47   0.33     3.06     9392 0.96     0.35   0.29    3.05     40904 1.03        0.38   0.29 3.08
White All             588 4.84      3.08   0.33    13.72     9392 3.54     2.49   0.29   14.02     40904 4.58        2.96   0.30 14.05
Balck Dichotomous     701 2.40      1.05      0        5    11987 2.33     0.98      0       5     46790 2.17        0.95      0     5
Black Frequency       757 0.47      0.38      0        1    12755 0.46     0.38      0       1     48265 0.39        0.36      0     1
Black All             682 2.84      1.11      0        6    11299 2.79     1.06      0       6     45950 2.55        1.02      0     6
Agg. Dichotomous      733 6.22      2.87      1       13    12641 5.15     2.43      0      14     47587 6.31        2.91      0    15
Agg. Frequency        577 1.69      0.51   0.36     4.05     9089 1.52     0.49   0.31    4.05     40495 1.66        0.44   0.30 4.05
Agg. All              577 8.00      3.08   1.90    15.53     9089 6.77     2.60   0.43   17.85     40495 8.04        3.10   0.59 17.13
Table 7a: Behavior of mixed-race adolescents; In-home sample, race based on parents (intact family)

                                       Dichotomous       Rescaled        All white    Dichotomous     Rescaled        All black    Dichot. white +    Freq. White +      All white +
                                           white         white freq.    behaviors         Black       black freq.    behaviors       rev'd black       rev'd black      rev'd black
black                                -1.444**          -0.0327**       -1.488**      0.173**        0.0654**        0.239**       -1.596**           -0.0977**        -1.724**
                                     [0.089]           [0.0096]        [0.094]       [0.023]        [0.0067]        [0.024]       [0.087]            [0.011]          [0.091]
mixed                                -0.529*           0.00990         -0.447        0.119+         0.0679**        0.191**       -0.686**           -0.0606+         -0.635*
                                     [0.26]            [0.029]         [0.28]        [0.062]        [0.018]         [0.067]       [0.26]             [0.035]          [0.27]
Constant                             -12.08**          -0.816**        -9.066**      -1.881**       0.371**         -1.509**      -9.744**           1.855**          -2.649
                                     [2.05]            [0.23]          [2.19]        [0.45]         [0.14]          [0.48]        [2.00]             [0.26]           [2.10]
Observations                         11050             10985           10753         10992          11264           10954         11050              10950            10721
R-sq                                 0.106             0.0348          0.107         0.154          0.0754          0.157         0.117              0.0422           0.121

p-val black = zero                   0                 0.000704        0             0              0               0             0                  0                0

Type of behavior                     white             white           white         black          black           black         white              white            white

p-val mixed = zero                   0.0436            0.737           0.110         0.0559         0.000199        0.00423       0.00826            0.0834           0.0176
p-val mixed = black                  0.000657          0.159           0.000288      0.405          0.896           0.488         0.000616           0.301            0.0000726
p-val joint hypotheses               0                 0.00266         0             0              0               0             0                  0                0

Identity                             unique combo      neither         white         black          black           black         unique combo       black            unique combo

sd biraical subpopulation            2.659             0.251           2.738         0.529          0.135           0.547         2.601              0.279            2.632
sd white subpopluation               2.710             0.256           2.805         0.565          0.131           0.581         2.600              0.279            2.666
sd black subpopulation               2.147             0.252           2.243         0.631          0.200           0.671         2.132              0.305            2.190
sd monoracial subpopulation          2.621             0.258           2.728         0.606          0.149           0.628         2.492              0.287            2.583

                                     mix > b           mix < mono      mix > b       mix < mono     mix > w         mix < w       mix > b            mix < w          mix > b
Differences in stdev
                                     mix > mono                                                     mix < mono      mix < mono    mix > mono                          mix > mono

Note: all models include the full set of control variables depicted in Table 3

The row "Type of behavior" summarizes the p-value above it and its associated coefficient.
The row "Identity" summarizes the p-values above it and their associated coefficients
The row "Differences in stdev" summarizes the standard deviations reported above only for significant differences (p-values not reported here).

"mix" = biracial subpopulation, "b" = black subpopulation, "w" = white subpopulation, "mono" = the black and the white subpopulations

Robust standard errors in brackets, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Table 7b: Identity of mixed-race adolescents, all samples

                                          Dichotomous Rescaled white      All white   Dichotomous Rescaled black    All black   Dichot. white + Freq. White +   All white +
                                              white       freq.          behaviors       Black        freq.        behaviors      rev'd black    rev'd black    rev'd black
In-home sample, race based on
parents, intact family (as in Table 7a)
Identity                                      unique          neither      white         black         black         black         unique           black         unique

                                             mix > b                                                 mix > w        mix < w        mix > b                        mix > b
Differences in stdev                                       mix < mono     mix > b     mix < mono                                                  mix < w
                                           mix > mono                                               mix < mono     mix < mono    mix > mono                     mix > mono


In-home sample, self-reported race,
intact family
Identity                                      white         wh than wh     white        neither       neither       neither         white           white         white

                                                                                                     mix > w
Differences in stdev                         mix > b                      mix > b                                                  mix > b                        mix > b
                                                                                                    mix < mono


In-home sample, self-reported race,
all adolescents
Identity                                      unique           white      unique        unique         black        unique         unique          unique         unique

                                                                                        mix > b      mix > w        mix > w
Differences in stdev                         mix > b                      mix > b                                                  mix > b                        mix > b
                                                                                        mix > w     mix > mono     mix > mono


In-school sample, self-reported race,
intact family
Identity                                      unique           white       white         black         black         black         unique           white         unique
                                                             mix > b                    mix > b                      mix > b
Differences in stdev                         mix > b        mix < w       mix > b      mix > w        mix > b       mix > w        mix > b                        mix > b
                                                           mix > mono                 mix > mono                   mix > mono

In-school sample, self-reported race,
all adolescents
Identity                                      white         wh than wh     white         black         black         black         unique           white         unique
                                                             mix < b       mix > b      mix > b                      mix > b                                      mix > b
                                             mix > b                                                 mix > w                       mix > b       mix > w
Differences in stdev                                        mix < w       mix < w      mix > w                      mix > w                                      mix < w
                                           mix > mono                                               mix > mono                   mix < mono     mix < mono
                                                           mix < mono    mix > mono   mix > mono                   mix > mono                                   mix > mono


See the notes to Table 7a for explanation of the notation and methods.
Table A1: Dependent variables, additional at-home sample (waves 1 and 2)
(Same rows as Table 2)
                           Self-identified, intact families                  Self-identified, all families
                   Black & White        Black           White       Black & White     Black              White
                    Obs Mean Obs Mean Obs Mean                      Obs Mean Obs Mean                Obs    Mean
Variable                   (Std)            (Std)           (Std)          (Std)           (Std)             (Std)

smoker                    62 0.1452    1590      0.056    9206    0.1981   338   0.183     6875   0.073     19973   0.255
smoke_30             62     0.258     1583    0.119      9162    0.297     336   0.244     6829   0.142     19874   0.346
smoker_reg           62     0.065     1591    0.019      9209    0.157     338   0.104     6883   0.035     19983   0.202
pot                  61     0.213     1563    0.111      9098    0.160     335   0.254     6720   0.158     19662   0.197
odrugs               62     0.016     1573    0.007      9146    0.037     337   0.018     6789   0.007     19802   0.047
drank12              62     0.435     1587    0.285      9202    0.469     338   0.447     6858   0.330     19950   0.509
drunken              62     0.210     1588    0.106      9199    0.289     337   0.267     6863   0.137     19946   0.328
drank_weekly         62     0.048     1591    0.104      9209    0.131     338   0.127     6883   0.128     19983   0.142
hadsex               62     0.387     1575    0.451      9135    0.298     338   0.485     6798   0.548     19822   0.387
suspend              59     0.153     1560    0.235      9034    0.126     322   0.258     6652   0.333     19230   0.181
expelled             59     0.000     1559    0.037      9034    0.013     322   0.019     6645   0.065     19219   0.021
school_skip          62     0.452     1590    0.834      9196    1.193     338   1.331     6865   1.571     19946   1.896
                            (1.141)           (2.936)            (4.851)         (3.991)          (6.086)           (6.803)

feelclose            62     0.8226    1591    0.819      9209    0.869     338   0.802     6883   0.795     19983   0.831
partschool           62     0.806     1591    0.862      9209    0.881     338   0.796     6883   0.837     19983   0.836
prejudiced           62     0.581     1591    0.532      9209    0.705     338   0.562     6883   0.490     19983   0.697
safe at school       62     0.758     1591    0.827      9209    0.888     338   0.778     6883   0.799     19983   0.847
happyschool          62     0.742     1591    0.806      9209    0.852     338   0.743     6883   0.781     19983   0.812
teachfaird           62     0.677     1591    0.762      9209    0.803     338   0.689     6883   0.732     19983   0.767
school_index         58     1.000     1548    0.895      8940    0.878     317   0.986     6558   0.911     18972   0.928
                            (0.494)           (0.462)            (0.442)         (0.497)          (0.476)           (0.464)

tchr_trouble         62     0.6774    1591    0.5594     9209    0.5818    338   0.633     6883   0.621     19983   0.601
pay_attnd            62     0.839     1591    0.666      9209    0.789     338   0.775     6883   0.680     19983   0.792
homeworkd            62     0.806     1591    0.629      9209    0.721     338   0.737     6883   0.656     19983   0.738
getalongd            62     0.677     1591    0.570      9209    0.600     338   0.609     6883   0.582     19983   0.619
schtrouble_index     58     0.996     1550    0.777      8965    0.878     317   0.923     6580   0.823     19016   0.904
                            (0.531)           (0.512)            (0.507)         (0.522)          (0.521)           (0.515)

graffiti             62     0.1452    1580    0.0475     9169    0.0739    336   0.110     6818   0.060     19864   0.081
property             62     0.242     1580    0.109      9171    0.173     337   0.220     6816   0.115     19864   0.172
lie                  62     0.532     1578    0.501      9171    0.501     336   0.521     6809   0.487     19852   0.502
steal                62     0.323     1576    0.186      9168    0.195     337   0.294     6816   0.198     19851   0.217
drive_wo             62     0.048     1581    0.085      9173    0.075     337   0.080     6828   0.097     19876   0.088
enter_steal          62     0.065     1589    0.035      9202    0.037     337   0.062     6867   0.041     19952   0.047
steal_over50         62     0.032     1581    0.026      9175    0.036     337   0.056     6826   0.039     19876   0.050
steal_less50         62     0.274     1581    0.130      9171    0.171     337   0.220     6828   0.140     19859   0.187
bad_public           62     0.548     1579    0.412      9171    0.455     337   0.507     6826   0.408     19862   0.457
delinq_index         62     0.355     1566    0.216      9141    0.243     335   0.322     6758   0.238     19775   0.263
                            (0.415)           (0.291)            (0.325)         (0.383)          (0.321)           (0.350)

housework            62     1         1591 0.965         9209 0.972        338   0.982     6879 0.964       19981 0.965
video                62     6.339     1588 5.856         9206 3.686        338   5.731     6866 6.309       19964 3.837
                            (12.89)        (9.01)             (5.64)             (10.66)        (10.16)           (6.15)
computer_games       62     2.4194    1589 3.5525        9209 2.3253       338   3.142     6875 3.490       19973 2.399
                            (7.185)        (7.79)             (5.504)            (8.32)         (7.80)            (5.88)
radio                62     12.516    1589 16.125        9185 15.413       338   15.325    6862 17.503      19926 17.364
                            (15.68)        (19.94)            (18.46)            (19.02)        (26.79)           (23.48)
watchtv              62     16.935    1581 20.8          9183 13.134       337   17.199    6833 20.339      19921 13.839
                            (17.73)        (18.91)            (12.31)            (16.11)        (18.41)           (13.26)
hobbies              62     0.8226    1591 0.7932        9208 0.8438       338   0.790     6881 0.764       19981 0.807
tv_video             62     1.000     1591 0.981         9209 0.969        338   0.979     6881 0.972       19982 0.962
skating              62     0.339     1591 0.299         9209 0.427        338   0.352     6881 0.304       19982 0.398
sports               62     0.726     1591 0.662         9209 0.756        338   0.719     6881 0.672       19982 0.718
exceercise           62     0.806     1591 0.847         9208 0.837        338   0.876     6881 0.850       19981 0.828
hangfriends          62     0.968     1591 0.901         9208 0.933        338   0.908     6881 0.895       19981 0.925
Table A2: Dependent variables, in-school samples                                                  Intact Families                                 All Families
(Similar to Table 2)                                                                  Black/white    Black        White               Black/white  Black       White
                                                                                      Obs Mean Obs Mean Obs        Mean               Obs Mean Obs    Mean Obs  Mean
                                                                                          (Std)        (Std)       (Std)                  (Std)       (Std)     (Std)

Smoked cigarettes at least once in past year                         cigs             370    0.300   6051   0.231   36618    0.384    742    0.373   12930   0.251   48214    0.404
Smoked cigarettes at least weekly during past year                   cigs_week        370    0.132   6051   0.056   36618    0.190    742    0.198   12930   0.069   48214    0.211
Smoked cigarettes at least once a month last year                    cigs_month       370    0.168   6051   0.175   36618    0.194    742    0.175   12930   0.181   48214    0.193
Smoke cigarettes nearly every day                                    smoker           370    0.078   6051   0.025   36618    0.117    742    0.143   12930   0.036   48214    0.136
Drank alcohol at least once in past year                             alcohol          371    0.580   6030   0.468   36550    0.561    746    0.629   12897   0.501   48102    0.576
Drank alcohol at least weekly during past year                       alcohol_week     371    0.119   6030   0.071   36550    0.111    746    0.168   12897   0.090   48102    0.120
Drank alcohol at least once a month in past year                     alcohol_month    371    0.461   6030   0.397   36550    0.450    746    0.461   12897   0.411   48102    0.456
Been drunk at least once during past year                            drunk            366    0.295   5970   0.199   36392    0.331    736    0.372   12768   0.230   47901    0.349
Been drunk at least weekly during past year                          drunk_week       366    0.077   5970   0.038   36392    0.064    736    0.120   12768   0.054   47901    0.071
Was drunk at least once per month last year                          drunk_month      366    0.219   5970   0.161   36392    0.267    736    0.253   12768   0.176   47901    0.279

Index of self-esteem, lower scores indicate better self-esteem       selfesteem       322     1.979 4976    1.897 33394       1.914   639     2.075 10420    1.941 43625      1.946
                                                                                            (0.624)         (.573)          (0.601)         (0.687)          (.596)           (.613)

Try very hard to do school work                                      schoolwk         398    0.837 6628     0.876 37812      0.866    815    0.774 14640     0.842 50104      0.851

Index of attitude towards school, higher scores=better attitude      school_index     377     0.420 6026 0.439 36787    0.371         757     0.468 12755 0.464 48265     0.386
                                                                                            (.3324)      (.4305)     (0.5544)               (.3659)       (.3456)     (0.59625)

Been in a fight last year                                            fight            347     0.519 5607    0.470 35609       0.409   701     0.555 11987    0.498 46790       0.429
Index of risky behaviors-higher scores=more risky behavior           risky_index      355     1.254 5766    0.889 35605       1.225   711     1.491 12224    0.950 46782       1.276
                                                                                            (1.234)         (.826)          (1.057)         (1.435)          (.915)          (1.090)

Watch very little TV during school week                              tvschool         398    0.166   6628   0.112   37812    0.262    815    0.156   14640   0.111   50104    0.256
Member of academic club                                              academic_club    398    0.312   6628   0.229   37812    0.257    815    0.281   14640   0.217   50104    0.245
Member of the band or the dance team                                 band_dance       398    0.359   6628   0.310   37812    0.283    815    0.339   14640   0.285   50104    0.270
Involved in school sports                                            sports           398    0.563   6628   0.517   37812    0.533    815    0.525   14640   0.495   50104    0.514
Member of school newspaper or yearbook                               news_year        398    0.143   6628   0.107   37812    0.103    815    0.148   14640   0.103   50104    0.099
Member of student council                                            studentcouncil   398    0.095   6628   0.091   37812    0.078    815    0.107   14640   0.082   50104    0.073
Member of the honor society                                          honorsociety     398    0.138   6628   0.086   37812    0.110    815    0.126   14640   0.071   50104    0.099

Selfhealth rating 1-5 with higher scores being poorer health         selfhealth       379   2.082 6197 1.999 37005            2.044   763   2.223 13340 2.057 48754            2.085
                                                                                          (1.001)        (.950)             (0.891)       (1.072)        (.982)              (0.914)
Index of missed activities due to health, higher #s indicates more   missactivity     351 0.378 5636 0.287 35635              0.279   713 0.472 11908 0.321 46798              0.297
                                                                                           (.594)        (.409)             (0.407)        (.742)        (.464)              (0.434)
Index of health troubles--higher numbers indicate more trouble       healthtrouble    339 1.352 5542 1.093 35108              1.217   688 1.425 11736     1.117 46043          1.237
                                                                                          (0.765)      (.7669)              (0.635)        (.799)       (0.677)              (0.652)
Table A3: Control variables, additional at-home samples (waves 1 & 2)
(Same row labels as Table 3)
                                                         Self-id, intact families                             Self-id, all respondents
                                             Black/white          Black           White            Black white         Black           White
                                            Obs Mean         Obs      Mean     Obs  Mean          Obs Mean        Obs       Mean   Obs    Mean
                                                   (Std)              (Std)          (Std)               (Std)              (Std)          (Std)

Income $                                      62     49.968   1591     42.190   9200     52.046   338     39.657   6882     24.434   19968     39.794
                                                   (23.914)          (35.916)          (51.758)         (61.102)          (32.425)           (46.868)
Age                                           61     15.459   1590     15.642   9208     15.667   337     15.653   6881     15.839   19981     15.842
                                                    (1.766)           (1.695)           (1.669)          (1.755)           (1.738)            (1.701)
Female                                        62      0.581   1591      0.541   9209      0.501   338      0.556   6883      0.533   19983      0.508
Urban residence                               62      0.484   1591      0.426   9209      0.241   338      0.497   6883      0.511   19983      0.281
Rural residence                               62      0.145   1591      0.272   9209      0.319   338      0.145   6883      0.199   19983      0.300
Parent college graduate                       62      0.435   1591      0.397   9209      0.376   338      0.444   6883      0.372   19983      0.371
Catholic                                      62      0.113   1591      0.045   9209      0.285   338      0.178   6883      0.047   19983      0.270
No religion                                   62      0.113   1591      0.026   9209      0.058   338      0.101   6883      0.053   19983      0.076
Age of mom in years                           62     41.758   1591     42.267   9209     41.733   338     41.364   6883     40.443   19983     41.112
                                                    (4.288)           (5.633)           (5.021)          (5.667)           (5.562)            (5.225)
Age of dad in years                           62     48.226   1591     45.207   9209     44.303   338     45.012   6883     44.098   19983     43.875
                                                    (8.225)           (6.562)           (5.925)          (5.710)           (4.933)            (5.590)
Mom born in US                                62      0.935   1591      0.934   9209      0.910   338      0.885   6883      0.929   19983      0.887
Dad born in US                                62      0.968   1591      0.947   9209      0.913   338      0.846   6883      0.835   19983      0.860
Dad's job is management/professional          62      0.242   1591      0.204   9209      0.270   338      0.086   6883      0.091   19983      0.185
Dad's job other than mgmt/prof'l              62      0.677   1591      0.727   9209      0.695   338      0.317   6883      0.352   19983      0.550
Dad has no job                                62      0.081   1591      0.061   9209      0.033   338      0.038   6883      0.039   19983      0.034
Mom's job is management/professional          62      0.355   1591      0.365   9209      0.286   338      0.340   6883      0.268   19983      0.239
Mom's job other than mgmt/prof'l              62      0.581   1591      0.504   9209      0.586   338      0.509   6883      0.516   19983      0.559
Mom has no job                                62      0.065   1591      0.129   9209      0.127   338      0.104   6883      0.146   19983      0.135
Parent receives welfare                       62      0.081   1591      0.061   9209      0.038   338      0.151   6883      0.148   19983      0.080
Table A4: Control variables, in-school samples
(Similar to Table 4)
                                                              Intact families                                     All respondents
                                                  black/white     black       white                   black/white      black       white
                                                 Obs Mean Obs Mean Obs          Mean                 Obs Mean Obs         Mean Obs   Mean
                                                      (Std)         (Std)       (Std)                     (Std)           (Std)      (Std)

Parents on welfare                                398     0.010   6628     0.009   37812     0.003    815     0.016   14640     0.016   50104     0.005
                                                        (0.100)          (0.095)           (0.053)          (0.125)           (0.124)           (0.072)
Age in years                                      397   14.816    6601   14.856    37780   14.976     810   14.922    14547   14.909    50046   15.000
                                                        (1.705)          (1.694)           (1.669)          (1.802)           (1.727)           (1.682)
Female                                            394     0.558   6599     0.534   37655     0.501    801     0.564   14556     0.524   49882     0.496
Parent has college education                      398     0.698   6628     0.640   37812     0.662    815     0.542   14640     0.470   50104     0.591
Mom born in U.S                                   398     0.834   6628     0.905   37812     0.921    815     0.734   14640     0.761   50104     0.846
Dad born in U.S.                                  398     0.859   6628     0.902   37812     0.921    815     0.492   14640     0.452   50104     0.750
Dad is management/professional                    398     0.236   6628     0.189   37812     0.305    815     0.140   14640     0.094   50104     0.244
Dad job is other than management/prof.            398     0.540   6628     0.559   37812     0.552    815     0.306   14640     0.281   50104     0.451
Dad has no job                                    398     0.085   6628     0.073   37812     0.043    815     0.055   14640     0.039   50104     0.037
Adopted                                           398     0.000   6628     0.000   37812     0.000    815     0.066   14640     0.029   50104     0.029
Mom's job is management/professional              398     0.372   6628     0.321   37812     0.306    815     0.285   14640     0.243   50104     0.277
Mom's job other than manager/prof.                398     0.337   6628     0.375   37812     0.387    815     0.313   14640     0.316   50104     0.365
Mom has no job                                    398     0.181   6628     0.169   37812     0.236    815     0.156   14640     0.149   50104     0.207
Live only with mother                             398     0.000   6628     0.000   37812     0.000    815     0.317   14640     0.351   50104     0.140
Live only with father                             398     0.000   6628     0.000   37812     0.000    815     0.043   14640     0.032   50104     0.035
Unknown if living with mom/dad                    398     0.000   6628     0.000   37812     0.000    815     0.113   14640     0.152   50104     0.050
