NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VARIETIES AND THE TRANSFER PROBLEM:
THE EXTENSIVE MARGIN OF CURRENT ACCOUNT ADJUSTMENT
Giancarlo Corsetti
Philippe Martin
Paolo Pesenti
Working Paper 13795
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13795

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

We thank Christian Broda, Joseph Gagnon, Philip Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti as well as seminar
participants at Columbia University, Dublin, Rome, European Central Bank, and NBER Summer Institute
for helpful comments. Corsetti's work is part of the Pierre Werner Chair Programme on Monetary
Union at the Robert Schuman Centre of the European University Institute. Martin's work received
financial assistance from the Institut Universitaire de France and Centre d'Economie de la Sorbonne.
The views expressed here are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or any other institution with which
the authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Giancarlo Corsetti, Philippe Martin, and Paolo Pesenti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Varieties and the Transfer Problem: The Extensive Margin of Current Account Adjustment
Giancarlo Corsetti, Philippe Martin, and Paolo Pesenti
NBER Working Paper No. 13795
February 2008
JEL No. F32,F41
ABSTRACT
Most analyses of the macroeconomic adjustment required to correct global imbalances ignore net exports
of new varieties of goods and services and do not account for firms' entry in the product market. In
this paper we revisit the macroeconomics of trade adjustment in the context of the classic 'transfer
problem,' using a model where the set of exportables, importables and nontraded goods is endogenous.
We show that exchange rate movements associated with adjustment are dramatically lower when the
above features are accounted for, relative to traditional macromodels. We also find that, for reasonable
parameterizations, consumption and employment (hence welfare) are not highly sensitive to product
differentiation, and change little regardless of whether adjustment occurs through movements in relative
prices or quantities. This result warns against interpreting the size of real depreciation associated with
trade rebalancing as an index of macroeconomic distress.

Giancarlo Corsetti
European University Institute
Florence, ITALY
giancarlo.corsetti@iue.it
Philippe Martin
Paris School of Economics
Université Paris 1 Panthéon Sorbonne
106-112 bd de l'Hopital
75013 Paris
France
philippe.martin@univ-paris1.fr

Paolo Pesenti
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
paolo.pesenti@ny.frb.org

1

Introduction

Between 1997 and 2006, the U.S. current account de…cit rose from 140 billion dollars, or 1.7
percent of U.S. output, to over 840 billion dollars, or 1.7 percent of world output. Regardless
of whether one attributes the strong deterioration of the U.S. current account to internal
factors (such as the investment boom of the mid-1990s accompanied by a secular decline
in private saving and followed by the emergence of large public de…cits) or to a ‘saving
glut’ (and investment drought) in the rest of the world, the consensus is that the current
imbalance is unsustainable and adjustment is in the cards.
The basic mechanism of adjustment is straightforward. A transfer of real resources
from the U.S. to the rest of the world requires a decrease in U.S. spending relative to
production, accompanied by a simultaneous relative movement in the opposite direction
abroad. This implies a reallocation of purchasing power across countries through a change
in relative prices, which can be sizable. For instance, in‡uential contributions by Maurice
Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogo¤ (2005, 2007) emphasize that the unwinding of the U.S. current
account de…cit may be associated with “the potential collapse of the dollar,” and estimate
the extent of real e¤ective depreciation at 30 percent or more. As of 2006, o¢ cial estimates
by international organizations projected a 15 percent depreciation over a ten-year horizon
under benign circumstances, but did not rule out sharp dollar spikes under more disruptive
scenarios.1
How much real dollar depreciation should the world economy expect in the future? And
will it come with a bang or a whisper? These are important questions, yet the quixotic
emphasis on the quantitative forecast of dollar adjustment should not overshadow the fact
that changes in international prices represent essential, but not exhaustive, steps towards
global rebalancing. In fact, the complexities of the international adjustment mechanism
have long been recognized in the literature, starting from the classic controversy on the
macroeconomic e¤ects of a transfer associated with Keynes (1919, 1929a,b,c) and Ohlin
(1929a,b). Deteriorating terms of trade and real exchange rates in the debtor country played
a crucial role in Keynes’analysis of German reparations after World War I. Ohlin criticized
Keynes’ emphasis on relative prices, arguing that income e¤ects can make terms-of-trade
adjustments redundant.2 Subsequent contributions have explored the transfer problem in
its many nuances. Nowadays, the textbook synthesis of the debate recognizes the validity
1 See

e.g. IMF (2006), Box 1.3. Similar estimates are discussed in Faruqee et al (2007).

2 See

Brakman and Van Marrewijk (1998, 2005) for a recent overview of the Keynes-Ohlin debate.

1

of the Ohlin position but concludes that “Keynes was right in practice.”3
In our view, the current debate on global rebalancing provides compelling reasons for
a modern revisitation of the transfer problem. This is certainly valid in light of recent
theoretical developments in international trade and …nance literature, as the received wisdom
of classical open-economy macroeconomics can now be re-assessed within the framework of
models with explicit and robust choice-theoretic foundations. But a more direct motivation
can be found in a set of stylized facts that modern analyses of international trade adjustment
can no longer a¤ord to overlook.
Over the past few decades, the strong expansion in the volume of international trade
has been accompanied by a vast change in its composition, in favor of di¤erentiated goods.
Following the methodology by Rauch (1999), Tang (2006) reports that U.S. imports of di¤erentiated products rose from 47.4 percent in 1975 to 75.5 percent in 2000 while the proportion
of U.S. exports of di¤erentiated goods increased from 61.3 to 78.6 percent between 1979 and
2000. Recent literature has also provided pervasive estimates of the fraction of trade growth
which occurs at the extensive margin (export of new varieties), as opposed to a rise in the
volume of trade in existing goods and services. Over the medium or long term (the time
horizon of a current account adjustment), the macroeconomic implications of …rms’ entry
and exit in the tradable sector are substantial (Broda and Weinstein (2004, 2006, 2007)).
Hummels and Klenow (2005) show that the extensive margin can account for about two
thirds of the di¤erence in trade across countries of di¤erent size. Yi (2003), Kehoe and Ruhl
(2003), and Ruhl (2005) show that trade liberalization results in a signi…cant increase of the
extensive margin.
Using highly disaggregated product-level data, Debaere and Mostashari (2005) report
that, for around 80 percent of the countries, over 40 percent of all goods categories exported
to the U.S. in 1998-2000 were in newly traded goods, that is, goods that were not exported
in 1989-91. While tari¤ reductions help to explain such increases in the extensive margin
of trade, other factors captured by country …xed e¤ects (possibly re‡ecting macroeconomic
conditions) account for the lion’s share of why goods are newly traded. The role of product
varieties in international trade is also emphasized in Gagnon (2003) which — building on
Krugman’s (1989) notion that economic growth is channelled into product proliferation —
provides evidence on the strong correlation between the growth of U.S. bilateral manufactured imports between 1972 and 2000 and the average growth rate of GDP of the exporting
countries. Of particular relevance for our purposes is the evidence discussed by IMF (2007),
suggesting that economies where the cost of starting and closing a …rm, and of hiring and
3 Krugman

and Obstfeld (2006), p.98.

2

…ring labor, have experienced smaller movements in real e¤ective exchange rates during
current account adjustment episodes.4
The traditional analysis of the international transfer problem typically abstracts from
the possibility of trade in new varieties as a potential engine of international adjustment.5
For this reason, it provides an incomplete framework for the analysis of global current account rebalancing. Regrettably, existing projections (from back-of-the-envelope estimates
to model-based scenario analyses) of the forthcoming dollar depreciation build to our knowledge on foundations that all but ignore this point. To what extent does trade at the extensive
margin in‡uence the macroeconomics of transfers? In this paper, we address this issue using a stylized yet rigorous analysis of the di¤erent margins of adjustment, stressing changes
in relative prices and employment as well as product di¤erentiation. In the model, …rms
in each sector produce under constant returns to scale, and introduce new product varieties sustaining a …xed entry cost which depends on the number of existing varieties in the
sector. Households in each country consume domestically produced nontradables, domestically produced import-competing goods, and imports. Trading costs allow us to map the
international macroeconomics of current account adjustment depending on the degree of
‘insularity’of national economies. Hence, relative to comparable analyses such as Obstfeld
and Rogo¤ (2005, 2007) and Dekle et al. (2007) — the latter focused on bilateral trade
relations in a multi-country simulation exercise — we analyze current account adjustment
in an environment where the number of product varieties is endogenous, labor supply is
elastic, and labor can be reallocated between sectors, so that the level and composition of
traded and nontraded output are endogenous.
A notable baseline result from our analysis is that, for a given constant cost of introducing
new varieties, a transfer has no impact on the terms of trade — which is the extreme version
of the case Ohlin was defending against Keynes. This is remarkable in light of the fact that
our model allows for home bias in consumption, due to the presence of trade costs and a
nontradable sector. Home bias in spending is traditionally a building block of the standard
argument according to which a transfer should be expected to a¤ect the terms of trade. In
our model with monopolistic competition and love for variety, however, the e¤ect of home
bias on demand is compensated for the creation of new varieties in response to a transfer,
which then attenuates or eliminates altogether the need for a relative price change.
In our quantitative simulations, the model is calibrated to U.S. data and used to assess
the e¤ects of improving net exports from a de…cit as high as 6.5 percent of GDP to a balanced
4 IMF
5A

(2007), pp. 103-104.

relevant exception worth emphasizing is the work by Brakman and van Marrewijk (1995, 1998).

3

position. We compare our results with those of a conventional ‘…xed-variety’model in which
there is no entry and adjustment occurs exclusively at the intensive margin. We conduct
several experiments checking robustness by varying the key parameters of the calibration.
In our benchmark calibration of the ‘…xed-variety’model, closing the external imbalance
requires a fall in long-run consumption by around 6 percent, and an increase in employment
by 3 percent; the real exchange rate and the terms of trade depreciate by 17 and 21.9
percent, respectively. This is a reasonable scenario, well in line with related exercises in the
literature allowing for some output ‡exibility.6
The equilibrium exchange rate movements caused by transfers can however be dramatically lower when adjustment occurs at the extensive margin. In our baseline calibration
with endogenous-variety e¤ects, the possibility of adjustment at the extensive margin does
not a¤ect the impact of the transfer on employment and consumption: total hours still grow
at 3 percent, and aggregate consumption falls. Yet, the equilibrium movement in the above
international prices are only 1.1 and 6.4 percent, respectively. These results are driven by
a large expansion in the varieties of home goods produced for the export markets (+24
percent), matched by a substantial rise in import competing goods (+12 percent). The
number of varieties of nontraded goods instead contract, although at a much lower rate
(-2.1 percent), and much less than imports from abroad (-13 percent). The fall in consumption is driven mainly by the overall changes in the basket of products available to domestic
households.7
As the size of the dollar adjustment has been in the spotlight as a key indicator of
macroeconomic stress, an important question is whether the welfare costs of adjustment
would be lower if this occurred mostly at the extensive margin. Our benchmark calibration
suggests a negative answer. The welfare costs for the country making the transfer do not
change much across simulations in spite of vastly di¤erent changes in international prices.
In other words, the equilibrium movement in international relative prices is obviously a
function of the speci…c features of macroeconomic adjustment: there are di¤erent possible
combinations of quantity and price adjustment that are consistent with a given correction in
6 For

instance, these …gures are comparable with experiments by Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2007) in which
output of tradables is increased parametrically by 20 percent.
7 Past evidence provides some guidance in this respect. Freund and Warnock (2007) look at 26 episodes
between 1980 and 2003 in which the current account de…cit was at least 2 percent of GDP before going
through a reversal (i.e., a reduction by at least two percentage points over three years). During such reversals,
countries on average experience slow GDP growth, increasing unemployment, and a real depreciation. Real
export growth and declining consumption and investment spur adjustment. Focusing on persistent de…cits
(above 2 percent of GDP for more than 5 years), the resolution of large de…cits does not require a more
extensive depreciation, nor it is more likely to be associated with an exchange rate crisis. If anything, large
and persistent de…cits involve less depreciation than average. Similar results are reported by Fratzscher,
Juvenal and Sarno (2007) in a time-series analysis of the U.S. case.

4

relative wealth and welfare. In our simulations where transfers have large entry/exit e¤ects,
the ‘competitiveness position’of the rest of the world deteriorates substantially even though
changes in the terms of trade and relative labor costs are contained.
The degree of economic ‡exibility, indexed by the cost of entry, a¤ects the magnitude
of relative price movements: a higher convexity of the cost of product di¤erentiation has
only a minor impact on employment and consumption, but clearly magni…es real exchange
rate movements relative to quantity adjustment. However, our results stress that the overall macroeconomic allocation is reasonably sensitive to variations in the elasticity of labor
supply. In our experiments with a low labor elasticity, with and without extensive margins,
the response of employment to the transfer is only 1.1 percent. However, the fall in consumption is three times as large in the speci…cation with endogenous varieties than in the
economy with …xed varieties: -10 percent against -3 percent. A low response of employment
translates into a sharp fall in the production of nontradables: the number of goods varieties
in this sector falls by 3.5 percent. As in our benchmark speci…cation, the di¤erence in the
terms of trade and real exchange rate movement is quite dramatic.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model. Section 3 analyzes
endogenous changes in consumption and output in response to a transfer, contrasting the
case in which varieties are endogenous with the traditional ‘…xed-variety’setup. Section 4
presents a quantitative assessment. Section 5 concludes.

2

The transfer problem revisited: product varieties and
relative prices in the global economy

2.1

Structure of the model

The world economy consists of two countries, Home and Foreign — Foreign variables are
denoted with a star. In each country households consume all varieties of goods available in
the market, both domestically produced and imported. They supply labor in a competitive
market to domestic …rms only, but own claims on …rms’ pro…ts worldwide. There are
L households in the Home country and L households in the Foreign country. In both
countries, …rms operate either in the nontradables or in the tradables sector. Firms in the
tradables sector either produce import-competing goods for the domestic market, or export
their production.
Each …rm produces a single good variety and operates under conditions of monopolistic
competition. The number of varieties produced is endogenously determined in the model.
There is free entry, but …rms face …xed entry costs to start production of a particular
variety. The entry costs consist of wages paid to the labor employed in setting up a …rm.

5

In the Home country varieties (and …rms) in the nontradables sector are de…ned over a
continuum of mass nN and indexed by hN 2 [0; nN ]. Home tradables (import-competing)
varieties produced for the domestic market are indexed by hD 2 [0; nD ]. Similarly, Home
varieties produced for the export market are indexed by hX 2 [0; nX ] By the same token,
in the Foreign country nontradables varieties are de…ned over the continuum fN 2 [0; nN ],
import-competing varieties are indexed by fD 2 [0; nD ] and export varieties are indexed by
fX 2 [0; nX ].

2.2

Firms

Firms have access to a linear technology in labor, which is the only input in production.
The production function of the representative Home …rm producing a speci…c variety is:
Y (hi ) = `(hi ) i = N; D; X

(1)

where Y (hi ) is the output of variety hi , `(hi ) is labor used in its production.
To start the production of a variety hi , a …rm needs to pay a …xed cost q(hi ), de…ned in
terms of Home labor costs:
q(hi )

wci ni

(2)

where w is the wage rate and ci ni are units of labor used in the activities required to
introduce a variety in the i sector.8 For

> 0, the cost function is convex: the cost of

creating an additional variety is an increasing function of the number of existing varieties
in the sector. The idea underlying our speci…cation of the cost function is that a higher
number of existing varieties on the market makes it more di¢ cult for …rms to di¤erentiate
their products relative to the competition, raising the costs of marketing and advertising
associated with the introduction of a new variety or brand. The parameter

measures the

sensitivity of these costs to the number of sectoral varieties.
In addition, shipping goods abroad entails transportation costs, denoted by

and ex-

pressed in units of the export good — thus modelled as ‘iceberg’ costs. The resource
constraints for each variety of Home goods are therefore:
Y (hN )

LC (hN )

Y (hD )

LC (hD )

Y (hX )

(1 + ) L C (hX )

(3)

where C (hN ) is per-capita consumption of good hN in the Home country, (hD ) is per-capita
consumption of good hD by the representative Home resident, and C (hX ) is consumption
of good hX by the representative Foreign resident. As domestic households provide labor
8 Corsetti

et al (2007) discuss the case in which entry costs are subject to shocks.

6

both for …rms’start-up and production activities, the resource constraint in the Home labor
market is:
L`

X Z

ni

0

i

Y (hi ) dhi + ci n1+
i

(4)

Without loss of generality, in each country domestic labor units are the numeraire in
terms of which all prices are measured. We let p(hN ), p(hD ) and p(fX ) denote the Home
prices of, respectively, Home nontradables, Home import-competing varieties and Home
imports. A similar notation holds in the Foreign country. Wages in both countries are
w = w = 1, and " denotes the exchange rate, de…ned as Home labor per unit of Foreign
labor. Using the above notation, the operating pro…ts of Home …rms are, respectively:
(hN )

p (hN ) LC (hN )

w` (hN )

(hD )

p (hD ) LC (hD )

w` (hD )

(hX )

"p (hX ) L C (hX )

(p (hN )

1) Y (hN )

(5)

(p (hD ) 1) Y (hD )
"p (hX )
w` (hX )
1 Y (hX )
1+

(6)
(7)

Similar expressions hold for the Foreign country.

2.3

Households

In the Home country the utility of the representative household is a positive function of
consumption C and a negative function of labor e¤ort `:
1 1+
`
1+

U = log C
where

(8)

is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity. C is a Cobb-Douglas index of tradables and

nontradables varieties sold in the country:
C=
where 1

1
CT CN

(9)

1

(1

)

is the share of nontradables in consumption, and the baskets CT and CN are

de…ned as:
CT =

"Z

nD

1

C (hD )

1

dhD +

0

Z

nX

1

C (fX )

0

CN =

Z

nN

1

C (hN )

1

1

dfX

#

1

(10)

1

dhN

(11)

0

In the expressions above

denotes the elasticity of substitution across varieties, as well

as the elasticity of substitution between import-competing goods hD and imports fX . We
assume that this elasticity is higher than the elasticity of substitution between the tradables
and nontradables baskets, that is

> 1.

7

Z

0

The budget constraint of the representative Home household is:
Z nD
Z nX
nN
p (hN ) C (hN ) dhN +
p (hD ) C (hD ) dhD +
p (fX ) C (fX ) dfX +I
0

`+

F=L

0

(12)

Home households earn labor incomes w` (recall that wages are normalized to one) and spend
on consumption goods. They …nance the …xed costs of setting up …rms and introducing
goods varieties (I in our notation), receive dividends revenue from the …rms they own ( )
and pay F=L to Foreign households, where F is the aggregate resource transfer to the rest
of the world. For tractability, we posit that households are endowed with a well-diversi…ed
international portfolio of claims on …rms’pro…ts, so that they …nance the same fraction of
the cost of creating new varieties in each country.9 Formally, Home households invest in a
portfolio of …rms worldwide:
I

XZ

1
L+L

ni

q (hi ) dhi + "

0

i

XZ
i

ni

q (fi ) dfi

0

and in return receive an equal share of pro…ts:
X Z ni
X Z ni
1
(hi ) dhi + "
L+L
0
0
i
i

!

(fi ) dfi

(13)

!

(14)

Optimal consumption demand satis…es:
C(hN ) =

p (hN )
PN

CN ;

C(hD ) =

p (hD )
PT

CT ;

C (fX ) =

p (fX )
PT

CT ;
(15)

PC =

PT CT

PN CN
=
1

(16)

where P , PT and PN are the utility-based consumer price indexes, de…ned as the minimum
expenditures required to purchase one unit of the respective baskets:
P

PT

=

=

PT PN1
"Z

;

PN =

Z

1

nN

1

1

p (hN )

dhN

0

nD

1

p (hD )

dhD +

0

Z

0

nX

1

p (fX )

dfX

(17)
#11

(18)

and optimal labor supply implies:
w = 1 = ` PC

(19)

Note that, as a result of our choice of numeraire, consumption increases when its price P
falls (with unit elasticity) and when labor ` decreases (with elasticity ). Similar expressions
hold in the Foreign country.
9 This is in contrast with the standard assumption that households only own and …nance domestic …rms.
As long as free entry is assumed, positing complete home bias in equity portfolio would not alter our results.

8

2.4

Prices

The prices charged by Home …rms take the standard form of markups over marginal costs,
equal in our setup to labor costs per unit of product:
p (hN ) = p (hD ) =
"p (hX ) =

1

1

p

(20)

(1 + ) = p(1 + )

(21)

Similar expressions hold in the Foreign country. Given that the two countries have identical
labor productivities and demand elasticities, it must be the case that p = p . It follows that
the equilibrium price indexes are:
1
1
PN = pnN

PT = pB 1

1

1

PN = p nN1

1

PT = p B

1

(22)

where:
B

n D + n X "1

;

B

nD + nX "

1

1

(1 + )

(23)

Borrowing a notation convention commonly adopted by the trade literature, the index of
trade costs
the case

2.5

is positive and less than one; the case

= 0 corresponds to in…nite trade costs,

= 1 to zero trade costs.

Free entry, balance of payments and equilibrium

To characterize the equilibrium in our model, we …rst rewrite the operating pro…ts earned
by Home …rms as follows:
(hN )

1
L
= p C(hN ) =

(hD )

L
= p C(hD ) =

(hX )

= p (1 + )

L

L`
nN
L`
n D + n X "1

C (hX ) =

(24)
(25)

L ` "
nD + nX "

1

(26)

Other things being equal, a higher number of …rms (and varieties) in a sector reduces the
pro…ts of each …rm operating in that sector. In the tradables sector, transportation costs
partially shield local …rms’pro…ts from foreign competition: if
and

is close to zero both

(hD )

(hX ) depend only on the number of import-competing …rms, nD and nD respectively.

With free entry, optimal investment in new varieties equates the value of a …rm to the
cost of creating a variety, which in equilibrium will then be equal to the value of operating
pro…ts. Competition in the goods market thus implies the following free entry conditions:
(hi ) = ci ni

i = N; D; X

9

(27)

From (5-7) and (20-21) it follows immediately that pro…ts for all …rms are proportional to
sales. Thus, using (28) the level of entry costs pins down …rms’size:
Y (hi ) = (

i = N; D; X

1) ci ni

(28)

Combining these expressions with (4),10 (12) and (27), the aggregate budget constraint can
be written as:
PC = `

F=L

(29)

Together with the equilibrium wage rate (19), the previous expression implies that Home
labor e¤ort is univocally determined as a function of the transfer:
`

=`

F=L

(30)

The aggregate budget constraint (29) corresponds to the Home aggregate balance of payments:
nX L ` "
nD + nX "

nX L` "1
n D + n X "1

1

F =0

(31)

The …rst two terms are Home exports less Home imports measured in Home labor units,
both inclusive of trade costs.
Similar expressions hold for the Foreign country. In particular, Foreign labor e¤ort in
equilibrium is:
P C =`

= ` + F=L

(32)

Given ` and ` from (30) and (32), and accounting for (24-26), the system of free entry
conditions (27), their Foreign analogs, and the balance of payments (31) jointly determine
the exchange rate ", the number of varieties nN , nD , nX , and their Foreign analogs as
functions of exogenous variables (L, cN , cD , cX and their Foreign analogs). The price
indexes are then determined according to (17-18) and Foreign analogs, and consumption
levels are determined according to (30) and (32).
In a symmetric equilibrium with L = L and F = 0, our model is solved by ` = ` = 1
and " = 1. Aggregate GDP is therefore equal to L = L . In what follows, it is convenient
to de…ne a measure of trade openness

such as:
1

cD
cX

1+

(33)

depends on both transport costs and the relative …xed cost of entry on export markets. It
is straightforward to show that in a symmetric equilibrium with balanced trade, the ratio
1 0 Note

that Home per-capita employment is ` =

cN nN+1 + cD nD+1 + cX nX+1 =L.

10

of exports (or imports) to GDP is equal to

=(1 + ), and the ratio of exportable varieties

to import-competing varieties in the tradables sector is nX =nD = = .11

3

Domestic and international implications of current
account adjustments

3.1

The macroeconomics of extensive margins

Consider now a current account adjustment experiment among lines similar to Obstfeld and
Rogo¤ (2005, 2007): the Home country makes a transfer

F to the Foreign country. The

experiment abstracts from the speci…c reasons why the country has an external imbalance to
start with,12 and focuses on the macroeconomic equilibrium response after all short-run and
business cycle dynamics are exhausted. As shown by Ferrero et al. (2007) and Faruqee et
al. (2007), the core results of this exercise remain valid, both in qualitative and quantitative
terms, in the context of full-‡edged dynamic simulations.
For su¢ ciently small values of

F=L we can approximate the e¤ects of the transfer

with the equilibrium multipliers in the neighborhood of the symmetric equilibrium. In what
follows, for any generic variable x we adopt the notation:
x
b=

dx=x
dF=L

(34)

The equilibrium implications of the adjustment are shown in Table 1. A current account
adjustment requires Home exports to increase in value relative to Home imports. This
can only be achieved if labor e¤ort increases in the Home country relative to the rest of
the world. The adjustment occurs at both the extensive and the intensive margins, and
the number of varieties produced changes in both the tradables and nontradables sectors.
Along the ‘traditional’intensive margin, terms of trade depreciation allows exporting …rms
to produce and sell more, and import-competing …rms to increase their market share.
Observe that there is exit in the Home nontradables sector, and entry into the nontradables sector in the Foreign country. Also, exportable varieties are created by the Home
1 1 Note

that in the tradables sector, the ratio of export pro…ts to domestic pro…ts (hX )= (hD ) is equal
in the symmetric equilibrium. Similarly, (hN )= (hD ) = 1 n 1+
, and the ratio nN =nD is equal
N =nD
i1=(1+ )
h
to 1 ccD (1 + )
in the symmetric equilibrium.
to

N

1 2 By

way of example, in the past the country’s residents may have borrowed from abroad on expectations
of growth di¤erentials. Given the current stock of external debt, the country faces an adjustment problem
to the extent that these di¤erentials do not materialize ex post — disappearing di¤erentials have indeed
been the subject of vast debate since 2001. Also, liberalization of capital ‡ows may have contributed to
the emergence of U.S. de…cits as a consequence of asymmetric developments of national …nancial markets
(or di¤erences in the level of risks and preferences), causing high precautionary savings in emerging market
economies as in Caballero et al. (2007) and Mendoza et al. (2007).

11

Table 1: Comparative statics

b̀ =

nc
N =

`b =

1
(1 + )

(35)

nc
N =

<0
(1 + ) (1 + )
(1 + )
nc
nc
f[ (1 + ) + ] [1 + (1
)] +
(1 + )g > 0
X =
X =
(1 + )
(1 + )
nc
nc
f[ + (
1)] [1 + (1
)]
(1 + )g
D =
D =
(1 + )
(1 + )
nc
c
[(1 + )(1 + ) 2 ]
D +n
X =

b
"=

(1 + )

[(1 + )(1 + )

[2 + (2

2

]=

1 + )] (1 + ) > 0

(nc
c
D +n
X)

(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)

country, while they are destroyed in the Foreign country. The magnitude of entry and exit
crucially depends on the convexity of the cost function.
The e¤ect of the transfer on the number of import-competing varieties nD is ambiguous.
Speci…cally, nD rises (a) if the size of the nontradables sector is large relative to the tradables
sector ( is close to zero), so that the amount of resources released by the nontradables sector
is enough to produce additional varieties in the import-competing sector; (b) if labor supply
is su¢ ciently elastic ( is close to zero), so that there is no shortage of labor. When these
two conditions fail, exit from the nontradables sector nN and the equilibrium contraction in
leisure are not su¢ cient to compensate for the expansion of the tradable sectors: the number
of import-competing varieties nD has to shrink as well. Observe that in this case the net
e¤ects of the transfer on the size of the Home tradables sector as a whole, i.e. nD + nX ,
depends on the magnitude of the rise in nX relative to the contraction in nD . A su¢ cient
condition for the tradables sector to expand as a whole is that the mass of …rms in the
domestic tradable sector is su¢ ciently high, that is

< 1.

If the tradables sector as a whole expands, then the terms of trade (and the relative
price of labor) must weaken. The terms of trade depreciation is large when trade costs are
high ( and therefore

goes to zero), adjustment at the extensive margin is di¢ cult ( is

12

high), or the Frisch elasticity is low, making employment less responsive to the transfer.
Conversely, the terms of trade depreciation converges to zero — an extreme version of the
case made by Ohlin — when

approaches zero, implying that the …xed cost of entry becomes

approximately constant. This is so despite the presence of trade costs and non traded goods,
which induce home bias in consumption.
It should be emphasized that the transfer of income abroad raises the relative size of
the market for Home exports, and therefore the operating pro…ts of domestic exporters (see
equations (26) and (32)). This in turn creates a clear incentive for …rms to enter the exports
market with new varieties. In the case of constant …xed costs of entry, the terms of trade
need not adjust to switch demand in favor of Home exports, even though overall expenditure
is biased towards domestic goods.13
The impact of the current account adjustment on aggregate consumption C is symmetric
in the two countries: consumption falls in the Home country, and rises abroad, by
b=
C

c = (1
C

)

(

nc
N

1)

+

nc
D

(

nc
(
1) b
"
X
1)(1 + )

b̀ < 0

(42)

The change in aggregate consumption is driven by a contraction in demand for both nontradables and tradables, corresponding to the contraction in the number of varieties produced
by these sectors (recall that nc
X =

nc
X < 0). The demand for imports of course responds

to any rise in their price (b
" > 0). The negative wealth e¤ect from the transfer, however,

also increases labor supply, hence the magnitude of consumption adjustment crucially depends on the labor elasticity. It is more pronounced when a low Frisch elasticity (a high )
dampens the response of Home employment (`) and GDP to the transfer:14
b̀ = GDP
\=

1
1+

(43)

If the …xed costs faced by …rms are seen as investment required to bring new good
varieties on the market, one can note here that the increase in investment exactly o¤sets
the change in GDP as given in the above equation. In fact the transfer a¤ects the relative
price of investing in new varieties and setting up new production lines in the tradables and
nontradables sector. Speci…cally, this relative price falls in the nontradables sector relative
to the export sector by

(nc
N

nc
X ). Instead, the relative price of production remains

1 3 It is worth mentioning that the case of a constant or even decreasing …xed cost is standard in endogenous
growth models with expanding product variety, as analyzed for example in Grossman and Helpman (1991)
and Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995).
1 4 Ju and Wei (2007) focus on the e¤ects of labor market institutions on the dynamics of adjustment: the
more rigid the labor market, the slower the speed of adjustment of the current account towards its long-run
equilibrium.

13

unchanged in our setting, as markups and marginal costs are symmetric across sectors.15
Finally, it is easy to show that:
dU
b
=C
dF=L

b̀ < 0

A transfer unambiguously worsens welfare.

3.2

(44)

The interaction between extensive and intensive margins

Let RER denote the welfare-based real exchange rate, i.e., RER

"P =P . Following the

current account adjustment, this measure of the real exchange rate can in principle move
either way:
2
[ = 1+
RER
1+

b
"+

2

nc
nc
2(1
D
X
+
1 1+

)
1

nc
N

(45)

For reasonable parameters values, the welfare-based real exchange rate does depreciate because of the transfer, i.e. the above expression is positive. But an appreciation scenario is
also possible when entry by Home exporters (and exit by Foreign exporters) is large enough.
This is because the change in the number of varieties raises the Home price index relative
to the Foreign one.
It is worth stressing that the de…nition of the consumer price index employed in evaluating the real exchange rate (45) does not correspond to the de…nition underlying o¢ cial
statistics, as these typically do not account for changes in the number of varieties available
to consumers (see Broda and Weinstein 2007 for an empirical analysis). To obtain a ‘statistical’measure of the real exchange rate depreciation from the above, it is su¢ cient to make
it conditional on a constant number of varieties, that is, the two last terms in (45) should be
set equal to zero. Given that these two terms are negative, the statistical measure of the real
exchange rate would unambiguously record a larger depreciation (associated with the transfer), than our welfare-based measure. The reason is apparent; the fall in the total number
of varieties available to domestic consumers translates into an increase in the welfare-based
consumer price index. For any given change in product prices, this variety-e¤ect on the
CPI would tend to reduce the equilibrium depreciation rate according to (45), but would
be ignored by its statistical counterpart. In fact, abstracting from changes in the number of
varieties, the real exchange rate would become proportional to the terms of trade, depending on the degree of home bias (according to the evidence, the statistical measure of real
exchange rates and terms of trade tend to move closely together). The rate of depreciation
1 5 The estimates by Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2005, 2007) point to the need for a strong adjustment in the
price of nontradables — up to 3 to 5 times larger than the terms of trade. However, in episodes of dollar depreciation associated with current account adjustment in the 1980s there is little or no evidence of
signi…cant changes in internal relative prices.

14

according to the statistical measure of the real exchange rate is therefore comprised between
the rate of depreciation in the terms of trade, and the rate of change in the welfare-based
real exchange rate.
The interaction between adjustment at the extensive and the intensive margin is crucial
to our understanding of the movement of the real exchange rate (45) and other macroeconomic variables. To analyze this interaction, it is useful to rewrite Home exports X and
imports M as
L ` "
nD + nX "

X = nX

M = nX

1

L` "1
n D + n X "1

(46)

Strictly speaking, the extensive margin of exports is given by the change in the number
of exportable varieties nX (the …rst term on the right hand side). However, changes in
quantities (i.e. the intensive margin, corresponding to the terms in parenthesis on the
right hand side) also depend on the number of Foreign import-competing varieties, and
the number of Home exporters itself. These a¤ect the size of the sales by each individual
exporter, via their general equilibrium e¤ect on total demand for Home products in the
Foreign market.
The general equilibrium interaction between the two margins makes the distinction between the two (especially from an empirical point of view) quite a di¢ cult task. To see why,
write the response of Home exports and imports to a transfer distinguishing between the
two margins, labelled ‘extensive’and ‘intensive’according to usual conventions:
b
X

=

c =
M

nc
X
|{z}

extensive

nc
| {zX}

extensive

+

1
1+
|

1
1+
|

h

nc
D

h

i
nc
" + (1 + ) b̀
X + ( + )b
{z
}
intensive

nc
D

nc
X +(
{z

intensive

i
1)b
" + (1 + ) b̀
}

(47)

(48)

Our model has sharp predictions about the …rst term on the right hand side: the intensive
margin is positive as long as the cost function of entry is convex ( > 0). With a transfer,
both the number of exported varieties and the sales abroad per product variety rise. Also,
there are important implications about the conventionally measured intensive margin. As
apparent from the expression above, the term in square brackets on the right hand side of
(47) can be further decomposed into di¤erent multipliers. These consist of the change in
the level of competition on the export market (captured by nc
D

nc
X ), the change in the

terms of trade, and the wealth e¤ect of the transfer on labor supply.

In light of these theoretical considerations, the extensive margin of exports adjustment

should actually be re-de…ned as to encompass all the e¤ects (direct and indirect) from entry

15

and exit of new varieties. As a result, the label ‘extensive’should include the …rst two terms
in the square brackets on the right hand side of the export equation; the label ‘intensive’
should residually include only the last two terms. It is worth stressing that the adjustment at
the intensive margin also comes in two parts: exports of each variety increase because of the
terms of trade depreciation, and expenditure in the Foreign country rises due to the e¤ect of
the transfer. This new classi…cation better captures the general equilibrium implications of
changes in the number of varieties predicted by theory, but its implementability in empirical
studies is bound to be highly demanding.

3.3

An economy with a …xed number of varieties

How would our results above compare with the e¤ects of a transfer in an economy in which
the number of goods (both local and exported) is exogenously given? To address this issue,
we note that under the assumption of a …xed set of goods, the ratio of exported to local
varieties nX =nD =

in our economy is constant.16 Then the terms of trade response to

the transfer is:
(1 + ) [(1 + ) (1 + ) 2 ]
(49)
(2
1 + ) (1 + )
The terms of trade change is unambiguously larger in an economy in which no adjustment
b
"=

occurs at the extensive margin.17
Interestingly, the e¤ect of a transfer on GDP and employment is identical in the two
economies: labor rises exactly by the same amount across model speci…cations. Similarly,
for reasonable parameters values, the fall in consumption is also comparable. In the latter
case, however, similar quantitative e¤ects on consumption may correspond to quite di¤erent
transmission mechanisms. In the economy with a …xed number of varieties, consumption
falls by:
b̀
b
"
(50)
1+
The fall in consumption is due to relative price and wealth e¤ects. When the number of
b=
C

c =
C

goods varieties is endogenous, instead, consumption also responds to changes in production
patterns. As discussed above, part of the fall in real consumption can be attributed to the
equilibrium contraction in the number of goods available to the consumers through imports
or local production (nontradables and possibly importables). As households value variety,
adverse e¤ects from changes in the availability of di¤erentiated products and from terms of
trade deterioration can compensate each other in consumption (and welfare) terms.
1 6 This case corresponds to our economy when
case of insurmountable barriers to entry.

goes to in…nity. Very high values of

correspond to the

1 7 The implied elasticity of the real exchange rate to the transfer is, using parameters explained in section
4.1, around 3, an order of magnitude larger than the one estimated by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004).

16

4

Quantitative simulations

In this section we calibrate our model and provide some basic quantitative elements for
an analysis of the U.S. current account, complementing our comparative statics analysis
above. In Section 3 we started from a symmetric balanced equilibrium and engineered a
current account surplus to match the transfer to foreign creditors. In this section we account
for country-size asymmetries. The initial conditions are such that the Home country runs a
trade de…cit, and we consider the e¤ects of a transfer that restores the balanced equilibrium.
The approach is therefore similar to the one adopted by Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2007). As
in the latter paper, we also assume that prices are ‡exible. However we do not assume a
…xed output, allowing for an endogenous response of employment, both total and across
sectors. We also analyze the macro response for di¤erent degrees of economic ‘‡exibility’,
in terms of creation and destruction of goods varieties. In this respect, we should make it
clear that the simulations below are not meant to provide a framework for a critical ‘sudden
stop’ scenario — which is arguably more plausible for small emerging markets than for a
large economy. On the contrary, we want to provide a rough assessment of the relative price
and macroeconomic adjustment associated with a correction of trade imbalances over a time
horizon in which new …rms and product varieties can be created.

4.1

The choice of parameters

We normalize the size of the world economy to 200 and choose L = 54 and L = 146 to
roughly approximate the weight of the U.S. economy in world GDP, about 27 percent in
2006. Consistently, we set F =

3:5 in the initial equilibrium, which yields a Home country

de…cit of roughly 6.5 of U.S. GDP (corresponding to the U.S. de…cit in 2006), and consider
the e¤ects of a transfer

F = 3:5:

In the baseline calibration the elasticity of substitution between product varieties

is

set equal to 2, a value consistent with macro studies of current account adjustment. We
also experiment with

= 5, a value suggested by trade studies. Trade costs

are set at

20 percent following Anderson and van Wincoop (2004). Following Obstfeld and Rogo¤
(2007) we take the share of tradables to be 25% of consumption (e.g.

= 0:25), although

in sensitivity analysis we consider the implications of values as high as

= 2=3.

We normalize cN and cN = 1. We set cX such that the ratio of Home exports to Home
GDP is 11 percent (corresponding to U.S. values in 2006). Similarly, in the rest of the world
cX is such that Foreign exports as a ratio of Foreign GDP are equal to 6.6 percent.18 In
1 8 The

latter value is equal to U.S. imports from the rest of the world in 2006 (about $2280 billion) divided

17

our model the choice of cD and cD is not consequential for our analysis, in the sense that
changes in these parameters only a¤ect the ratios nX =nD and nX =nD without modifying
relative pro…ts across sectors, thus leaving unchanged the equilibrium allocation of resources
and agents’response to macroeconomic shocks.
The parameter

, the measure of convexity in the cost function for the creation of

new varieties, is directly related to the relative importance of extensive margin adjustment.
Hummels and Klenow (2005) show that the extensive margin accounts for two-thirds of the
greater exports of larger economies. In our model, the latter e¤ect is equal to @ ln X=@ ln L =
1=(1 + ) = 2=3, suggesting

= 0:5. Other empirical estimates suggest a smaller role for the

extensive margin. In sensitivity analysis we experiment with more conservative parameters
such as
and

= 1 (i.e. a quadratic cost function corresponding to a 50 percent extensive margin)

= 12 (corresponding to the case in which adjustment at the extensive margin accounts

for a small fraction of exports). We also consider an (admittedly unrealistic) calibration with
very close to zero, to emphasize the di¤erences between a model in which all adjustment
occurs at the extensive margin relative to the conventional models in which all adjustment
occurs at the intensive margin.
Finally, most micro studies using microdata on wages, hours worked and various household characteristics, suggest a low estimate of the Frisch elasticity (1= ). For men, most
estimates are in the range 0 to 0.5 (see for example Heckman and MaCurdy 1980, MaCurdy
1981, Altonji 1986, Blundell and MaCurdy 1999). Browning et al. (1999) note however that
these microeconomic estimates are often incompatible with real business cycle models that
use values in the range of 3 or higher. In our baseline parameterization we choose

= 1,

following Gali, Gertler and López-Salido (2007). In sensitivity analysis we consider the cases
= 0 (in…nite elasticity that corresponds to the Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988) model
of indivisible labor) and

4.2

= 5.

Numerical results

Table 2 reports our numerical results. The table compares our models with entry (columns 1
through 8), with a speci…cation in which product varieties are given and the current account
adjustment only occurs at the intensive margin (the last four columns). For each variable
in the Table 2, we report the percentage change resulting from current account adjustment.
Our baseline parameterization is displayed in the …rst row of the Table (Benchmark ). A
transfer from the Home country to the rest of the world is associated with an 11.5 percent
by world GDP excluding the U.S. in 2006 ($47800 billion minus $13000 billion).

18

Table 2: Numerical simulations

Extensive Margin Model
nD

Benchmark

nN

nX

nX

Fixed Varieties Model

"

RER

`

C

"

RER

`

C

11:5

2:1

24:4

13:1

6:4

1:1

3:3

6:8

21:9

17:0

3:3

6:2

=5

12:9

2:1

23:3

11:7

2:5

1:1

3:3

4:1

7:8

6:2

3:3

4:3

=0

16:1

0

26:9

12:6

7:4

4:8

6:9

1:8

25:2

19:5

6:9

3:6

=5

8:7

3:5

22:8

13:4

5:9

1:2

1:1

9:8

19:8

15:4

1:1

2:8

0:4

3:5

18:5

15:6

4:2

2:1

1:1

9:4

15:7

12:4

1:1

7:3

=0

21:6

3:2

35:5

15:8

0:0

4:4

3:3

6:3

21:9

17:0

3:3

6:2

= :35

13:4

2:4

26:9

13:9

4:9

0:2

3:3

6:7

21:9

17:0

3:3

6:2

=1

7:6

1:6

18:4

10:9

9:9

4:4

3:3

6:9

21:9

17:0

3:3

6:2

= 12

0:8

0:2

2:9

2:2

19:9

14:8

3:3

6:4

21:9

17:0

3:3

6:2

= 5; = 2=3

increase19 in the (varieties produced by the) import-competing sector nD , a 2.1 percent
contraction in the nontradables sector nN and a 24.4 percent expansion in the export sector
nX (abroad, the export sector nX contracts by 13.1 percent). The terms of trade (and
the relative price of labor ") depreciate by 6.4 percent, while the CPI-based real exchange
rate RER depreciates by only 1.1 percent, re‡ecting the interaction between intensive and
extensive margins. In the absence of …rms’entry (see the last four columns of the Table) the
adjustment relies exclusively on movements of relative prices: the terms of trade depreciate
almost 3.5 times more in the …xed varieties model than in the extensive margin model, and
the extent of RER depreciation is more than 15 times!
The transfer is associated with an expansion of employment and GDP in the Home
country (labor e¤ort ` increases by 3.3 percent), but external demand crowds out internal
demand and Home consumption C falls by 6.8 percent. As a result, welfare unambiguously
falls in the Home country. Welfare also falls in the ‘…xed-variety’model, as this also predicts a
1 9 It is possible to consider scenarios in which n
D actually falls due to the e¤ect of the transfer. For
instance, in our case this happens when the Frisch elasticity is su¢ ciently low and the share of tradables is
particularly (and implausibly) high: see the results reported in row = 5; = 2=3.

19

fall in consumption and a rise in labor e¤ort. In the baseline calibration, it is straightforward
to compare welfare losses across models, since labor movements are identical whether or not
the extensive margin is operational. Thus, what matters is the fall in consumption, which
is larger in the extensive margin model (6.8 percent) than in the …xed varieties model (6.2
percent).
These …ndings suggest that ‡uctuations in currency values and growth slowdowns, much
emphasized in the traditional literature on current account rebalancing, are only imperfect
gauges of the social costs associated with the adjustment process. It is certainly possible to
envision soft-landing scenarios of current account rebalancing involving small exchange rate
depreciations and above-average GDP growth, but they are nevertheless associated with
larger welfare losses than alternative scenarios in which relative prices play a much more
conspicuous role.20
This point is subject to a number of caveats, stressed by our sensitivity analysis. When
varieties are relatively more substitutable in global consumption ( = 5), the welfare loss is
stronger in the ‘…xed-variety’model than in our setup. The parameterization of

does not

in‡uence the response of the labor e¤ort, but mostly the change in consumption: namely,
the higher is

, the smaller is the loss of consumption. This is especially relevant in the

extensive margin model (the fall in C goes from 6.8 to 4.1 percent in the extensive margin
model and from 6.2 to 4.3 percent in the ‘…xed-variety’ model). With a large

, small

equilibrium movements in relative prices can have a large impact on trade values. While
this is true both in the extensive margin and the …xed varieties models, the reduction in
the predicted exchange rate depreciations of " and RER is much more evident in the latter
model (in fact, in the extensive margin model the depreciation of RER is the same regardless
of the choice of elasticity).
Another economy in which welfare worsens more in the …xed varieties model than in the
extensive margin model is one in which the Frisch elasticity is high ( is low). Consider the
row

= 0 in Table 2. As labor supply is in…nitely elastic, the transfer does not require

any contraction in the nontradables sector (nc
N = 0). Exchange rates adjust more than in
the Benchmark cases across models, and this is especially relevant for the extensive margin

model. In both models, labor e¤ort increases more than twice relative to Benchmark. Con-

sumption falls 3.6 percent in the …xed-variety model, but only 1.8 percent in the extensive
margin model.
The parameter

is key to our numerical simulations and welfare comparisons. Consider

2 0 These welfare considerations are particularly relevant when
losses associated with = 5 in Table 2.

20

is high: see for instance the consumption

the last four rows of Table 2. When

= 0 the exchange rate does not move at all in

the extensive margin model (b
" = 0) and all adjustment occurs through the reallocation of
product varieties, in strong contrast with the traditional view captured by the …xed-variety
model. Raising the value of

brings our model with the extensive margin progressively closer

to the …xed-variety model. Interestingly, in terms of welfare analysis the polar cases
and

=0

! 1 yield virtually similar outcomes (compare the consumption losses under the two

parameterizations, noting that changes in labor e¤ort are una¤ected by ). Interestingly,
the welfare di¤erence across the two models is non monotonic in : when

= 0 the loss of

Home consumption and welfare in the extensive margin model is close to the …xed varieties
model. When

goes to one, the loss of welfare in the extensive margin model is signi…cantly

larger than in the alternative model. When

increases above one, the gap between the two

welfare losses shrinks, and disappears completely when

5

is su¢ ciently high.

Conclusion

In a world of increasing integration of markets for manufacturing goods and services, a
larger share of trade in di¤erentiated products should be expected to a¤ect substantially
the relation between trade and equilibrium relative price movements. In this paper we have
investigated this issue by revisiting the classical model of international transfer, in light of
the current debate on the sustainability of the current account de…cits run by the U.S. since
the mid 1990s.
A transfer-model approach to the analysis of current account rebalancing has many
important advantages. It clari…es the macroeconomic implications of intersectoral allocation
of resources, as well as of the interplay between domestic and international relative prices.
Traditional models that emphasize the role of the elasticities of substitution across goods
predict large swings in the domestic relative price of nontradables. In our model, domestic
relative prices are pinned down by symmetry in equilibrium marginal costs and markups
across sectors. Adjustment thus requires changes in relative sectoral output. While our
analysis abstracts from dynamic considerations, it has the advantage to single out the basic
components of the transmission mechanism that are bound to shape the macroeconomics of
transfers even in full-‡edged dynamic models.
Namely, to the extent that market integration is far from perfect, a large transfer does
a¤ect the domestic macroeconomic process in fundamental ways. Multisector models encompassing extensive margins, such as ours, call attention to market structure and the costs
of product di¤erentiation as key determinants not only of the type of adjustment (prices
vs. quantities) but also of their welfare implications. The real exchange rate movements

21

predicted by our model, either with or without adjustment at the extensive margin, are
nonetheless small compared to historical records. Over time, exchange rates have vastly
erred on either side of purchasing power parity across the main currency areas of the world.
Large and persistent swings have systematically eluded theoretical explanations stressing
fundamentals. Since the multiple roles of the exchange rate as equilibrium relative price in
both the product and …nancial markets are not su¢ ciently understood, mapping the results
of a theoretical analysis of transfers into predictions about international price movements
cannot escape being subject to important caveats.

22

References
[1] Altonji, J.G., 1986, “Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro
Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), pp. 176-215.
[2] Anderson, J. and E. van Wincoop, 2004, “Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic Literature, 42 (3), pp. 691-751.
[3] Barro R. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth, Mc. Graw Hill.
[4] Blundell, R. and T.E. MaCurdy, 1999, “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics Vol.
3A, pp. 1559-1695.
[5] Brakman S., and C. van Marrewijk, 1995, “Transfers, Returns to Scale, Tied Aid and
Monopolistic Competition”, Journal of Development Economics 47, pp. 333-354.
[6] Brakman S., and C. van Marrewijk, 1998, The Economics of International Transfers,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[7] Browning, M., L. P. Hansen, and J. Heckman, 1999, “Micro Data and General Equilibrium Models,” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics
Vol. 1A, pp. 543-633.
[8] Broda, C. D. Weinstein, 2004, “Variety Growth and World Welfare.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94 (2), pp. 139-144.
[9] Broda, C. and D. Weinstein, 2006, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 21(2), pp. 541-85.
[10] Broda, C. and D. Weinstein, 2007, “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and
Price Implications,” NBER Working Paper No. 13041.
[11] Caballero, R., E. Farhi and P.-O. Gourinchas, 2007, “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global
Imbalances’and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[12] Corsetti, G., P. Martin and P. Pesenti, 2007, “Productivity, Terms of Trade, and the
‘Home Market E¤ect”’, Journal of International Economics, 73 (1) pp. 99-127.
[13] Debaere P. and S. Mostashari , 2005, “Do Tari¤s Matter for the Extensive Margin of
International Trade? An Empirical Analysis", CEPR Discussion Paper 5260

23

[14] Dekle, R., J. Eaton and S. Kortum, 2007, "Unbalanced Trade", American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 97, No. 2.
[15] Faruqee, H., D. Laxton, D. Muir and P. Pesenti, 2007, “Smooth Landing or Crash?
Model-Based Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebalancing”, in R. Clarida (ed.),
G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 377-456.
[16] Ferrero, A., M. Gertler, and L. Svensson, 2007, “Current Account Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” in J. Gali and M. Gertler (eds.), International Dimensions of Monetary
Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
[17] Fratzscher M., L. Juvenaly and L. Sarno, 2007, “Asset Prices, Exchange Rates and the
Current Account,” European Central Bank Working Paper No.790.
[18] Freund, C. and F. Warnock, 2007, “Current Account De…cits in Industrial Countries:
The Bigger They Are, the Harder They Fall?”in R. Clarida (ed.), G7 Current Account
Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
pp.133-168.
[19] Gagnon, J. E., 2003, “Productive Capacity, Product Varieties, and the Elasticities
Approach to the Trade Balance,”Board of Governors International Finance Discussion
Paper No.781.
[20] Gali, J., M. Gertler and D. López-Salido Markups, 2007, “Markups, Gaps, and the
Welfare Costs of Economic Fluctuations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1),
44-59.
[21] Grossman, G and E. Helpman, 1991, Innovation and Growth, MIT Press.
[22] Hansen, G., 1985, “Intertemporal Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 16(3), pp. 309-337.
[23] Heckman, J. and T.E. MaCurdy, 1980, “A Life Cycle Model of Female Labour Supply,”
Review of Economic Studies, 47(1), pp. 47-74.
[24] Hummels D. and Peter J. Klenow, 2005, “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports, American Economic Review, 95(3), pp. 704-723.
[25] International Monetary Fund, 2006, World Economic Outlook. Financial Systems and
Economic Cycles, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, September.

24

[26] International Monetary Fund, 2007, World Economic Outlook. Spillovers and Cycles in
the Global Economy, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, April.
[27] Ju, J. and S-J. Wei, 2007, “Current Account Adjustment: Some New Theory and Evidence,”National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13388, September.
[28] Kehoe, T. and K. Ruhl, 2003, “How Important is the New Goods Margin in International Trade?”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota.
[29] Keynes, J. M., 1919, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, London, UK: MacMillan.
[30] Keynes, J. M., 1929a, “The German Transfer Problem,” The Economic Journal 39,
pp.1-7.
[31] Keynes, J. M., 1929b, “The Reparations Problem: A Discussion. II. A Rejoinder,”The
Economic Journal 39, pp.179-82.
[32] Keynes, J. M., 1929c, “Mr. Keynes’Views on the Transfer Problem. III. A Reply,”The
Economic Journal 39, pp.404-8.
[33] Krugman, P., 1989, “Di¤erences in Income Elasticities and Trends in Real Exchange
Rates.” European Economic Review 33, pp. 1031-1054.
[34] Krugman, P. and M. Obstfeld, 2006, International Economics. Theory and Policy,
Boston: Addison Wesley.
[35] Lane, P. and G. Milesi-Ferretti, 2004, “The Transfer Problem Revisited: Net Foreign
Assets and Real Exchange Rates,”Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(4), pp. 841857.
[36] MaCurdy, T.E., 1981, “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting,”
Journal of Political Economy, 89(6), pp. 1059-85.
[37] Mendoza, E., V. Quadrini and V. Rios-Rull, 2007, “Financial Integration, Financial
Deepness and Global Imbalances,” University of Maryland Working Paper.
[38] Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogo¤, 2005, “Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange
Rate Adjustments.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp. 67-123.
[39] Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogo¤, 2007, “The Unsustainable US Current Account Position
Revisited,” in R. Clarida (ed.), G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and
Adjustment, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp.339-376.

25

[40] Ohlin, B., 1929a, “The Reparations Problem: A Discussion; Transfer Di¢ culties, Real
and Imagined,” The Economic Journal 39, pp.172-83.
[41] Ohlin B., 1929b, “Mr. Keynes’ Views on the Transfer Problem. II. A Rejoinder from
Professor Ohlin,” The Economic Journal 39, pp.400-4.
[42] Rauch, James, “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International Economics 48 (1999):7–35.
[43] Rogerson, R., 1988, “Intertemporal Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 21(1), pp. 3-16.
[44] Ruhl, K., 2005, “The Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics,” Working Paper,
University of Texas, Austin.
[45] Tang, L., 2006, “Communication Costs and Trade of Di¤erentiated Goods”, Review of
International Economics, 14 (1), 54-68.
[46] Yi, Kei-Mu, 2003, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade”,
Journal of Political Economy, p.52-102.

26

