                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ESTIMATING CROSS-COUNTRY DIFFERENCES IN PRODUCT QUALITY

                                         Juan Carlos Hallak
                                           Peter K. Schott

                                        Working Paper 13807
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13807


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




Special thanks to Alan Deardorff for many fruitful discussions. We also thank Steve Berry, Keith Chen,
Rob Feenstra, James Harrigan, Justin McCrary, Phil Haile, Amit Khandelwal, Keith Maskus, Peter
Neary, Serena Ng, Ben Polak, Marshall Reinsdorff, Matthew Shapiro, Beata Javornik, Walter Sosa
Escudero, and seminar participants at Chicago, Dartmouth, Di Tella, EIIT, IMF, LSE, Maryland, Michigan,
Microeconomics of Growth Network, NBER, Penn State, Princeton, San Andrés, UCLA, UCSD and
Yale. Alejandro Molnar and Santiago Sautua provided superb research assistance. This research is
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants No. 0241474 and 0550190. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Juan Carlos Hallak and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Cross-Country Differences in Product Quality
Juan Carlos Hallak and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 13807
February 2008
JEL No. F1,F2,F4

                                                ABSTRACT

We develop a method for decomposing countries' observed export prices into quality versus quality-
adjusted-price components using information contained in their trade balances. Holding observed export
prices constant, countries with surpluses are inferred to offer higher quality than countries running
deficits. Our method accounts for variation in trade balances induced by horizontal and vertical differentiation.
We use our method to examine manufacturing product quality among the world's top exporters from
1989 to 2003. We find that the initial quality gap between high- and low-income countries is smaller
than their initial income gap, and that the former narrows considerably faster over time.


Juan Carlos Hallak
Universidad de San Andrés
Departamento de Economía
Vito Dumas 284 (B1644BID)
Victoria, Provincia de Buenos Aires
ARGENTINA
and NBER
jchallak@udesa.edu.ar

Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu
                E C     -C      D   P             Q                    2


1.        Introduction

         Theoretical and empirical research increasingly point to the importance of product
quality in international trade and economic development.1 Unfortunately, relatively little
is known about how countries’ product quality varies across time, or how it is influenced by
trade liberalization and other aspects of globalization. A major impediment to research in
this area is lack of data — reliable estimates of export quality for a wide range of countries,
industries and years do not exist. In this paper, we introduce a method for obtaining such
estimates that incorporates information about world demand for countries’ products.
    Researchers often react to the absence of information about countries’ product quality
by constructing ad hoc proxies, the most common of which is observed export prices (unit
values).2 This measure is unsatisfactory, however, because export prices may vary for
reasons other than quality. Chinese shirts might be cheaper than Italian shirts in the U.S.
market because of lower quality, but they might also sell at a discount because China has
lower production costs or an undervalued exchange rate. If consumers value variety and
goods are horizontally as well as vertically differentiated, high-cost producers can survive
in the U.S. market even in the face of cost disadvantages.
    Our method for identifying countries’ export quality involves decomposing observed
export prices into quality versus quality-adjusted-price components. We define quality to
be any tangible or intangible attribute of a good that increases all consumers’ valuation
of it. Countries’ product quality relative to a numeraire country is identified by combin-
ing data on their observed export prices with information about global demand for their
products contained in their trade balance vis a vis the world. The intuition behind our
identification is straightforward and has been used extensively in the industrial organiza-
tion literature: because consumers are assumed to care about price relative to quality in
choosing among products, two countries with the same export prices but different global
trade balances must have products with different levels of quality. Among countries with
identical export prices, the country with the higher trade balance is revealed to possess
     1
     Flam and Helpman (1987) is representative of a line of theoretical research studying the influence of
product quality on international trade. Empirically, cross-country and time-series variation in product
quality has been linked to firms’ export success (Brooks 2006, Verhoogen 2007), countries’ skill premia
(Verhoogen 2007), quantitative import restrictions (Aw and Roberts 1986, Feenstra 1988) and trade
patterns (Schott 2004, Hallak 2006). The contribution of quality growth to macroeconomic growth is
investigated theoretically by Grossman and Helpman (1991) and empirically by Hummels and Klenow
(2005).
   2
     See, for example, Schott (2008). More generally, unit value differences figure prominently in surveys
of countries’ “quality competitiveness” (e.g., Aiginger 1998, Verma 2002, Ianchovichina et al. 2003, and
Fabrizio et al. 2007) and also are often used to distinguish horizontal from vertical intra-industry trade
flows (e.g., Abed-el-Rahman 1991 and Aiginger 1997).
            E C         -C      D   P             Q                    3


higher product quality.3
   A major contribution of the paper is to generalize this intuition to a setting where
countries are also allowed to differ in the number of unobserved horizontal varieties they
export in each product category (e.g., red versus blue men’s long-sleeve cotton shirts), a
standard assumption in trade models. Accounting for unobserved horizontal differentia-
tion is difficult because it introduces an additional factor besides quality that can increase
consumer demand for a country’s products. All else equal, consumer love of variety im-
plies that countries producing a larger number of varieties in a product category export
larger quantities and therefore exhibit higher trade surpluses. Unless the number of hor-
izontal varieties that countries export is accounted for, this increase in net trade will be
interpreted, erroneously, as higher product quality. Our approach assumes a negative
relationship between quality-adjusted prices and the number of varieties countries export.
We justify this assumption by appealing to theoretical findings in Romalis (2004) and
Bernard et al. (2007) that demonstrate that countries’ comparative advantage sectors
exhibit both relatively low prices — due to relatively low factor costs — and a relatively
high number of varieties — due to disproportionate use of factor inputs.4
    Using countries’ net trade with the rest of the world to identify consumer demand
imposes an important practical constraint on empirical implementation of our method.
Currently, the most reliable time-series data on countries’ trade balances are recorded
according to relatively coarse industries relative to the much more disaggregate products
(e.g., men’s long-sleeve cotton shirts) at which some countries’ export prices can be ob-
served. To deal with this constraint we derive a theoretically appropriate price index
that aggregates countries’ product-level export prices up to the industry level. We refer
to this index as the “Impure Price Index”. We term it “impure” because its prices are
“contaminated” by quality. This index has the useful property of being separable into
quality versus quality-adjusted-price components. It is developed under the assumption
that countries’ export quality is constant across products within industries. This assump-
tion creates an “aggregation trade-off”: while product quality is more likely to be constant
across products the more disaggregate the industry, data on countries’ global net trade
   3
     The use of market shares to infer unobserved consumer valuation is well-established in the industrial
organization and index number literatures (e.g. Berry 1994 and Bils 2004, respectively). Here, countries’
net trade with the rest of the world (conditional on trade costs) is a natural expression of their “market
share”.
   4
     Feenstra (1994) outlines a method for computing import price indexes that accounts for the intro-
duction of new product varieties (see also Broda and Weinstein 2006). Given its focus on changes in
prices over time, that methodology requires no knowledge of cross-sectional variation in the number of
varieties countries export within product categories so long as that number is constant over time for a
subset of countries. Here, we allow the number of varieties to vary across all countries.
           E C      -C      D   P         Q                 4


becomes more scarce as well as more susceptible to measurement error. Use of disaggre-
gate industries may also be problematic if countries’ use of intermediate inputs straddles
the industries at which quality is being estimated. Separate estimations of quality for
apparel and textiles, for example, might not capture the fact that some countries import
textiles to produce apparel. As a result, textile and apparel quality might be under- and
over-estimated in these countries.
    We show that even though the Impure Price Index comparing two countries’ export
prices is unobservable, it is bounded by observable Paasche and Laspeyres indexes defined
over their common exports to a third country (e.g., the United States). This result
anchors a two-stage strategy for inferring countries’ export quality. In the first stage, we
use the large set of bilateral Paasche and Laspeyres bounds (e.g., Germany versus China,
Swizterland versus Germany, France versus Thailand, etc.) to estimate the Impure Price
Index for each country-industry-year relative to a common numeraire. In the second
stage, we use data on countries’ global net trade in the industry to strip away variation
in quality-adjusted (or “pure”) prices from the estimated Impure Price Indexes. This
procedure yields estimates of quality that vary by country, industry and year.
    We use our method to estimate manufacturing quality for the world’s 43 largest ex-
porters over the period 1989 to 2003. The estimated Quality Indexes reveal substantial
variation in quality levels across countries in any given year as well as across years. We
find that relative export quality for overall manufacturing increases most dramatically for
Ireland, Malaysia and Singapore over the sample period, and falls most dramatically for
Hong Kong, New Zealand and Australia. Among countries that begin the sample period
in the top tercile of quality, Japan and Spain experience the largest (relative) declines. We
also show that our estimates of export quality and their evolution over time can deviate
substantially from estimates of export quality based on raw export prices. Indeed, we find
that our Quality Indexes and raw export prices move in opposite directions for one third
of the countries in our sample, including some of those with the largest increases in our
quality estimates. Finally, dividing our sample in halves according to income per capita
in 1989 (high versus low), we find that the mean quality gap between the two groups is
initially smaller than the gap in mean per capita income, and that the mean quality gap
narrows considerably faster.
    This paper’s focus on cross-sectional variation in product quality differentiates it from a
very large index number literature devoted to constructing quality-adjusted cost-of-living
indexes. Here, rather than measure quality changes in bundles of products purchased over
time, we identify quality variation over simultaneously purchased bundles from different
            E C        -C      D   P            Q                    5


sources of supply. Since we cannot observe products’ underlying attributes, we are also
unable to make use of standard strategies — such as hedonic pricing — that link prod-
uct attributes to specific dimensions of quality.5 Our method complements such efforts,
however, because its use of publicly available trade data permits estimation of product
quality across a broad range of countries, industries and years for which surveys of product
characteristics may be unavailable or prohibitively expensive to collect.6
    Our analysis is more closely related to previous attempts in the international trade
literature to deal with potential variation in unit values not entirely due to variation in
product quality. Hallak (2006), for example, assumes a monotonic relationship between
per-capita income and “pure prices” at the sector level while, in the closest precedent
to this paper, Hummels and Klenow (2005) use import prices and quantities to make
inferences about the cross-sectional elasticity of quality with respect to country income and
size. Neither of these papers, however, permits explicit estimation of product quality by
country, sector, and year, as is done in this paper.7 Our approach is also different from an
earlier strand of literature primarily interested in analyzing the effect of import quotas on
the quality composition of trade (e.g. Aw and Roberts 1986, Boorstein and Feenstra 1987,
and Feenstra 1988). In this literature, import quality increases when the composition of
imports shifts toward high-quality product categories. This literature therefore adopts
an across-product-category view of quality variation and quality upgrading in contrast to
the within-product-category view pursued here.
    Estimates of countries’ export quality will obviously find use in testing models of in-
ternational specialization and development. They may also benefit other fields, such as
productivity and growth, where, despite the existence of an influential theoretical litera-
ture linking the production of quality to economic growth (e.g., Grossman and Helpman
1991, Aghion and Howitt 1992), empirical investigation of this link is scarce due to the
unavailability of reliable measures of quality. Controlling for product quality is also cru-
cial for computing the import and export price indexes used to deflate national accounts
aggregates. Current estimates of “real GDP” in the Penn World Tables, for example,
deflate nominal GDP using a purchasing-power-parity index based on final expenditure
data. As noted by Feenstra et al. (2007), this adjustment likely does not appropriately
   5
     Feenstra (1995), for example, demonstrates how information on product attributes can be used to
establish bounds on the exact hedonic price index.
   6
     The International Price Program of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics constructs import and export
price indexes by combining survey data on firms’ prices with firms’ assessments about changes in the
quality of their products over time (Alterman et al. 1999).
   7
     More recently, Khandelwal (2007) has developed a method for estimating quality based on the as-
sumption of a nested logit demand system.
            E C        -C      D   P            Q                   6


capture changes in countries’ production over time because it ignores the terms of trade.
The ability to net quality out of countries’ import and export price indexes before per-
forming the terms-of-trade correction would enhance the reporting of national accounts.
Development of country-sector specific quality-adjusted price indexes is also likely to be
useful in the labor economics literature. The distributional consequences of international
trade implied by the Stolper-Samuelson theorem, for example, cannot be properly iden-
tified if the import and export price changes used to empirically assess the theorem’s
relevance do not properly account for changes in countries’ product quality.8
     The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines our assumptions about consumer
demand and introduces the Impure and Pure Price indexes that will be the focus of our
analysis. Section 3 shows that the unobservable Impure Price Index is bounded by
observable Paasche and Laspeyres indexes. Section 4 derives the relationship between
the Pure Price Index and countries’ sectoral net trade. Sections 5 through 7 describe
the application of our method to identifying export quality trends for 43 large trading
countries over the period 1989 to 2003. Section 8 concludes.

2.   Preferences and Price Indexes

    This section describes the preference structure underlying our analysis and formally
introduces the price and quality indexes that are the focus of our method.

2.1. Preferences

   Goods are classified into product categories, which are in turn classified into sectors.
Sectors are indexed by s = 1, ..., S, while product categories (within sectors) are indexed
by z = 1, ..., Zs . In our empirical investigation below, product categories correspond to
ten-digit Harmonized System (HS) categories, the finest possible level of aggregation in
trade statistics.
   There are C countries, indexed by c = 1, ..., C. The theoretical framework presented
below focuses on one sector, s. The analysis for other sectors to which the method is
applied is analogous.
   Preferences are common across countries, and are represented by a two-tier utility
function that incorporates consumer love of variety. The upper tier is Cobb-Douglas, with
  8
    See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) for a discussion of the empirical validity of the Stolper-Samuelson
mechanism.
              E C        -C       D   P              Q                      7


expenditure shares bs for each sector s. The lower tier has the following CES form9 ,10
                                         σ σ−1
                                               s
                               σ s −1
                                             s

     us =          (ξ z λcs xcz ) σs ncz         , σs > 1.                              (1)
                 c   z

In the sub-utility function (1), ncz is the number of horizontally differentiated varieties of
product z produced by country c, xcz is the quantity consumed per variety, and σ s is the
elasticity of substitution between varieties. We note that by indexing product categories
instead of varieties, we implicitly assume symmetry across varieties in the same prod-
uct category. The utility function includes two shifters, ξ z and λcs . The first shifter, ξ z ,
varies across product categories but is constant across countries for a particular product
category. It captures consumers’ valuation of the essential characteristics common to the
heterogeneous varieties of a particular product category. Consumers, for example, might
have a higher preference for table varieties than chair varieties. The second shifter, λcs ,
varies across countries and sectors, but is constant across products within a particular
country and sector. It represents product quality and captures the combined effect of all
product characteristics, other than price and those already captured by ξ z , on consumers’
valuation of a good. Product quality encompasses both physical attributes (e.g., durabil-
ity) and intangible attributes (e.g., product image due to advertising). These assumptions
are formalized as follows:

       Assumption 1: ξ cz = ξ z ,         ∀c = 1, ..., C,       ∀z = 1, ..., Zs .

       Assumption 2: λcz = λcs ,          ∀z = 1, ..., Zs .


     With the preference structure defined by equation (1), product demand depends on
quality-adjusted or “pure” prices. Letting pcz be the export price of a typical variety of
product z produced in country c, we define the “pure” price of that variety by pcz =
pcz /(ξ z λcs ). The pure price is a quality-adjusted price. It is also divided here by ξ z for
notational compactness, but none of the results or their interpretation is affected by this
choice.
   9
      The assumption of homothetic preferences, although standard in the international trade literature,
is potentially strong in this context. It is worthy of more focused attention in future theoretical and
empirical research.
   10
      To
       simplify
                notation, subindexes on summations refer to all members
                                                                              of a set unless otherwise noted,
e.g.     c and   c′ both sum
                             over all countries c = 1, ..., C while  c′ =c sums over all countries except c.

For product categories, z denotes the sum across all product categories in sector s, z = 1, ..., Zs . Note
that we omit subindex s from z.
             E C       -C       D   P            Q                    8


2.2. The Pure and Impure Price Indexes

    In this section we develop notation to keep track of countries’ unobserved numbers
of varieties. Define ncs to be the average number of varieties across product categories
produced by country c in sector s,
           1  c
     ncs =      n                                                                                    (2)
           Zs z z

and define nz to be the (country o—normalized) world average number of varieties of
product z,
            1  c nos
       nz =     n                                                                                    (3)
            C c z ncs

The normalization in (3) re-scales the number of varieties of each country into common,
country-o units, according to the ratio of the average number of varieties between o and
               ncz to be country c’s “excess variety” in product z relative to the world
c. Define also 
average,
                   nos
       cz = ncz
       n               − nz .                                                                        (4)
                   ncs
                                                          c
Note that excess variety has the convenient property that z nz = 0, ∀c = 1, ..., C.
   Define an aggregator11 of product prices produced in country c and sector s as
                                       1−σ
                                           1
                                            s

     Psc =      nz ξ σz s−1 (pcz )1−σs         .                                                     (5)
                   z

The Impure Price Index between countries c and d is then defined as

       Pscd = Psc /Psd .                                                                             (6)

     The Impure Price Index is a summary measure of price variation between goods pro-
duced by countries c and d in sector s. The index is “impure” in the sense that it is
defined over prices that are “contaminated” by quality. The index is transitive, so that
Pscd Psdo = Psco . Choosing country o as the numeraire country, we can associate an index
number, Psco , with each country c, noting that Pscd can always be recovered from the ratio
Psco /Psdo . In particular, the value of this ratio is independent of which country is chosen
as the numeraire.
  11
    This type of price aggregator is often called a price “index” in the trade literature (e.g., Anderson
and van Wincoop 2004). We reserve the term “index” here for price comparisons between countries, in
accordance with terminology employed in the index number literature.
           E C        -C     D   P         Q                 9


   The Impure Price Index can be decomposed into an index of quality and an index of
pure prices:
                                                                   1
                                                          c 1−σ s 1−σ s
                                                     nz (
                                                         pz )
                            λc
                                         Pc     z                 
     Ps = Ps λs ,
       cd    cd cd     cd    s
                      λs = d ,     Ps =
                                     cd    s
                                              = 
                                                                  
                                                                                (7)
                            λs           Psd       nz (pdz )1−σ s
                                                          z

The Quality Index,    λcd
                       s ,   between countries c and d in sector s is simply defined as the
ratio of the two countries’ quality levels. The Impure Price Index and the Quality Index
implicitly define the Pure Price Index, Pscd . The Pure Price Index is a summary measure
of pure price variation between countries, and it is also transitive. Combining estimates
of countries’ sectoral Impure Price Indexes with inferences about their sectoral Pure Price
Indexes derived from their global net trade in the sector, we will use the decomposition
in (7) to identify countries’ sectoral relative product quality.

3.   Bounding the “Impure” Price Index

    The bilateral Impure Price Index in equation (7) cannot be observed because it depends
upon unobservables such as the number of varieties exported by the country pair and the
elasticity of substitution. In this section we outline a set of assumptions which allow the
Impure Price Index to be bounded by observable Paasche and Laspeyres indexes defined
over the two countries’ common exports to a third country. In Section 5, we demonstrate
how overlapping bilateral bounds across country pairs can be used to identify Impure
Price Indexes for all countries (relative to a numeraire country).

3.1. Constrained Expenditure Function

    We focus on countries’ exports to a single “common importer”, which we refer to as
the United States given the focus of our empirical examination below. The analysis would
be identical were it to be applied to any other common importer.
    We define a country as “active” in product z if it reports positive exports to the United
States in that category. Let Is be the set of all product categories in sector s, and let
Isc be the subset of active categories in country c. Define vector ps to include the U.S.
import prices of all active categories in sector s from all countries. Define analogously
vectors qs , ns , λs , and ξ s . A vector of per-variety consumption xs is implicitly defined by
qs and ns . Finally, stack these vectors across sectors to form vectors p, q, n, λ, ξ, and x.
    Since our method is based on comparing import prices (as measured by unit values)
across pairs of U.S. trading partners, we need to use notation specific to country pairs.
                E C       -C        D   P              Q        10


Index countries in a pair of U.S. trading partners by c and d. Denote by Iscd the set of
active categories common to c and d in sector s. Zscd is the number of such categories.
Denote also by Isc,−d the set of products in which c is active but not d, by Isd,−c the set of
products in which d is active but not c, and by Uscd the union of these two sets. Finally,
∅cd
  s is the set of products in which neither of the two countries is active. The set Is can
then be partitioned into Iscd , Uscd , and ∅cd
                                            s .
    We can use Iscd to break each of vectors p and q into two components. First, alter-
natively for each i = c, d, pis(cd) and qis(cd) include prices and quantities, respectively, of
exports by i of products in categories z ∈ Iscd . The remaining parts of p and q are denoted
by p−i             −i                                                  cd
      s(cd) and qs(cd) . These vectors include categories z ∈ Is exported by all countries
other than i, and also categories z ∈    / Iscd exported by all countries (including i).12
    For a pair of exporting countries c and d, we now define the constrained expenditure
(or import) function mcs(cd) (pis(cd) , q−c
                                         s(cd) , n, λ, ξ,U). This function represents the minimum
expenditure that the representative consumer in the U.S. would be required to spend on
varieties exported by country c in categories z ∈ Iscd in order to attain utility level U
when import prices of those varieties are pis(cd) , if this consumer is constrained to consume
quantities q−cs(cd) of all other products, and the number of varieties, quality, and product
shifters are, respectively, n, λ, ξ. The constrained expenditure function solves the problem

       min pis(cd) qcs(cd)      s.t.     U(qcs(cd) , q−c
                                                      s(cd) , n, λ, ξ) = U,    i = c, d         (8)
       qc
        s(cd)


where U(.) is the representative consumer utility function.13
    By revealed preference, the minimum import expenditure on products produced by
country c in categories z ∈ Iscd , when import prices of those products are pcs(cd) while
q−c
 s(cd) , n, λ, ξ, and U take their unconstrained equilibrium values, is the observed amount
of imports:

       mcs(cd) (pcs(cd) , q−c                     c      c
                           s(cd) , n, λ, ξ,U ) = ps(cd) qs(cd) .                                (9)

However, when prices are pds(cd) instead of pcs(cd) , the minimum import expenditure is equal
to or lower than pds(cd) qcs(cd), because the amount pds(cd) qcs(cd) is sufficient to attain utility
U but qcs(cd) is not necessarily optimal given pds(cd). Hence,

       mcs(cd) (pds(cd) , q−c                     d      c
                           s(cd) , n, λ, ξ,U ) ≤ ps(cd) qs(cd) .                               (10)
  12
     The term in parenthesis in the subindex denotes the subset of products within sector s in which
countries c and d export in common to the U.S., i.e. z : z ∈ Iscd .
  13
     Neary and Roberts (1980) and Anderson and Neary (1992) use the constrained expenditure function
to analyze consumption choices under rationing.
              E C                 -C         D   P                    Q              11


Taking the ratio of (9) over (10), we obtain

           c
                       mcs(cd) (pcs(cd), q−c
                                          s(cd) , n, λ, ξ,U )          pcs(cd) qcs(cd)
          Ms(cd)   =                                               ≥                       = Hscd .                  (11)
                       mcs(cd) (pds(cd), q−c
                                          s(cd) , n, λ, ξ,U )
                                                                       pds(cd) qcs(cd)

Equation (11) displays a standard result in index number theory stating that the cost-of-
                     c
utility price index Ms(cd) is larger than a Paasche price index, Hscd , defined here in a cross-
                                                                                 c
sectional rather than a time-series context. The left-hand side of (11), Ms(cd)      , captures
the change in minimum expenditure on country c’s varieties (in categories z ∈ Iscd ) that
would be necessary to maintain utility U, if import prices of those varieties changed from
pds(cd) to pcs(cd) , holding constant their number and characteristics (including quality), and
the number, characteristics and quantity consumed of all other goods. The right-hand
side of (11), Hscd , is a Paasche price index defined over the observed prices of the country
pair’s common exports to the U.S. in sector s.
     Similarly, we can focus on imports from country d to obtain

           d
                       mds(cd) (pcs(cd), q−d
                                          s(cd) , n, λ, ξ,U )          pcs(cd) qds(cd)
          Ms(cd)   =                                               ≤                       = Lcd
                                                                                              s ,                    (12)
                       mds(cd) (pds(cd), q−d
                                          s(cd) , n, λ, ξ,U )
                                                                       pds(cd) qds(cd)

where Lcd
       s is a Laspeyres price index defined over the country pair’s common exports to
the U.S. in sector s. This is another standard result, which states that the cost-of-utility
         d
index Ms(cd)   is bounded from above by a Laspeyres price index.14
                                                                 c            d
   We will now obtain explicit functional forms for Ms(cd)            and Ms(cd) . Define u s ≡
                         1/ϕs
   c
      nz (ξ z λcs xcz )ϕs       . The utility function U can be written as a function of u
                                                                                         s and a
 z∈Iscd
function us of arguments that are held constant in the minimization problem that defines
the constrained expenditure function. Since U is strictly increasing in u   s , there is a single
value u∗s of this variable that satisfies the constraint U (
                                                            us , us ) = U in (8). Then, we can
rewrite the minimization problem as
                                                                                    1/ϕs
                                                           
              min
               c
                                  ncz piz xcz   s.t              ncz (ξ z λcs xcz )ϕs        = u∗s ,   i = c, d.
               xz
                         z∈Iscd                          z∈Iscd


The solution to this problem is the product between a CES aggregator measuring the unit
  14
    Paasche and Laspeyres indexes are typically defined in a time series context, where there is a natural
ordering of time periods. Since there is no natural ordering of countries in a multilateral context, calling
one of these indexes Paasche and the other one Laspeyres rather than vice versa is arbitrary.
              E C               -C         D   P                     Q                                   12


cost of utility and the target level of utility, u∗s 15
                                                        1−σ
                                                            1

                                      λi 1−σs              s

      ms(cd) (ps , qs , λ, ξ,U) = 
        c      i    −c                   c    i
                                        nz pz c  s            u∗s .                                                                    (13)
                                     cd
                                                λ s
                                                z∈Is


                                                     c
       We can now obtain an explicit expression for Ms(cd) in equation (11):
                                                    1−σ
                                                        1                                             1−σ s  1−σ
                                                                                                                   1
                                                           s                                   pcz                s

                    z∈I cd      ncz   pcz )1−σs
                                       (                                  cd        ncz      Psc
          c            s                                         cd cd  z∈Is              
         Ms(cd)   =        d 1−σs                          = Ps λs           d 1−σ s                                           (14)
                        ncz pdz λλsc                                         nc pz       
                                           s
                                                                                        z       Psd
                        z∈Iscd                                               z∈Iscd


Taking logarithms on both sides of (14) and using the fact that Pscd = Pscd λcd
                                                                              s , we can
combine this equation with (11) to obtain
                                                                                                                   1−σs  1−σ
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                             pcz               s

                                                                                 z∈I cd          ncz        Psc         
                                                                                                                         
         ln Hscd ≤ ln Ms(cd)
                       c
                             = ln Pscd + ln φcs(cd) ,                 φcs(cd) ≡  s                              1−σ             .   (15)
                                                                                                            pdz       s
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                 ncz         Psd
                                                                                      z∈Iscd

                                                                      d
Similarly, an expression analogous to (14) can be obtained for Ms(cd)    , which combined
with (12) yields16
                                                                             1
                                                           d  pcz 1−σs 1−σs
                                                        z∈I cd nz Psc      
          cd       d          cd      d        d        s                   
      ln Ls ≥ ln Ms(cd) = ln Ps + ln φs(cd) , φs(cd) ≡            d 1−σs     .  (16)
                                                                d  pz      
                                                                nz P d
                                                                                                              s
                                                                                      z∈Iscd

   Equations (15) and (16) relate the implications of consumer cost minimization to
cross-sectional Paasche and Laspeyres price indexes, where each of the cost-of utility
indexes has observable bounds on just one side. Our consideration of two cost-of-utility
indexes, as well as the one-sidedness of their bounds, differs from the standard bounding
  15
     It is here where Assumptions 1 and 2 are critical. In equation (13) we use these assumptions to
          pi     pi λi ξ i             λi
derive λc zξc = λi zξ i λzc ξzc = piz λsc , i = c, d.
          z z    z z      z z            s
  16
     Note that all prices (observed and pure) in this section are cif import prices, that is, import prices
inclusive of customs, insurance and freight charges. Under the assumption that trade costs are constant
                                                                        c        d
across product categories within a sector (see Section 4), the indexes Ms(cd) , Ms(cd) , Hscd , Lcd
                                                                                                 s alternatively
can be defined as free-on-board (fob) — i.e., exclusive of customs, insurance and freight charges — if they
are appropriately scaled by relative trade costs between countries c and d and the United States. As a
result, the inequalities in equations (15) and (16) also apply to fob import prices. As noted in Section 5,
we use fob import unit values to measure U.S. trading partners’ export prices in our empirical analysis.
            E C         -C     D   P            Q                   13


of cost-of-utility indexes from both above and below found in the index number literature.
Here, since we allow for horizontal differentiation, we must deal with two cost-of-utility
                     c          d
indexes because Ms(cd)    and Ms(cd) are defined over different numbers of varieties, i.e., ncz
and ndz , respectively.17 As a result, φcs(cd) and φds(cd) are also different. Under plausible
assumptions described below, however, we can show that ln φcs(cd) < 0 and ln φds(cd) > 0,
which implies that the Paasche and Laspeyres indexes bound the Impure Price Index, i.e.,
ln Hscd ≤ ln Ms(cd)
              c
                    ≤ ln Pscd ≤ ln Ms(cd)
                                    d
                                          ≤ ln Lcd
                                                s .


3.2. Paasche and Laspeyres Bounds on the Impure Price Index

   In this section we develop additional notation specific to country pairs. For each pair of
countries c and d, define the pair’s (o—normalized) average number of varieties in product
category z:
                             
       cd    1 nos c nos d
     n
     z =          n + n ,                                                              (17)
             2 ncs z nds z
and the country pair’s (o—normalized) “multilateral excess variety” in product z relative
to the world average:
      cd = n
      n     cd
       z    z − nz .                                                                              (18)

Multilateral excess variety measures the extent to which the average number of varieties
in countries c and d is above or below the world average.
    Also, for each country i = c, d in the country pair, define i’s (o-normalized) “bilateral
excess variety” in product z relative to the country-pair average,
                nos i
      i,cd
      nz    =         cd
                   n −nz .                                                                         (19)
                nis z
Bilateral excess variety measures the extent to which the number of varieties in a country
is above or below the bilateral average. These measures of excess variety possess three
convenient properties:
                                 cd
            i,cd
            n     = 0,           
                                 n
                                 z = 0,      c,cd
                                              n        nd,cd
                                                    = −                                           (20)
             z                                 z         z
        z                    z

The first and second properties indicate that, across product categories within country
i, both bilateral and multilateral excess variety sum to zero. The third property reveals
that two countries cannot both have positive bilateral excess variety in the same category.
  17  c           d
     Ms(cd) and Ms(cd) would be equal, for example, if the number of varieties in countries c and d were
proportional to one another for every product category.
             E C      -C       D   P       Q               14


    Define the bilateral difference in two countries’ pure prices in product category z
relative to their countries’ pure price aggregator as
               1−σs  1−σs
                  pcz          pdz
      ∆pcd
          z =             −              .                                         (21)
                 Pcs          Pd  s

A positive    pcd
             ∆z    indicates that country c has a lower pure price of z (relative to the price
aggregator) than country d. A lower pure price may arise, for example, due to comparative
advantage, i.e., variation in exporters’ relative production efficiency or factor costs.
    Finally, for set of products A, define the sample covariance over that set of products
                            
as covA (xz , yz ) = (1/ZA ) z∈A (xz − x) (yz − y), where ZA is the number of elements in
A.
    We now lay out a set of sufficient conditions for the Impure Price Index to be bounded
by observable Paasche and Laspeyres price indexes.
    Assumption 3 states that country c relative to country d will tend to have positive
bilateral excess variety in those products in which it has a lower relative pure price.

                         c,cd                  d,cd        
   Assumption 3: covIscd n     pcd
                         z , ∆z    = cov Is
                                             cd  n
                                                  z   , ∆
                                                          pdc
                                                           z    ≥0

    This assumption is based on the results of theoretical models of international trade
with product differentiation that allow for trade costs and do not assume factor price
equalization (e.g., Romalis 2004, Bernard et al. 2007). These models find that, across
goods, the relative number of varieties between two countries is a negative function of the
countries’ relative prices. This finding supports the intuitive notion that countries should
have a relatively higher (lower) number of firms in sectors or product categories in which
they are relatively more (less) competitive, i.e. those sectors with relatively lower (higher)
prices. It is possible to reformulate these models in terms of quality-adjusted variables.
Thus reinterpreted, these models predict that the relative number of varieties in a sector
or product category is a negative function of relative pure (or quality-adjusted) prices.
    Assumption 4 imposes the restriction that there is no correlation between the country-
pair’s multilateral excess variety and bilateral differences in pure relative prices.

                                   cd
                                            
   Assumption 4: covIs            
                                  n
                                  z , ∆cd
                                        pz = 0

   This assumption is not very strong, as there is no obvious relationship between the
country pair’s excess variety relative to the world average and relative comparative ad-
vantage among countries within the pair.
            E C       -C       D   P                                  Q    15


    Assumption 5 requires that countries c and d be similarly active in exporting goods
to the United States.

    Assumption 5: δcd    dc
                   s = δ s = 0 , where                                               
                                                                       pcd
                                                                      ∆ z
                                         c,cd z∈Iscd                                  
                                         n
                                          z          cd                       ncd
                                                                              +    pcd
                                                                                 z ∆z 
                                                                 Zs
                                      z∈Uscd
                              δcd
                               s =                  
                                                                            1−σ s         , and
                                                                      d
                                                                      pz
                                                           ncz
                                                      cd             Psd
                                                   z∈Is

                              δdc
                               s    is defined analogously.

    The magnitude of the terms δcd            dc
                                      s and δ s depends on the extent to which countries
c and d are “similarly active”. Assumption 5 requires that these terms are zero. A
sufficient condition that implies assumption 5 is that the two countries are active in the
same categories. In that case, the numerator in the expression for δcd
                                                                     s is zero, as it sums
                                   cd
over elements of an empty set, Us . Since the sums in the numerator involve positive and
negative terms, it is still possible that the numerator is zero even if Uscd is non-empty.
More generally, δcd      dc
                 s and δ s will tend to be smaller (in absolute magnitude) the smaller is
the number of mismatched active categories (in the numerator) relative to the number of
matched active categories (in the denominator).18
   With assumptions 3, 4 and 5 as well as our earlier assumptions about consumer utility,
Proposition 1 demonstrates that a country pair’s unobservable Impure Price Index is
bounded by the observable Paasche and Laspeyres indexes defined over their common
exports to a third country.

Proposition 1 Under Assumptions 1 through 5, for any two countries c and d, the (un-
observable) Impure Price Index is bounded by the (observable) Paasche and Laspeyres
indexes:
                              ln Hscd ≤ ln Pscd ≤ ln Lcd
                                                      s


Proof. See Theory Appendix.
    This finding provides the basis for our estimation of the Impure Price Index in the
first-stage of our empirical strategy.
  18
     The empirical section imposes a threshold number of matched active categories for a country pair to
be included in the estimation.
                E C    -C      D   P             Q                    16


4.      Net Trade as Indicator of Pure Price Variation

       This section derives the theoretical relationship between countries’ net trade and their
Pure Price Indexes. Exporting goods from country c to country c′ requires paying iceberg
                   ′             c cc′
trade costs of τ cc                                                                 ′
                 s . Therefore, pz τ s is the import price of product z in country c . Given
the CES preference structure assumed in equation (1), it is easy to derive country c’s
bilateral export and import flows (in sector s) with every other country c′ . Summing
export flows over c′ = c, we obtain the value of country c’s exports,
                                     ′ 1−σ s
                                                
                    ncz pcz τ cc  s                  ′
      Exportscs =                     1−σ         bs Y c                          (22)
                               (G c )
                                   ′       s
                  c =c
                   ′       z      s

            ′
where Y c is the income of country c′ and
                                     1/(1−σs )
        ′
                ′′  ′′ ′′ ′ 1−σs
     Gcs =           ncz pcz τ cs c                                                                 (23)
                   c′′   z

is a consumption-based price aggregator. The expression in brackets in equation (22) is
country c’s share in country c′ ’s sectoral expenditure, bs Y c . This share does not depend
on prices and quality levels independently of one another, but only on the ratio of the
two, pcz .19
    In a similar manner, we obtain the value of country c’s imports,
                                                                          
                     ncz′ pcz′ τ cs′ c 1−σs               nc (p c 1−σ s
                                                                       )
                                                                 z   z
       Importscs =                    1−σ s    bs Y c = 1 −            1−σs    bs Y c .  (24)
                              (G  c )                           (G c )
                   c =c z
                    ′             s                         z      s


Subtracting equation (24) from equation (22), we obtain country c’s net trade with the
world in sector s, Tsc , as a proportion of its expenditure in the sector,
                                        ′ 1−σ s
      1 Tsc            ncz pcz τ cc s          Yc
                                                    ′

             = −1 +                                   ,                           (25)
      bs Y c            c′  z
                                 (Gcs′ )1−σ s     Yc

Equation (25) shows that countries’ trade balance in sector s is a function of all the
product-level pure prices in that sector. Our objective is to simplify this expression by
relating net trade of country c in sector s to the Pure Price Index.
    To express equation (25) as a function of the Pure Price Index, we must impose
structure on the relationship between pure prices and the number of varieties countries
  19
    We can associate an infinite price pcz with a product z that is not produced in country c. Since pure
prices are elevated to a negative exponent, this product will have no effect on the volume of trade or the
price aggregator.
              E C            -C        D   P         Q          17


produce. Based on the same theoretical results that motivate Assumption 3, we postulate
a negative relationship between the number of varieties and pure prices, defined here
across sectors rather than across categories within sectors.

                                        −ηs
                           ncs /Y c
      Assumption 6:        nos /Y o
                                      = Psco ,           ∀c = 1, ..., C,   η s ≥ 0.

      A particular case of this assumption is when η s = 0, in which case the average number
of varieties in a sector is a constant proportion of income. Here, we allow for a more
general case where the number of varieties is allowed to decrease as pure prices increase.
We also characterize the relationship between pure prices and number of varieties across
product categories within sectors as the sum of a common component across countries
(Vs ) and a mean-zero, country-specific idiosyncratic component
                       1−σs 
             c     c c
       cov nz , pz /Ps         = Vs + µcs ,                                         (26)

noting that this characterization does not impose any restriction on the covariance.20
   The following Proposition describes the main result of this section.

Proposition 2 Under Assumption 6, country c’s sectoral net trade can be expressed (ab-
stracting from approximation error) as a linear function of the Pure Price Index
        Tsc
            = Ψs + γ s ln Psco + bs τ cs + ιcs                                                 (27)
        Yc
where
                           γ s = bs (1 − σs − η s ) < 0, Ψs = bs (ks + Zs Vs ) ,
                                     ′  τ cc′ 1−σs                       1−σ
                                                                                 
                         c                c                           (Pso ) s
                       τ s = ln         Y      s
                                              Gc′
                                                          , ks = ln        Yo
                                                                                   ,
                                                      s
                                        c′
                                      ιcs =   bs Zs µcs

Proof. See Theory Appendix.
    Proposition 2 provides a simple expression for the relationship between net trade and
pure prices. This proposition formalizes the key insight of the paper. Price variation not
accompanied with corresponding quality variation implies variation in pure prices. Even
though unobservable, pure prices are manifest in sectoral trade balances. In particular,
the surplus in a country’s sectoral net trade should be larger the lower are its pure prices.
    In addition to pure prices, trade costs also influence net trade. The term τ cs summarizes
this influence. This term includes bilateral trade costs between all country pairs. First, it
 20
      For estimation, we will assume that µcs and the instrumental variable are uncorrelated.
            E C       -C       D   P              Q                 18

                                                                                     ′
includes all outbound bilateral trade costs for country c. Those costs, τ cc
                                                                          s , enter directly
into the summary term τ s , which is smaller the higher are those costs. Second, τ cs also
                          c
                                                                     ′
includes all inbound bilateral trade costs for country c, τ cs c . In this case, the inbound
costs enter through the consumption price index for country c, Gcs . The term τ cs is larger
the larger are those costs, and hence affect positively net trade of country c. Finally, all
other bilateral trade costs enter indirectly through countries’ consumption price indexes,
  ′
Gsc , dampening the negative effect of the outbound bilateral trade costs. Therefore, net
trade of country c is higher the higher are trade costs between third countries.21
    The impact of trade costs on net trade characterized in Proposition 2 is conditional on
pure prices. That is, while trade costs properly shift the relationship between net trade
and pure prices, they do not provide a comparative statics assessment of the effect of
trade costs on net trade. Changes in those costs will typically affect pure prices in general
equilibrium, implying an indirect effect on net trade not captured in equation (27). Note
that our method does not require that we identify the economic forces that determine
pure prices in equilibrium. It only requires that we control for them. Variation in pure
prices can be driven by traditional sources of comparative advantage, or it can be the
result of macroeconomic conditions, such as over- or under-valued currencies.
    Equation (27) can be interpreted as a relative demand function, where net trade is
the “quantity” variable, the Pure Price Index is the “price” variable, and the trade costs
are demand shifters. The first term captures movements along the demand curve: higher
pure prices of country c in sector s are associated with a worsening of this country’s net
trade position in that sector. The second term captures movements of the demand curve.
Conditional on pure prices, higher inbound trade costs relative to outbound trade costs
shift this curve to the right.
    Before concluding this section, we note that a substantial advantage of using net trade
as the quantity indicator in our method is that it can mitigate our inability to control
for components of trade costs we cannot observe, such as information costs and non-
tariff barriers associated with commercial policy. As noted above, bilateral trade costs
affect countries’ exports and imports in opposite directions. As a result, the impact
of unobserved trade costs may, to a considerable extent, cancel out. In contrast, an
alternative approach based purely on “demand” information, e.g., using countries’ U.S.
import market shares rather than their global net trade, as in Khandelwal (2007), is likely
to be substantially more sensitive to mismeasurement of trade costs.
  21
    See Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) for a detailed discussion of the effects of trade costs on trade
flows in a related setting.
              E C      -C       D   P             Q                    19


5.      Estimation

       In this section we demonstrate how our theoretical results can be used to estimate U.S.
trading partners’ relative manufacturing export quality from 1989 to 2003. Estimation
is accomplished in two stages. We discuss the strategy of each stage, as well as their
data requirements, separately. Throughout, we focus on the key issues associated with
implementing our method, deferring detailed discussions of data requirements to a sepa-
rate Data Appendix. Raw datasets and the computer code used to generate the results
reported below are available from the authors upon request.

5.1. Estimation of First-Stage Impure Price Indexes

   The first stage of the estimation uses Proposition 1 to estimate each country’s Impure
Price Index, Psko , ∀k = o, where country o is the numeraire country and hats over variables
denote estimates. We note that the choice of numeraire is made without loss of generality;
in our empirical implementation, we use Switzerland. For generic country pair c and d, the
estimated indexes Psco and Psdo implicitly determine the bilateral index Pscd = Psco /Psdo .
This index should satisfy the Paasche and Laspeyres bounds for that country pair, as
outlined in Proposition 1. Similarly, for C trading partners, the C − 1 estimated Impure
Price Indexes Psko , ∀k = o, implicitly determine C(C − 1) bilateral indexes Pscd , ∀c, d, that
should satisfy the bilateral Paasche and Laspeyres bounds for all country pairs.
    If export prices and quantities were observed without error, estimation would entail
searching for an interior solution to the set of observed Paasche and Laspeyres bounds
across country pairs. Given that import data may be mis-recorded on customs documents,
however, we allow for measurement error in the bounds by assuming that Paasche and
Laspeyres indexes are observed imprecisely. Denote the “true” Paasche and Laspeyres
                                                                                           cd
indexes by Hs∗cd and L∗cd  s , respectively. We assume that the observed indexes, Hs and
Lcd                                                                         cd          ∗cd
  s , depart from the true indexes by a multiplicative error: in logs, ln Hs = ln Hs + ̺h,s
                                                                                                cd

and ln Lcd         ∗cd      cd
         s = ln Ls + ̺l,s . We also assume that each error is distributed normally, with
mean zero and standard deviation ψ s , and that the errors for each bound are independent
both of each other and of error terms for other bilateral pairs.22
    Satisfying the inequality constraints of Proposition 1 for a given pair of countries
  22
    This is a potentially strong assumption because the price (unit value) of a single product might show
up in many bounds, inducing correlated rather than independent errors. It is worth noting that biases
in the estimated standard errors of the estimated price indexes do not affect our results for quality since
only price index point estimates are used in the second stage. Biases in the latter estimates, however,
may not be innocuous.
           E C       -C      D   P           Q                  20


implies:

      ln Pscd ≥ ln Hs∗cd ⇒ ̺cd        cd      cd
                            h,s ≥ ln Hs − ln Ps                                                (28)
      ln Pscd ≤ ln L∗cd
                    s   ⇒ ̺cd        cd      cd
                           l,s ≤ ln Ls − ln Ps .                                               (29)

Separately for each year t, we estimate a set of index numbers ln Psko , ∀k = o, and
the standard deviation of the error term ψ by maximizing the joint likelihood that the
                                           s
intervals defined by all “true” Paasche and Laspeyres bounds contain the estimates, i.e.
the likelihood that (28) and (29) are jointly satisfied for each country pair {c, d}. This
criterion implies maximizing the function
                              
                                    ln Hscd − ln Pscd
                                                              
                                                                  ln Lcd      cd
                                                                                 
                                                                      s − ln Ps
         ln L =          ln 1 − Φ                        + ln Φ
                 c d>c
                                           ψ s                           ψs

where Φ is the cumulative normal.
    Intuition for this estimator is provided in Figure 1, which considers the Paasche-
Laspeyres interval for a single country pair c and d, defined by ln Hscd and ln Lcd       s . In the
figure, two cumulative normal distributions, each with standard deviation ψ s , take values
of one half at each end of the interval. Consider a pair of Impure Price Index estimates
relative to the numeraire and the location of their (log) ratio ln Pscd = ln Psco − ln Psdo along
the horizontal axis in the figure. According to equation (28), the height of the cumulative
normal distribution to the left of ln Pscd indicates the likelihood that the true Paasche
index is lower than the estimated bilateral index, that is, ln Hs∗cd < ln Pscd . Likewise,
using equation (29), the height of the cumulative normal to the right of ln Pscd indicates the
likelihood that the true Laspeyres index is greater than the estimated bilateral index, that
is, ln L∗cd
        s   > ln Pscd . Choosing a particular value for ln Pscd inevitably involves increasing
the value of one of these functions at the expense of the other. If the objective were to
maximize the likelihood that ln Pscd is within the true bilateral Paasche and Laspeyres
bounds, only taking into account the bounds of this particular country pair, then ln Pscd
would lie in the middle of the interval and be equivalent to the well-known Fisher index.
However, because the choices of ln Psco and ln Psdo , which determine ln Pscd for this country
pair, also influence the fit of all other country pairs in which either country c or d are
present, the estimates that maximize the joint likelihood for all country pairs will not in
general be located in the center of the interval for countries c and d. For that reason, ln Pscd
is drawn off-center in the interval depicted in Figure 1. This estimator has the advantage
that it penalizes estimates that lie inside the interval only in relation to the likelihood
that conformance to the theory is a consequence of measurement error. Similarly, it
           E C       -C        D   P               Q      21


penalizes estimates outside the interval only in relation to the likelihood that violation of
the bounds restriction is not caused by measurement error. We note that this estimator is
not a conventional maximum likelihood estimator as it does not maximize the likelihood
of observing the data (the bounds) given the parameters (the Impure Price Indexes).
    Even though the theoretical properties of our estimator are unknown, further intuition
for it can be derived from consideration of two alternatives. The first, which we refer to
as the “V” estimator, is defined by a quadratic penalty function centered at the midpoint
(Fscd ) of each country pair’s interval,
                                    2
        ΨV =          ln Fscd − ln Pscd .                                            (30)
               c    d>c

Since the midpoint of the interval is equal to the (log of the) Fisher index defined by
                                                         !
the intervals’ Paasche and Laspeyres bounds (Fscd = Hscd Lcd     s ), this penalty function is
similar in spirit to other multilateral indexes proposed in the index number literature (see,
for example, Diewert and Nakamura 1993). Though this approach has the advantage of
rewarding estimates that are closer to the middle of the interval, where conformance with
the bounds is less likely to be driven by measurement error, it has the undesirable feature
of treating equally deviations from the Fisher index that are inside versus outside of the
theoretically mandated bounds.
   A second alternative penalty function, which we refer to as the “sink” estimator, only
penalizes estimates outside the interval:
                      "                                               #2
     ΨS =          1cd                   cd
                     s ∗ min abs ln Ps − ln Hs
                                                cd
                                                     , abs ln Lcd      cd
                                                               s − ln Ps             (31)
               c   d>c

where 1cd                                                   cd        cd       cd
        s is an indicator variable equalling zero for ln Hs ≤ ln Ps ≤ ln Ls and one
otherwise. While this approach properly favors estimates within the interval, it ignores
potential measurement error. Our proposed estimator, by contrast, penalizes estimates
within and outside the interval, but only according to the likelihood that conformance to
the theory is a consequence of measurement error.
   We also investigate the use of an index (HK) proposed by Hummels and Klenow (2005),
                 $  pk wz
                              k

      HKskW =             W
                           z
                                , k = 1, ..., C                                      (32)
                   kW
                        p z
                   z∈Is

where
                                                                sk    W
                                                                 z −s z
             pk qk                pW  W
                                   z qz                 ln sk −ln sW
      skz = z z          , sW
                             z =              , wzk =  z sk −s    z
                                                                      W    .             (33)
                  k k                 W W
                pz ′ qz ′            pz ′ qz ′                  z
                                                                k
                                                                  ′   z′
                                                                         W
                                                                    ln sz′ −ln sz ′
            z ′ ∈IskW             z ′ ∈IscW              z′ ∈IscW
            E C         -C      D   P              Q                    22


The index HKskW compares country k’s prices to those of the world (W ) over the set of
goods country k has in common with the world (z ∈ IskW ). The world (W ) is an aggregate
of all countries — in our case the 43 countries in the sample — except for country k. There-
fore, the “world” price of product z, pW z , is just total world value divided by total world
quantity, qzW , omitting country k in the calculation.23 Though this index has the advan-
tage that it can be computed rather than estimated, it has the disadvantage of treating
an aggregation of countries as a single entity without theoretical justification. Finally, a
bilateral index for country pair c and d, HKscd , is computed as the ratio HKscW /HKsdW .24
    We compare the empirical performance of each of these estimators after outlining the
first-stage data requirements. As discussed further below, we show that our preferred
estimator comes closest to estimating Impure Price Indexes consistent with Proposition
1.

5.1.1. First-Stage Data Requirements

    Estimation of countries’ Impure Price Indexes requires data on countries’ export prices
and quantities. Here, we rely on detailed U.S. import statistics published by the U.S.
Census Bureau. These data record the total customs value and quantity of U.S. imports
by year, source country and ten-digit Harmonized System (HS) product classification
from 1989 to 2003. We focus here on U.S. import data given its availability for such a
long time horizon, but note that our method can be generalized to include data from
other countries; such data would generate additional Paasche and Laspeyres bounds that
could be incorporated into the estimation. Our use of U.S. trade data presumes that U.S.
import prices and quantities are representative of countries’ exports to other markets.25
    We compute the unit value, or “price”, of export product z from source country c, pcz ,
by dividing free-on-board import value (vzc ) by import quantity (qzc ), pcz = vzc /qzc , where
free-on-board refers to import values that are exclusive of customs, insurance and freight
charges.26 Examples of the units employed to classify products include dozens of men’s
  23
     Since country k is not included to calculate world prices, the set of countries in W varies with k. We
do not subindex W by k to simplify notation.
  24
     Note that since the HK index is a bilateral index applied to a multilateral purpose, it does not
satisfy transitivity, i.e., it cannot be obtained from applying equation (32) directly to countries c and d.
                       $  pc wzcd
Formally, HKscd =              z
                               pd
                                     .
                            z
                   z∈Iscd
  25
     In principle, this assumption could be tested by comparing the results of this section to results based
on other countries’ data.
  26
     A sustained assumption in our framework is that the export unit values that we observe are not
systematically different from the prices charged to domestic consumers, which we do not observe.
              E C      -C      D   P            Q                    23


cotton shirts in apparel, square meters of wool carpeting in textiles and pounds of folic
acid in chemicals. We focus on manufacturing exports, where a product is classified as
manufacturing if it belongs to SITC industries 5 through 8. Following standard practice,
we exclude SITC 68, non-ferrous metals, from manufacturing. We note that quantity
information is missing for approximately 20 percent of observations in the raw data; these
observations are dropped.
    Unit values are noisy due to both aggregation and measurement errors (GAO 1995).
To mitigate the impact of these errors, we both restrict our analysis to relatively large
exporters and screen the raw data. First, we start with the world’s top 50 exporters
of manufactured goods by value. Second, we employ two types of screens to eliminate
suspect observations. “Primary” screening drops observations where only a single unit is
shipped in a year or where the U.S. CPI-deflated annual import value is below $25,000 in
1989 dollars. “Secondary” screening makes the primary quantity and value cutoffs more
stringent while imposing three additional criteria:

       • (More Stringent) Relevance Constraint: Country-product-year observations must
         have quantity greater than 25 and value (in 1989 dollars) greater than $50,000;

       • Presence Constraint: Country-product observations must appear in more than two
         years of the sample;

       • Country-Pair Overlap Constraint: For a country-pair comparison to be included in
         the sample in any given year, the two countries must export at least 25 products in
         common to the United States; and

       • Unit-Value Dispersion Constraint: Country-product-year observations are excluded
         if the country’s adjusted27 unit value is less than one-fifth or more than five times
         the geometric mean of all prices for the product in that year.

    After secondary-screening the data, we finally impose the constraint that data required
for both the first and second stage cannot be missing for more than three years of the
  27
     The adjustment accounts for the likelihood that very high export prices are more likely to be the
result of misrecording if they come from countries with relatively low average export prices, and vice
versa. To adjust product-country-year unit values relative to the numeraire country, we perform two
iterations of the first-stage estimation. In the first iteration, we estimate Impure Price Indexes after
eliminating observations under the unit-value-dispersion constraint without making any adjustment to
country’s unit values. In the second iteration, we divide a country’s unit values by the estimated Impure
Price Index from the first iteration prior to implementing the unit-value-dispersion screen. We note that
omitting the second iteration has relatively little impact on our second-stage quality estimates.
          E C      -C     D   P        Q                24


sample period. After all screens are implemented, we are left with 43 countries, which
constitute the base sample we use in the remainder of the paper.
   The costs and benefits of screening the raw data can be discerned from Table 1. Each
row of the table focuses on a different screen, while each column indicates the affect of
the screen on a different aspect of the 2003 sample, though we note that screening has a
similar effect across years. To promote comparability, all rows in the table are restricted
to the same set of 43 countries available after the most stringent screening (that is, the
screening in the final row of the table).
    The first column of Table 1 demonstrates that secondary screening reduces the value
of imports captured in the sample by 11 percent vis a vis the primary-screened sample.
The next two columns of Table 1 show that secondary screening also reduces country
and country-product participation in the sample, lowering the number of country pairs
for which data is available to 829 from 861 and the median number of products country
pairs export in common to the United States from 347 to 228. As illustrated in the final
column of the table, there are very few incorrectly ordered Paasche and Laspeyres bounds
(i.e., Lcd     cd
        s < Hs ) in all three screens. We do not use those bounds for estimation.
    The primary benefit of screening is substantially tighter Paasche and Laspeyres bounds.
As indicated in the fourth column of the table, the median interval length (ln Lcd       cd
                                                                                  s −ln Hs )
under the preferred secondary screening is 0.74, less than one-third the length under the
primary screen, 2.51. The reduction in interval length results in a substantial improvement
in estimation precision.
    Of the additional criteria imposed by secondary screening, the unit-value dispersion
constraint exerts the strongest affect on median interval length. For example, an “al-
ternate” secondary screening (not shown) that omits the requirement that adjusted unit
values be within one-fifth and five times the geometric mean for the product-year results
in a disproportionately large increase in median interval length (to 2.01) versus import
value (to 97.8 percent).
    The left-hand panel of Table 2 summarizes several dimensions of the preferred sample,
by year. The first column of the panel illustrates that the sample of countries is held
constant at 43 for the entire sample period. The final column of the panel shows that
the median Paasche-Laspeyres interval across country pairs measured in log points moves
between 0.68 and 0.78 over the sample period. The remaining columns of the panel
demonstrate that the number of country pairs, the total number of product-country-
pairs, and the median number of common products across country pairs all rise over time.
These increases are driven by growth in the number of products countries export to the
            E C        -C      D   P            Q                    25


United States over the sample period. This growth introduces a potential composition bias
into our estimates, a well-known problem in the index number literature. We attempt to
mitigate the influence of composition bias via use of the “presence” and “overlap” screens
outlined above. Unfortunately, we cannot restrict our analysis to a set of continually
exported country-products due to numerous changes in product classification codes during
the sample period.

5.1.2. First-Stage Results

    The right-hand panel of Table 2 summarizes the results of the first-stage estimation by
year. Column one of the panel shows that the log likelihood declines in absolute value over
time, while column two reports that the estimated standard deviation, ψ       s , is relatively
constant at approximately 0.15 over the sample period. The third column of the panel
reports the estimation’s goodness of fit in terms of the percent of first-stage Impure Price
Index estimates that lie within the Paasche-Laspeyres bounds. As indicated in the table,
this share is above 90 percent in all years and rises from 90.4 percent in 1989 to 93.8
percent in 2003.
    Goodness of fit for the alternate “V”, “sink” and HK Impure Price Index estimates
described above, in contrast, is generally lower, supporting the choice of our preferred
approach. As reported in Table 3, the “V” performs best among the alternatives to the
preferred estimator, with the “sink” estimator a close second. The performance of the
“HK” estimator, on the other hand, is poor: on average, just 43 percent of the bilat-
eral Impure Price Indexes lie within the theoretically mandated Paasche and Laspeyres
bounds. Similar differences are manifest in the first-stage estimates: though we find a
high cross-country correlation between Impure Price Indexes estimated by our preferred
estimator and those estimated by the “V” and the “sink” (the average cross-sectional
correlation across years is above 0.99 in both cases), the correlation with the computed
“HK” indexes is much lower (an average across years of 0.43).28 Given the similarity of
the preferred, “V” and “sink” estimates, it is not surprising that the second-stage quality
estimates to which they give rise are also quite similar.
    Estimation of the first stage yields an Impure Price Index for each country relative
to the numeraire country. In Figure 2, we report normalized log Impure Price Indexes
for all countries for the first and last years of the sample. This normalization involves
  28
    In a few cases, for a given country-year the “sink” estimator yields an indeterminate solution over a
compact interval. This indeterminacy occurs for one country per year on average. Choosing alternative
points within the interval has negligible effects on the cross-country correlations cited in the text.
           E C          -C       D   P               Q     26


subtracting the mean log index across countries from every country’s estimated log Impure
Price Index, by year
                                   1  ko
      ln Pstc,M ean = ln Pstco −     ln Pst .                                      (34)
                                   C k

In particular, the normalized Impure Price Index for the numeraire country, ln Psto,M ean ,
                 
is equal to − C1   ln Pstko .
                   k
    Estimated Impure Price Indexes generally accord with expectations. In the figure,
countries nearer the origin such as Pakistan (PAK) and China (CHN) exhibit relatively
low export prices in both years vis a vis the mean while countries in the upper right corner
like Ireland (IRL) and Switzerland (CHE) exhibit consistently high relative export prices.
Countries’ orientation with respect to the grey forty-five degree line illustrates changes in
relative prices over time. Countries like Hungary and Morocco (MAR) that lie above the
forty-five degree line exhibit rising relative export prices, while those below the forty-five
degree line like China (CHN) and Singapore (SGP) experience declining relative prices.
In both years, the ordering of countries accords well with their level of development. Note
that a mapping of country codes to country names is provided in Table 5.

5.2. Estimation of Second-Stage Quality Indexes

    The second stage of our estimation uses the result in Proposition 2 to recover infor-
mation about countries’ relative export quality from their first-stage estimated Impure
Price Indexes. Given ln Pscd = ln Pscd − ln λcd
                                              s from equation (7), we can rewrite the result
of Proposition 2 as

      Tstc /Ytc = Ψst + γ s ln Pstco + bs τ cst − γ s ln λco        co          c
                                                           st + γ s κst + bs Zs µst        (35)

where t indexes time periods and κco               co      co
                                         st = ln Pst − ln Pst is the estimation error from the
first stage. The last three terms in equation (35) are unobservable and create a compound
error term that includes: countries’ product quality relative to the numeraire country
(λco                                                co
   st ); the estimation error in the first stage (κst ); and the idiosyncratic component of the
covariance between excess variety and pure prices (µcst ) from equation (26). Assuming that
this compound error term is uncorrelated with the regressors is untenable. In particular,
the quality component λco   st may be correlated with the estimated Impure Price Index:
developed countries, which tend to have higher export prices, are also likely to produce
higher quality.
           E C          -C       D   P            Q          27


   To deal with this endogeneity, we first specify a linear time path for the evolution of
product quality relative to the numeraire country,

      ln λco    co    co      co
          st = α0s + α1s t + εst                                                            (36)

where αco        co
        0s and α1s are a country fixed effect and the slope of a country-specific time trend,
respectively, and εco
                    st represents deviations of quality from this trend. As in the estimation
of the first stage, results here do not depend upon the choice of numeraire country, and
we again choose Switzerland for this role. Incorporating the country-specific linear time
trend for quality into equation (35), we obtain our second-stage estimating equation

      Tstc /Ytc = Ψst + γ s ln Pstco − ζ co     co          c      co
                                          0s − ζ 1s t + bs τ st + υ st                      (37)

where ζ co        co       co        co
        0s = γ s α0s and ζ 1s = γ s α1s are country fixed effects and time trends, respectively,
and υ co          co    co            c
       st = γ s (κst − εst ) + bs Zs µst is the error term. Note that the terms for both the
trade balance and the tariff could be expressed relative to the numeraire country, but that
doing so would have an impact only on the year fixed effects.
   The inclusion of country fixed effects in (37) eliminates the most obvious source of
endogeneity, i.e. the cross-sectional correlation between the time-invariant components of
countries’ prices and quality levels. The inclusion of country-specific time trends further
reduces the remaining correlation between regressor and error term, as the latter term
now includes only deviations of quality from country-specific trends. However, correlation
between εco         co
             st and Pst may still persist, as shocks to quality may be accompanied by increases
in (impure) prices.
       To address this potential problem, we use the real exchange rate as an instrument
for the estimated Impure Price Index. As usual, the instrument needs to satisfy two
conditions. First, because the estimating equation includes country-specific fixed effects
and time trends, the instrument has to be correlated with ln Pstco , after controlling for the
fixed effects and time trends. In other words, deviations of the real exchange from its own
time trend have to be correlated with similar deviations of Pstco . Macroeconomic condi-
tions typically determine periods of over- and under-valuation of countries’ real exchange
rate around long-run trends. These periods also determine changes in the international
competitiveness of a countries’ exports, captured in our model by Pstco . Since Pstco is a com-
ponent of Pstco , periods of over- or under-valuation are also associated with movements of
Pstco , providing the necessary correlation. Second, the instrument has to be uncorrelated
with the error term εco  st , which requires that shocks to quality around the trend in sector
s are not correlated with the real exchange rate. While we cannot rule out that such a
          E C      -C     D   P         Q               28


correlation exists, we judge it to be relatively unimportant. Shocks to quality in sector s
might be accompanied by exactly offsetting changes in prices, leaving pure prices — and
hence net trade in that sector — unchanged. Even if these shocks affect pure prices, they
might have a negligible effect on the real exchange rate. This is more likely to be true if
the shocks are temporary deviations around a trend, and if they are specific to sector s,
that is, uncorrelated with shocks to quality in other sectors. Finally, we also assume that
both κco        c
        st and µst are uncorrelated with the real exchange rate.
    We estimate equation (37) using two-stage least squares (2SLS). Our estimate of coun-
try c’s Quality Index relative to the numeraire is
                   co       co 
                    
                    ζ    + 
                           ζ
           co                1s t
      ln λst = −     0s
                                  ,                                                  (38)
                         γs
                         

where t indexes the number of years since 1989 and the remaining right-hand side variables
are estimates from equation (37). Note that we identify only the linear trend in quality.
Deviations of quality from the linear trend are confounded with the other two components
of the error term and are therefore not included in our estimated Quality Indexes.
    Countries’ estimated Pure Price Indexes are derived from equation (37) and the defi-
nition of ln λ co in equation (38). They are equal to
                st
                                      c                        
            co
                                      Tst
                                          − 
                                            Ψ    + 
                                                   b τ c
                                                         − υ
                                                            co
                                co   Yc      st    s st     st
      ln Pst = ln Pstco − ln 
                               λst =  t                        .                    (39)
                                                 γs
                                                 

    We note that this estimate of the Pure Price Index inherits any estimation error in
both the Impure Price Index and the Quality Index. In particular deviations of quality
from the trend (εco
                 st ) are misattributed to the Pure Price Index.


5.2.1. Second-Stage Data Requirements

    Estimation of the second stage faces a number of practical obstacles. Foremost among
them is data collection. Obtaining reliable information about countries’ trade balances, for
example, is challenging because countries vary greatly in how they report this information
to international agencies. Similarly, collection of countries’ product-level trade barriers
did not begin in earnest until 1989 and has grown fitfully since then. Here, we provide
a brief description of how our datasets are constructed. See the separate Data Appendix
for further detail.
    Trade balance data are drawn from the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics
Database (COMTRADE). This dataset records bilateral import and export flows between
            E C        -C      D   P             Q                    29


countries by manufacturing industry and year. Our overall approach to obtaining coun-
tries’ net trade is to subtract each country’s total reported imports from its total reported
exports by industry and year.29 We measure countries’ annual net trade in overall man-
ufacturing as well as the industries within manufacturing discussed below. As required
by equation (37), we normalize trade balances by nominal GDP drawn from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) database. Data on Taiwan’s GDP are from
the Economist Intelligence Unit website.
    To assess countries’ trade barriers, we make use of data on two types of bilateral trade
costs: transport costs and tariffs. We measure country pairs’ bilateral transport costs
using the U.S. import data, which record both the customs-insurance-freight (cif) and
free-on-board (fob) value for most import flows. Restricting our analysis to the preferred
screened sample described above, we define transport costs as aczt = (cifztc − fobczt ) /fobczt
and we estimate ad valorem transport costs per mile across all z in industry s in year t
by regressing the relative value spent on customs, insurance and freight on imports from
country c on the distance the exports have travelled,
                                
       ln (aczt ) = δst ln Dc,U S + β ′stX c,US + ∈czt,                                              (40)

where Dc,U S represents the great circle distance in miles between the United States and
country c and X c,US represents additional controls, including whether country c shares a
common language or border with the United States or was    ever a colony   of the United
                                                                        ′
States. In the estimations below we set ast equal to exp 
                                          cd                       cd stX .
                                                           δst ln D + β    cd

     Tariff information is derived from the Trade Analysis and Information System (TRAINS)
Database maintained by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD). In principle, these data record countries’ most favored nation (MFN) tar-
iffs as well as any preferential (PRF) tariff rates that might be available for a subset of
trading partners at the eight-digit Harmonized System level. In practice, product-country
coverage in the dataset is very sparse, hampering our ability to control properly for trade
policy in equation (37).
     The construction of the trade cost term τ cst is more challenging because it requires
values for the unobservable consumption price indexes Gc′s (equation 27). As indicated in
  29
    Unfortunately, country pairs’ reported trade flows with each other are often mutually inconsistent.
Since our principal interest is the accuracy of countries’ overall net trade with the world, we favor this
approach, which maximizes reporting consistency within countries, to the one taken by Feenstra et al.
(1997, 2000), which generally relies on reporting countries’ import statistics to estimate bilateral trade
flows. Further details of our data refinement procedures are described in the separate Data Appendix.
            E C        -C       D   P             Q                    30


equation (23), up to a factor of proportionality (captured by the constant in the regres-
                 ′′  ′′ 1−σs
sion), the term    ncz pcz      is the share of country c′′ in world production of sector
                    z
s in a world equilibrium with no trade costs. We approximate this share by the share
of country c′′ in “world” exports of that sector, i.e., the total exports of all countries in
the preferred estimation sample. While this approximation is imperfect, the theoretical
and observed shares should both largely be driven by country size. As a result, this ap-
proximate measure should capture a substantial fraction of the relevant variation in the
unobserved shares. The consumption indexes Gcs also require an estimate of the elasticity
of substitution σ s . We compute τ cst using σs = 6 and note that alternative values of σ s
ranging from 3 to 10 have almost no impact on our results. We obtain the main input
                                                                           ′
for the construction of the trade cost term, the bilateral trade costs τ cc
                                                                         s , by adding the
measures of bilateral transport costs and tariffs explained above.
    Finally, to compute countries’ real exchange rates, we use the real effective exchange
rate series reported by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) on their website. Though
the EIU dataset is reasonably complete, we fill in any holes in it by using data from the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

5.2.2. Second-Stage Results

    Table 4 reports second-stage estimates of γ s and bs from the estimation of equation
(37) by OLS and two-stage least squares (2SLS).30 Robust standard errors adjusted for
clustering at the country level are reported below each coefficient. As indicated in the
table, the OLS estimate of γ s has the expected negative sign but is statistically insignifi-
cant. The 2SLS estimate, on the other hand, is both negative and statistically significant
as well as substantially lower than the OLS estimate, -0.325 versus -0.029. The coeffi-
cient on the trade cost term is negative and insignificant for OLS. For 2SLS, it has the
expected positive sign but remains statistically insignificant, an outcome that may reflect
the difficulties associated with accurate measurement of trade costs. The final row of the
table reports an F-statistic for the first stage of 2SLS of 37.8.31
    Log Quality Index intercepts and slopes, normalized by annual means as in equation
(34), are displayed in Figure 3 along with their 95 percent confidence bands.32 Estimated
  30
     Given our rejection of a unit root using the test developed by Levin et al. (2002), we perform the
estimation in levels rather than in differences. The test is performed on the dependent variable, each of
the regressors, and the residual allowing alternatively for a constant and for both a constant and a time
trend. The null hypothesis that there is a unit root is rejected at the 1% significance level in all cases.
  31
     By comparison, implementation of the second stage using first-stage estimates based on the “V”,
“sink” and HK indexes discussed above yields first-stage F-statistics of 31.9, 34.8, and 3.9, respectively.
  32
     Standard errors are computed using the delta method. Intercept and slope coefficients and standard
           E C        -C      D   P            Q         31


intercepts are equivalent to countries’ relative log export quality in 1989. As indicated
in the figure, China’s quality in 1989 is two-thirds (e0.418) that of the mean country in
that year, while Germany’s is more than twice as high (e0.723). Estimated slopes report
how much relative export quality rises or falls vis a vis the mean country each year. The
countries with the highest and lowest slopes are Ireland and Hong Kong, at 0.076 and
-0.037, respectively, though the former has a relatively large confidence interval.
    Figure 3 sorts countries according to their intercepts, from low to high. Though these
intercepts vary widely, they tend to be high for developed economies like Switzerland and
Sweden and low for developing countries like Malaysia and the Philippines. Quality slopes
also vary substantially across countries but appear to be inversely related to intercepts.
Key outliers to this pattern include Hungary, Singapore and Ireland, though the estimated
slopes of the latter two countries are estimated relatively imprecisely.
    Normalized Quality Indexes across the sample period are displayed along with 95 per-
cent confidence bands for a set of nine countries in Figure 4. The relative tightness of
the confidence bands indicates substantial and statistically significant variation in product
quality across both countries and years. China’s export quality relative to the mean coun-
try in the sample, for example, is substantially and significantly below that of Germany,
Japan and even Singapore in all years and is essentially flat over time. Quality indexes
for Hungary and Singapore, on the other hand, rise significantly over time, though the
trend for Singapore is relatively imprecise.
    To assess the robustness of our results, we performed a number of sensitivity analyses.
First, we find that our second-stage regression results are not driven by the inclusion of
any particular country, as selectively removing each one country from the sample has little
impact on our point estimates. Second, we obtain similar results using either more or less
stringent secondary screens, though standard errors are generally larger in the latter case.
Finally, our second-stage results are very similar when using either the “V” or “sink”
estimators discussed above to derive first-stage Impure Price Indexes. Though we do not
report all of these results to conserve space, they are available from the authors upon
request.

6.   Evolution of Overall Manufacturing Quality Over Time

   This section examines the evolution of countries’ relative manufacturing quality over
time. We show that several developing countries, notably the Philippines and Malaysia,
errors are reported for each country in the separate Data Appendix.
          E C      -C     D   P         Q                32


exhibit large increases in relative quality over the sample period, and that changes in
countries’ raw relative export prices can be a poor approximation of changes in their
relative product quality. We also demonstrate that the “quality” gap between initially
high- and low-income countries narrows more substantially over time than their “income”
gap. Though these findings are primarily descriptive, they nevertheless highlight the range
of issues that our estimates might help address.
    Table 5 displays countries’ overall manufacturing quality rankings at four-year intervals
from 1989 to 2003. Countries are sorted according to their ranking in 1989, and the final
column of the table reports the change in ranking over the sample period. Countries
whose rank changes by more than ten places between 1989 and 2003 are highlighted.
    As indicated in the table, quality rankings are generally more stable for countries that
begin the sample period with relatively high normalized Quality Indexes. Among the
upper tercile of countries (from Switzerland to Norway), the average change in rank is
-1.7. In this group, Japan and Spain exhibit the largest declines, from 10 to 17 and from
14 to 21, respectively, while Ireland experiences the largest gain, from 7 to 1.
    More substantial re-rankings are observed among countries that begin the sample
period with low quality. Across countries in the bottom tercile (Turkey to Chile), for
example, the average change in rank is 2.6. The largest increases in this cohort are
exhibited by Malaysia and the Philippines, which jump 27 and 18 places, respectively,
between 1989 and 2003. The sharpest declines of this group are registered by Colombia,
China and India at -11, -9 and -9, respectively. Across all countries, Singapore registers
the second highest jump in ranking, from 23 in 1989 to 2 in 2003.
    Changes in quality rankings inferred from our method can be quite different from
changes in countries relative export prices, indicating that naively equating price and
quality can yield misleading results. Figure 5 compares the change in countries’ normalized
log Quality Indexes versus their change in normalized log Impure Price Indexes between
1989 and 2003. Though these two changes are positively correlated (0.32), quality and
prices move in opposite directions for one third of the sample. For Malaysia, Singapore,
Thailand and Indonesia, quality rises while raw export prices fall, while the opposite is
observed for Argentina, Greece, Israel, Mexico, Poland, Portugal, Spain and Switzerland.
These divergences between quality and impure prices are due to variation in countries’
global net trade balances. As illustrated in Figure 6, for example, Malaysia’s rising trade
balance combined with its relatively flat impure prices results in rising estimated quality.
    The attainment of higher quality levels in manufacturing is often thought to foster
export development, which in turn induces economic growth. Seminal research by Gross-
            E C        -C      D   P             Q                    33


man and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and Howitt (1992), for example, highlights a link
between countries’ ability to “climb the quality ladder” and their economic development.
In these models, productivity gains allow countries to produce higher quality goods and
thereby achieve higher income. Based on similar reasoning, governments in several coun-
tries have implemented export development programs that help firms improve the quality
of their products. Despite its importance, there has been relatively little empirical inves-
tigation into the link between product quality and economic development, mostly due to
a lack of information about product quality.
    Here, we find a strong positive relationship between countries’ manufacturing quality
and income, with the cross-country correlation of normalized log manufacturing quality
and normalized log income per capita ranging from a high of 0.88 in 1990 to a low of
0.66 in 2003.33 The correlation between growth in manufacturing quality and growth
in per capita income between 1989 and 2003, however, is substantially smaller at 0.30.
This relationship is displayed in Figure 7. Prominent outliers to the positive correlation
include the Philippines and China. The Philippines saw its quality rise relative to the
mean country while its income fell. The opposite is true for China, whose quality fell 11.1
percent relative to the average country even as its per capita income grew 130.2 percent.
    Finally, we find that trends in quality and income per capita growth are quite different
for countries that begin the sample period with either high or low levels of income per
capita. Dividing the countries in our sample into two groups according to whether their
1989 income per capita is above or below the median in that year, we find that the 1989
gap in mean quality levels between these two groups is initially lower than the mean
income gap, at 0.83 log points versus 2.32 log points, respectively. Over time, as reported
in Figure 8, we find substantially stronger narrowing of mean quality levels versus mean
income levels. While the quality gap narrows by nearly 40 percent, to 0.51 log points in
2003, the income per capita gap falls only slightly, to 2.25 log points.

7.     Estimating Export Quality Within Manufacturing

    As noted previously, our method for identifying product quality contains an aggre-
gation trade-off. While product quality is more likely to be constant across more finely
disaggregated products, data on countries’ global net trade and trade barriers is scarcer
  33
    Even though Hummels and Klenow (2005) cannot obtain quality levels for each country, they are able
to compute estimates of the cross-sectional elasticity of quality with respect to income using assumptions
about the elasticity of substitution and the number of varieties countries produce. Depending on these
assumptions, their estimate of the cross-sectional quality-income elasticity in 1995 ranges from 0.09 to
0.23.
           E C      -C     D   P          Q                34


and potentially more susceptible to measurement error. In this section we compute Qual-
ity Indexes across the four one-digit SITC industries that constitute manufacturing. We
also estimate quality across the two two-digit SITC sectors that represent apparel and
textiles, respectively, in order to explore the potential influence of countries’ use of inter-
mediate inputs outside of the sectors at which quality is being estimated.

7.1. One-digit SITC Sectors

    Estimation of export quality within manufacturing relies upon the same strategies and
datasets described above. To conserve space, we omit a discussion of screening, but note
that primary and secondary screens exert similar influence. The number of countries that
can be included in the analysis varies by industry because all countries do not participate
equally in each industry. Of the 43 countries used for aggregate manufacturing, we are
left with 27 countries in Chemicals, 41 countries in Manufactured Materials, 37 countries
in Machinery and 41 countries in Miscellaneous Manufacturing.
    Table 6 reports estimation results as well as details of the first-stage estimation sam-
ple by industry and year. Across industries, the data are thicker in terms of product-
country-pair observations and median products in common for Manufactured Materials
and Miscellaneous Manufactures than for Machinery and Chemicals. Goodness of fit in
terms of the share of estimates falling within bounds is highest in Machinery and lowest
in Manufactured Materials and Miscellaneous Manufactures, and this ordering generally
remains consistent with the ordering of their Paasche-Laspeyres intervals from high to
low.
    Figure 9 reports estimates of countries’ normalized first-stage Impure Price Indexes by
manufacturing industry for 2003 versus 1989. As indicated in the figure, prices are most
tightly distributed in Chemicals (except for outlier Ireland) and are most dispersed in
Miscellaneous Manufactures. We find that countries’ Impure Price Indexes are positively
correlated across industries. In 2003, this correlation is highest for Manufactured Materials
versus Miscellaneous Manufactures (0.82) and lowest for Chemicals versus Machinery
(0.54).
    Table 7 reports the second-stage OLS (top panel) and 2SLS (bottom panel) estimates
of γ s and bs by industry. The 2SLS estimates of γ s have the expected negative sign in all
four industries, but the estimate for Chemicals is statistically insignificant. As with the
results for aggregate manufacturing above, the 2SLS coefficients for the trade cost term
have the expected positive sign but are statistically insignificant. The strength of the
real exchange rate as an instrument for the Impure Price Index varies across industries.
            E C        -C      D   P            Q                    35


The F-statistic for the first stage of the 2SLS regression is high for both Machinery and
Miscellaneous Manufactures, low for Manufactured Materials, but especially low (0.01)
for Chemicals. A potential explanation for this result is that Chemical products are less
horizontally differentiated than products in Machinery or Miscellaneous Manufactures. If
that were the case, export prices might not be responsive to movements in countries’ real
exchange rate and instead respond mostly to movements in world prices. This hypothesis
receives some support from the relatively low price dispersion exhibited in the Chemical
Impure Price Indexes (Figure 9).
     Normalized log Quality Index intercepts and slopes along with their standard errors
are displayed along with their 95 percent confidence bands in Figure 10.34 Outside of
Chemicals, most countries’ normalized slopes and intercepts are significantly different from
zero (i.e., the mean country). As with aggregate manufacturing, the ordering of quality
intercepts generally accords with expectations: developed economies have the highest
intercepts in Machinery, for example, while Italy’s intercepts are among the highest in
Manufactured Materials and Miscellaneous Manufactures, which include Textiles (SITC
65) and Apparel (SITC 84), respectively. China’s quality ranking, on the other hand,
is relatively low in both Manufactured Materials and Machinery and relatively high in
Miscellaneous Manufacturing. Given the weak results for the Chemicals sector, we exclude
if from further analysis.
     Disaggregated quality estimates reveal substantial variation in export quality across
industries within countries. While quality intercepts for Manufactured Materials and
Miscellaneous Manufactures are positively correlated, the correlation of intercepts for Ma-
chinery and Miscellaneous Manufactures is approximately zero. Hong Kong and Taiwan,
for example, have relatively high intercepts for Miscellaneous Manufactures but are in the
middle of the pack for Machinery. Quality Index slopes display similar variation: across
countries the non-Chemical industry slopes have the same sign in only 17 of the 43 coun-
tries in the sample. These differences are highlighted in Figure 11 for the subset of nine
countries examined above. For Singapore, quality increases relatively strongly compared
to the mean country in all three sectors. For Malaysia, quality increases strongly in Ma-
chinery, much more moderately in Manufactured Materials, and declines in Miscellaneous
Manufactures.
     Quality convergence within manufacturing also varies across industries. Figure 12
reports the evolution of mean quality for countries with initially high and low per capita
  34
    As noted above, standard errors are computed using the delta method. Intercept and slope coefficients
and standard errors are reported for each country and industry in the separate Data Appendix.
            E C        -C      D   P             Q                    36


income. As indicated in the figure, there is a substantial narrowing of quality in Machinery,
weaker convergence in Miscellaneous Manufactures and an unchanging quality gap in
Manufactured Materials.

7.2. Two-digit SITC Sectors: Apparel and Textiles

   As noted in the introduction, our method for estimating product quality involves an
aggregation trade-off. For broad SITC categories such as all manufacturing, the assump-
tion of constant quality across all products in the category is strong, but data on countries’
global net trade is more readily available and more likely to be reliable. Another poten-
tial advantage of using broader SITC sectors is their ability to dampen the impact of
countries’ use of imported intermediate inputs. Use of such inputs is an issue when they
straddle the sectors at which quality is being estimated. Countries with a strong com-
parative advantage in one sector, for example, might be large net exporters of that sector
but large net importers of a second sector which is an input to the first. All else equal,
this situation may lead quality in the first and second sectors to be over- and underesti-
mated, respectively. In principle this problem can be solved by using input-output tables
to map imported intermediates to final goods. Unfortunately, such tables are unavailable
at a useful level of aggregation for a wide sample of countries. Another potential solution
would be to use value added trade data, but these data, too, are generally unavailable.
    In this section we investigate the potential impact of input-output linkages across
sectors by examining the relationship between textiles (SITC 65) and apparel (SITC 84).
We also explore a potential solution to the intermediate-inputs problem that involves
combining linked industries into a more aggregate sector. First, we estimate quality
for textiles and apparel separately. We then estimate quality for the hybrid “Apparel
& Textiles”, which includes products from both industries. We find that even though
cross-country correlations of apparel and Apparel & Textile quality are high in every
year, estimated quality for apparel declines substantially for some countries when textile
deficits are taken into account.
    Across the sample period, an average trade surplus in apparel coincides with an aver-
age trade deficit in textiles in eight developing countries: Colombia, Hong Kong, Israel,
Mexico, Malaysia, the Philippines, Portugal and South Africa. The contrast is most stark
for Hong Kong, whose average net trade in SITC 65 and SITC 84 over the sample period
is -1.0 and 7.6 percent of GDP, respectively.35 The opposite pattern, that is, an average
  35
    Interestingly, Hong Kong’s net trade in these two sectors move in opposite directions over time, with
the result that its declining trade surplus in Apparel & Textiles is less extreme than its declining trade
            E C       -C       D   P            Q                   37


deficit in apparel and an average surplus in textiles, is exhibited by several developed
economies: Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Japan and Switzerland. The remaining
countries either have a surplus in both sectors (e.g., Italy, Pakistan and Romania), or a
deficit in both sectors (e.g., Spain, Ireland and Sweden). The largest re-ranking of apparel
versus Apparel & Textile qualities occurs for Pakistan, which has a strong surplus in both
apparel and textiles.
    Table 8 reports 2SLS estimates of γ s and bs for SITC 65, SITC 84 and the hybrid
Apparel & Textiles. The estimates of γ s for all three remain negative and significant, while
the estimates for the trade cost term have the indicated signs but remain insignificant.
Though the Quality Index intercepts and slopes for the hybrid sector versus those for
SITC 84 differ markedly for some countries, their correlations across all countries are
quite high: 0.90 for the intercepts and 0.91 for the slopes. Estimated Quality Indexes are
also highly correlated across years, ranging from 0.90 in 1989 to 0.74 in 2003.
    These findings suggest that even though controlling for intermediate inputs does not
appear to change the overall pattern of results across countries, it can have a substantial
effect on individual countries’ estimated quality. As a result, it would be prudent to
include as much information about input-output linkages as possible when estimating
quality at low levels of aggregation. Over time, collection and dissemination of more
detailed data on countries’ international trade and use of inputs should make this task
easier.

8.   Conclusion

    This paper attempts to fill an important gap in the international trade and devel-
opment literature by outlining a method for identifying how countries’ product quality
evolves over time. First, we show how an important but unobserved Impure Price Index
comparing countries’ export prices is bounded by their observable Paasche and Laspeyres
indexes. Then, we develop a method for decomposing an estimate of this Impure Price
Index into Quality and Pure Price Indexes. This method makes use of information on
consumers’ valuation of countries’ products contained in their net trade with the world
and allows for both vertical and horizontal product differentiation. In contrast to a vast
literature that associates cross-country variation in export unit-values with variation in
product quality — implicitly assuming away cross-country variation in quality-adjusted
prices — our method allows for price variation induced by factors other than quality, e.g.,
surplus in apparel. Between 1989 and 2003, Hong Kong’s apparel surplus declines from 13.4 to 5.3 percent
of GDP, while its Apparel & Textiles surplus declines from 11.2 to 5.6 percent of GDP.
          E C     -C      D   P        Q               38


comparative advantage or currency misalignment.
   Implementation of our method reveals trends in product quality not evident in export
prices alone. Indeed, for several countries, export prices and quality evolve quite differ-
ently. Our estimation also highlights the importance of accounting for intermediate trade
in estimating countries’ export quality. Further theoretical and empirical efforts on this
front will be quite useful.
          E C    -C     D   P        Q              39


References

Abed-el-Rahman, K., 1991. Firms’ Competitive and National Comparative Advantages
   as Joint Determinants of Trade Composition. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 127:83-97.

Aghion, Phillippe and Peter Howitt, 1992. A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruc-
  tion. Econometrica, 60(2): 323-351.

Aiginger, Karl, 1997. The Use of Unit Values to Discriminate Between Price and Quality
   Competition. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 21(5):571-592.

Aiginger, Karl, 1998. Unit Values to Signal the Quality Position of CEECs. In The
   Competitiveness of Transition Economies. OECD Proceedings, 1998(10):1-234.

Alterman, William F., W. Erwin Diewert and Robert C. Feenstra. 1999. International
   Trade Price Indexes and Seasonal Commodities. Washington DC: U.S. Department
   of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Anderson, James E and J. Peter Neary, 1992. Trade Reform with Quotas, Partial Rent
  Retention, and Tariffs. Econometrica, 60(1):57-76 .

Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop, 2004. Trade Costs. Journal of Economic Lit-
  erature, XLII(3): 691-751.

Aw, Bee Yan and Mark J. Roberts, 1986. Measuring Quality Change in Quota-
  Constrained Import Markets. Journal of International Economics, 21(1): 45-60.

Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen Redding and Peter K. Schott, 2007. Heterogenous Firms
   and Comparative Advantage. Review of Economic Studies, 74(1):31-66.

Berry, Steven T. 1994. Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Differentiation.
   The RAND Journal of Economics, 25(2):242-262.

Bils, Mark, 2004. Measuring the Growth from Better and Better Goods. NBER Working
    Paper 10606.

Boorstein, Randi and Robert C. Feenstra, 1987. Quality Upgrading and its Welfare Cost
   in U.S. Steel Imports, 1969-74. NBER Working Paper 2452.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, 2006. Globalization and the Gains from Variety.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 541-585.
          E C     -C     D   P        Q               40


Brooks, Eileen, 2006. Why Don’t Firms Export More? Product Quality and Colombian
   Plants. Journal of Development Economics, 80(1): 160-178.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Philippe Martin and Paolo Pesenti, “Productivity Spillovers, Terms of
   Trade and the ‘Home Market Effect’, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Diewert, W. Erwin and Alice Nakamura, 1993. Essays in Index Number Theory, Volume
   1. North Holland. Amsterdam.

Fabrizio, Stefania, Deniz Igan, and Ahoka Mody, 2007. The Dynamics of Product Quality
   and International Competitiveness, IMF mimeo.

Feenstra, Robert C., 1988. Quality Change Under Trade Restraints in Japanese Autos.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103:131-146.

Feenstra, Robert C., 1994. New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
   Prices. American Economic Review, 84(1):157-177.

Feenstra, Robert C., 1995. Exact Hedonic Price Indexes. Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 77:634-653.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma and Hengyong Mo,
   2005. World Trade Flows: 1962 to 2000, NBER Working Paper 11040.

Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis and Peter K. Schott, 2002. U.S. Imports, Exports,
   and Tariff Data, 1989-2001, NBER Working Paper 9387.

Feenstra, Robert C, Alan Heston, Marcel Timmer and Haiyan Deng, 2007. Estimating
   Real Production and Expenditures Across Nations: A Proposal for Improving Existing
   Practice. UC Davis, mimeo.

Flam, H., Helpman, E., 1987. Vertical Product Differentiation and North-South Trade.
   American Economic Review, 77: 810-822.

General Accounting Office, 1995. US Imports: Unit Values Vary Widely for Identically
  Classified Commodities. Report GAO/GGD-95-90.

Goldberg, Penny and Nina Pavcnik, 2007. Distributional Effects of Globalization in De-
   veloping Countries. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1): 39-82.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, 1991. Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth.
   The Review of Economic Studies, 58: 43-61.
          E C    -C     D   P        Q              41


Hallak, Juan C., 2006. Product Quality and the Direction of Trade. Journal of Interna-
   tional Economics, 68(1): 238-265.

Hummels, David and Peter Klenow, 2005. The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports.
   American Economic Review, 95: 704-723.

Ianchovichina, Elena, Sethaput Suthiwart-Narueput and Min Zhao, 2003. Regional Im-
   pact of China’s WTO Accession. In Krumm, Kathie and Homi Kharas (eds), East
   Asia Integrates: A Trade Policy Agenda for Shared Growth (Washington DC: The
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank).

Levin, Andrew, Chien-Fu Lin and Chia-Shang James Chu, 2002. Unit root tests in panel
   data: asymptotic and finite-sample properties. Journal of Econometrics, 108: 1-24.

Khandelwal, Amit, 2007. The Long and Short of Quality Ladders. Mimeo, Columbia
  Business School.

Neary, J. Peter and K.W.S. Roberts, 1980. The Theory of Household Behaviour Under
   Rationing. European Economic Review, 13: 25-42.

Romalis, John, 2004. Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 94: 67-97.

Schott, Peter K., 2004. Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in Interna-
   tional Trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2): 647-678.

Schott, Peter K., 2008. The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports. Economic Policy,
   53: 5-49.

Verhoogen, Eric, 2007. Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
   Manufacturing Sector: Theory and Evidence from an Exchange-Rate Shock. Forth-
   coming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Verma, Samar, 2002. Export Competitiveness of Indian Textile and Garment Industry.
   Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations, Working Paper 94.
             E C        -C       D   P                    Q                        42


A    Theory Appendix

A1. Proof of Proposition 1

    We have already shown that ln Hscd ≤ ln Pscd + ln φcs . To demonstrate that ln Hscd ≤
ln Pscd , we need to show that ln φcs ≤ 0.
                                   c             
    Using the fact that ncz = nnos n   c,cd
                                        z     ncd
                                             + z    and noting that the set Iscd results from
                                   s
subtracting Uscd from Is , we can write:
                                                                          
                       c
                       ns                                  
              ncz ∆
                   pcd
                    z = o       c,cd
                                nz ∆   pcd
                                          z +      cd
                                                   nz ∆pcd
                                                         z −       cd
                                                                   n   pcd
                                                                    z ∆z
                                                                           .              (41)
           cd
                       ns    cd               z∈I               cd
      z∈Is                  z∈Is                       s                 z∈Us

   Using the definition of sample covariance provided in section 3, for two variables xz
and yz it is true that
                                      1  
          xz yz = ZA covA (xz , yz ) + A   xz   yz .                                (42)
     z∈A
                                      Z z∈A z∈A

Then, the first term on the right hand side of (41) can be expressed as
                                     c,cd            1  c,cd 
            c,cd
            n z   ∆
                   pcd
                    z  = Zs
                           cd
                              cov cd
                                 Is   n
                                       z   , ∆
                                               pcd
                                                z    +   cd
                                                               n
                                                               z     pcd
                                                                     ∆z                                          (43)
         cd
                                                       Z s  cd    cd
      z∈Is                                                            z∈Is            z∈Is
                                        c,cd        1  c,cd 
                         = Zscd covIscd n     pcd
                                        z , ∆z    − cd    n
                                                            z      pcd
                                                                   ∆z
                                                     Zs  cd     cd    z∈Us            z∈Is
                                                                                               
where the second equality uses the property                        c,cd
                                                                   n z   =            c,cd
                                                                                      nz    +            c,cd
                                                                                                         nz    = 0 . In
                                                            z∈Is             z∈Iscd             z∈Uscd
                    cd
turn, since ncd     
              z =   nz + nz , the second term on the right hand side of (41) can be written
as
                         cd            
          ncd    pcd               pcd          pcd
           z ∆  z    =       n
                               z ∆ z +     nz ∆z                                     (44)
      z∈Is                z∈Is                z∈Is
                                         cd
                                                          
                    = Zs covIs          
                                        nz , ∆pcd     +              pcd
                                                                  nz ∆
                                               z                      z =0
                                                           z∈Is

                                                                        cd
where the first equality in the second line uses (42) and                  n
                                                                           z = 0, and the second equal-
                                                                      z∈Is
                                                                                         
ity uses Assumption 4 and the definition of Pscd            in (7), which implies that          pcd
                                                                                             nz ∆z = 0.
                                                                                                    z∈Is
             E C                  -C              D   P                     Q                        43


   Combining the results in (43) and (44), we can rewrite equation (41) as
                                                                                         
                                                                      ∆ pcd
                                                                          z
                      c
                     ns  cd         c,cd                   z∈Iscd                     
         ncz ∆
              pcd
               z  =    o Zs covIscd n
                                     z , ∆pcd
                                             z    −      c,cd
                                                         nz           cd
                                                                             −     cd
                                                                                   n   pcd
                                                                                    z ∆z 
      cd
                     ns                               cd
                                                                   Zs           cd
      z∈Is                                                                               z∈Us                            z∈Us
                                                                                                
                                                                 ∆ pcd
                                                                     z
                                  nc              c,cd z∈Iscd                 
                          ≥      − so             n
                                                    z           cd
                                                                         cd
                                                                        +n   pcd
                                                                          z ∆z  = 0,
                                  ns            cd
                                                              Z  s
                                                   z∈Us


where the inequality uses Assumption 3 and the last equality uses Assumption 5.
                         pcd
   Finally, decomposing ∆z according to its definition in (21), we obtain
                                                 1−σs  1−σ
                                                             1
                                           pcz               s

                   z∈I cd       ncz      Psc
                                      
      ln φcs ≡ ln  s        d 1−σs                                   ≤ 0.                                                       (45)
                          nc pz      
                                  z        Psd
                        z∈Iscd


Substituting this result into ln Hscd ≤ ln Pscd + ln φcs in equation (15), we obtain

      ln Hscd ≤ ln Pscd .                                                                                                            (46)

   An analogous proof shows that ln Pscd ≤ ln Lcd
                                               s . Hence, the Paasche and Laspeyres
indexes bound the Impure Price Index,

                                                         ln Hscd ≤ ln Pscd ≤ ln Lcd
                                                                                 s .


A2. Proof of Proposition 2

    Solving for ncz in equation (4) and substituting the result into (25), we can rewrite the
right-hand side of that equation as
                              ′ 1−σ s
                                                                               1−σs 
         n 1  c′ τ s
          c                  cc                                   1−σs       pcz
   −1 + os c            Y                    n  (
                                                  p
                                                z z
                                                    c 1−σs
                                                     )     +   
                                                               Ps
                                                                 c
                                                                            n
                                                                             c
                                                                              z
                                                                                        .
         ns Y               G c′
                              s                                                  Psc
                    c ′                     z                             z

                                                                         c                   c
Using the definition of Psc in equation (7) and the fact that, since n    z = 0,   ncz ( Ppzc )1−σs =
                                                                                     
                                                                         z                     s
      %             c
                            &                                                      z
Zs cov ncz , ( Ppzc )1−σs , the above expression can be further rewritten as
               s

                                                                                                                     1−σs 
                                                                             1−σs                         
                    1  c 1−σs                                         ′
              ncs                                            ′       τ cc
                                                                       s                1 + Zs cov            pcz          .
      −1 +             Ps                                 Yc                                         ncz ,
              nos   Yc                              c′
                                                                     Gcs′                                        Psc
            E C                 -C        D   P               Q     44


Using Assumption 6 and equation (26), we can substitute the latter expression for the
right-hand side of (25). Rearranging terms and taking natural logarithms, we obtain
                                                                                
              1 Tsc             1−σs −ηs  ′  τ cc′ 1−σs
      ln 1 +           = ks ln Psco            Yc     s
                                                                 [1 + Zs (Vs + µcs )] (47)
              bs Y c                         c′
                                                      G c′
                                                        s
                              1−σs
                                      
                     (Pso )
where ks = ln            Yo
                                       . Using ln(1 + x) ≃ x, and abstracting from the approximation
error, we can express equation (47) as
                                                                        
        1 Tsc                                           ′  τ cc′ 1−σs
               = ks + (1 − σ s − η s ) ln Psco + ln      Yc   s
                                                                           + Zs (Vs + µcs ) .       (48)
        bs Y c                                         c′
                                                             G  c′
                                                                s

Finally, we can express this equation as
                                           Tsc
                                               = Ψs + γ s ln Psco + bs τ cs + ιcs
                                           Yc
where
                             γ s = bs (1 − σs − η s ) < 0, Ψs = bs (ks + Zs Vs ) ,
                                       ′  τ cc′ 1−σs                       1−σ
                                                                                   
                           c                c                           (Pso ) s
                         τ s = ln         Y      s
                                                Gc
                                                   ′        , ks = ln        Yo
                                                                                     ,
                                                         s
                                           c′
                                         ιcs =   bs Zs µcs
   E C                 -C            D   P                                 Q                  45

                                                      Percent of
                                                     Unscreened       Explicit       Median       Median       Correctly
                                                      Sample's     Country-Pair    Common         Interval     Ordered
                                                    Import Value Comparisons        Products      Length        Bounds
      Unscreened Sample                                100.0%           861           1213          4.46        99.9%
      Primary Screened Sample                          99.8%            861           347           2.51        99.8%
      Preferred Secondary Screened Sample              88.8%            829           228           0.74        99.4%
      Notes: Table displays several attributes of the estimation sample for all manufacturing in 2003 according to three
      methods of screening the raw data. All samples contain the same set of 43 countries. Import value for each sample is
      expressed as a percentage of the unscreened sample. Explicit country-pair comparisons is the number of country pairs
      that appear in the sample; the maximum is 903 (i.e., 43*42/2). Median common products is the median number of
      export products exported in common to the United States across country pairs appearing in the sample. Median interval
      length is the median log difference between Paasche and Laspeyres bounds. Correctly ordered bounds is the percent of
      bounds in the sample for which the Paasche index is less than the Laspeyres index.




 Table 1: Sample Attributes for All Manufacturing in 2003, by Screening




                                    Attributes of Estimation Sample                    Attributes of First-Stage Estimation
                                                Median
                                               Common                     Median Log                             First-Stage
                                               Products       Product-     Paasche-               Maximization Estimates
                            Country-Pair        Across       Country-Pair Laspeyres Objective       Standard        Within
               Countries Observations Country Pairs Observations            Interval  Function        Error        Bounds
        1989       43            811              133          208,108        0.74       -349         0.16          90.4%
        1990       43            829              143          223,564        0.68       -334         0.14          90.8%
        1991       43            814              144          219,596        0.69       -332         0.15          91.5%
        1992       43            814              146          224,875        0.73       -322         0.14          91.2%
        1993       43            823              156          239,190        0.74       -319         0.16          90.6%
        1994       43            846              171          263,986        0.73       -320         0.16          91.8%
        1995       43            858              185          292,615        0.76       -272         0.14          94.2%
        1996       43            862              190          308,028        0.72       -251         0.13          93.5%
        1997       43            866              206          328,629        0.69       -310         0.15          93.3%
        1998       43            869              221          342,476        0.73       -291         0.15          93.5%
        1999       43            873              226          350,882        0.76       -245         0.14          93.7%
        2000       43            877              249          374,151        0.72       -300         0.16          93.0%
        2001       43            875              238          358,160        0.78       -222         0.14          94.1%
        2002       43            831              234          341,940        0.74       -239         0.15          94.5%
        2003       43            829              228          330,968        0.74       -271         0.16          93.8%
        Notes: First panel displays characteristics of the preferred first-stage estimation sample, by year. Second panel
        displays attributes of the first-stage estimation.



Table 2: Sample and First-Stage Estimation Attributes, All Manufacturing
    E C    -C          D   P                                   Q    46

                                             First-Stage Estimator
                                   Preferred      V        Sink      HK
                          1989        90.4      88.2       86.1     46.4
                          1990        90.8      89.3       85.3     37.0
                          1991        91.5      90.0       84.8     36.7
                          1992        91.2      90.7       85.9     37.5
                          1993        90.6      89.4       86.9     37.6
                          1994        91.8      90.5       89.0     40.2
                          1995        94.2      91.7       88.5     45.4
                          1996        93.5      93.1       90.2     46.8
                          1997        93.3      93.5       87.8     46.8
                          1998        93.5      94.2       88.1     43.8
                          1999        93.7      94.0       87.9     44.7
                          2000        93.0      92.2       88.3     47.0
                          2001        94.1      94.2       89.9     44.0
                          2002        94.5      93.4       86.8     41.7
                          2003        93.8      92.7       90.5     45.3
                          Mean        92.7      91.8       87.7     42.7
                        Notes: Table compares the share of first-stage
                        estimates lying between country-pairs' Paasche and
                        Laspeyres bounds, by year.



Table 3: Goodness of Fit Across Alternative First-Stage Estimators, By Year




                                                     OLS               2SLS
                      Impure Price Index           -0.029             -0.325 ***
                                                    0.020              0.094
                      Trade Costs                  -0.016              0.022
                                                    0.062              0.080
                      Observations                     640                640
                        2
                      R                                0.93               0.87
                      First-Stage F Statistic            .                37.8
                      Notes: Table displays OLS and 2SLS regression results for
                      estimation of equation (37) on the preferred sample (see
                      text). Coefficients for country fixed effects and time trends
                      are omitted. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
                      adjusted for clustering at the country level are reported
                      below each coefficient. The instrument for the Impure Price
                      Index in the 2SLS results is the real exchange rate. ***
                      denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level.



      Table 4: Second-Stage Regression Results for All Manufacturing
E C     -C           D   P                              Q    47

                Country                       1989 1993 1998 2003 Change
                Switzerland (CHE)               1     2       2      3       -2
                Sweden (SWE)                    2     3       3      5       -3
                Germany (DEU)                   3     4       6      8       -5
                France (FRA)                    4     6       9      9       -5
                Italy (ITA)                     5     7       8      7       -2
                Finland (FIN)                   6     5       4      4        2
                Ireland (IRL)                   7     1       1      1        6
                Belgium (BEL)                   8     8       5      6        2
                Denmark (DNK)                   9     9      10     11       -2
                Japan (JPN)                    10    10      12     17       -7
                United Kingdom (GBR)           11    11      13     16       -5
                Austria (AUT)                  12    12      11     15       -3
                Netherlands (NLD)              13    13      15     12        1
                Spain (ESP)                    14    17      19     21       -7
                Norway (NOR)                   15    14      14     10        5
                Australia (AUS)                16    18      22     27      -11
                Israel (ISR)                   17    16      16     19       -2
                Hong Kong (HKG)                18    22      26     33      -15
                Canada (CAN)                   19    21      23     25       -6
                Taiwan (TWN)                   20    20      21     24       -4
                New Zealand (NZL)              21    24      27     32      -11
                Korea, Republic of (KOR)       22    19      17     18        4
                Singapore (SGP)                23    15       7      2      21
                Portugal (PRT)                 24    23      20     20        4
                Argentina (ARG)                25    26      25     23        2
                Brazil (BRA)                   26    27      28     30       -4
                Hungary (HUN)                  27    25      18     13       14
                Mexico (MEX)                   28    28      33     34       -6
                Turkey (TUR)                   29    29      32     31       -2
                Colombia (COL)                 30    31      36     41      -11
                India (IND)                    31    33      37     40       -9
                South Africa (ZAF)             32    30      31     29        3
                China (CHN)                    33    36      40     42       -9
                Greece (GRC)                   34    35      35     37       -3
                Poland (POL)                   35    37      38     39       -4
                Indonesia (IDN)                36    34      30     26       10
                Romania (ROM)                  37    40      41     38       -1
                Morocco (MAR)                  38    38      34     28       10
                Thailand (THA)                 39    41      39     35        4
                Philippines (PHL)              40    39      29     22       18
                Malaysia (MYS)                 41    32      24     14       27
                Pakistan (PAK)                 42    43      43     43       -1
                Chile (CHL)                    43    42      42     36        7
                Notes: Table records countries' quality ranking according to their
                normalized quality indexes in each year. Countries are sorted
                according to their 1989 ranking. Final column reports change
                between 1989 and 2003. Countries whose rank changes by more
                than ten places are highlighted.




               Table 5: Normalized Quality Rankings
          E C                            -C               D   P                                          Q                                         48

                                                                           Median                                                                 Median
                                                                          Common    First-                                                       Common
       First-Stage                        Median Log                      Products  Stage                        Median Log                      Products
       Estimates             Maximization Paasche-   Product-              Across Estimates         Maximization Paasche-   Product-              Across
          Within   Objective  Standard    Laspeyres Country-Pair Country Country   Within Objective  Standard    Laspeyres Country Pair Country Country
         Bounds    Function     Error      Interval    Obs       Pair Obs   Pairs  Bounds Function     Error      Interval    Obs       Pair Obs   Pairs

                                          Chemicals (SITC 5)                                                            Manufactured Materials (SITC 6)
1989     94.7%         -44         0.08          0.64          16,042      176         56       90.3%       -189         0.13        0.58         59,398          499        66
1990     93.4%         -40         0.08          0.69          18,085      198         59       90.2%       -197         0.12        0.57         61,994          512        68
1991     95.0%         -45         0.11          0.71          17,392      186         63       89.7%       -211         0.13        0.55         59,284          510        66
1992     95.6%         -54         0.11          0.73          20,035      212         62       88.9%       -224         0.15        0.55         61,843          530        67
1993     92.8%         -60         0.12          0.72          21,526      220         65       91.3%       -238         0.15        0.59         67,827          558        72
1994     96.3%         -54         0.11          0.71          23,017      226         66       90.1%       -274         0.16        0.61         76,301          594        76
1995     94.9%         -76         0.13          0.67          25,889      245         67       90.4%       -277         0.17        0.66         84,583          614        82
1996     95.1%         -47         0.07          0.76          27,998      262         70       91.4%       -248         0.16        0.66         88,890          616        84
1997     93.7%         -87         0.12          0.66          30,769      277         72       92.5%       -238         0.15        0.65         94,855          628        88
1998     93.7%         -88         0.13          0.75          32,375      285         71       91.3%       -262         0.16        0.65        101,679          646        91
1999     94.0%         -87         0.14          0.73          32,863      288         72       93.0%       -233         0.14        0.66        104,242          658        94
2000     94.3%         -85         0.12          0.65          34,919      295         74       91.7%       -293         0.18        0.66        111,155          681        96
2001     92.2%        -109         0.15          0.68          34,193      293         74       93.0%       -234         0.15        0.72        103,982          658        94
2002     86.9%        -127         0.21          0.65          33,684      278         73       94.7%       -189         0.12        0.70        101,514          631        95
2003     84.1%        -125         0.21          0.70          33,117      276         75       92.3%       -204         0.15        0.69         93,619          589        94

                                          Machinery (SITC 7)                                                           Miscellaneous Manufactures (SITC 8)
 1989     95.2%         -95          0.14           0.76       43,580         365        77      80.0%        -302         0.12        0.45        76,610          651        71
 1990     92.1%         -75          0.11           0.77       44,778         374        78      78.0%        -329         0.13        0.43        86,114          679        79
 1991     91.1%         -94          0.12           0.79       46,765         400        77      81.6%        -291         0.13        0.43        82,742          643        76
 1992     91.9%         -97          0.12           0.85       44,618         384        76      82.6%        -287         0.13        0.45        85,662          647        79
 1993     91.4%        -140          0.17           0.80       47,232         413        75      84.1%        -290         0.14        0.52        89,817          651        79
 1994     93.2%         -90          0.10           0.77       54,816         437        84      85.8%        -289         0.14        0.49        96,176          674        83
 1995     94.7%        -130          0.13           0.83       66,636         508        90      87.5%        -279         0.13        0.46       101,637          682        91
 1996     92.4%        -154          0.13           0.70       74,858         525        96      88.5%        -266         0.14        0.50       102,411          680        88
 1997     90.9%        -184          0.15           0.64       80,935         532        100     92.0%        -231         0.11        0.51       107,525          699        94
 1998     93.8%        -150          0.12           0.72       82,866         559        97      90.4%        -200         0.11        0.55       111,583          699        98
 1999     92.5%        -163          0.14           0.73       85,992         560        100     88.2%        -266         0.14        0.56       113,628          695        102
 2000     92.5%        -137          0.12           0.72       93,946         578        107     88.4%        -312         0.16        0.52       120,254          712        110
 2001     95.7%        -131          0.13           0.75       91,063         592        102     86.1%        -276         0.14        0.54       113,308          694        107
 2002     93.4%        -145          0.15           0.75       86,000         566        98      89.2%        -252         0.15        0.58       106,469          656        102
 2003     93.7%        -143          0.13           0.78       84,451         560        98      90.2%        -219         0.12        0.57       105,211          662        102
Notes: Table displays characteristics of the first-stage estimation of Impure Price Indexes by manufacturing industry and year. The number of countries included in the analysis
varies by industry: there are 27 in Chemicals, 41 in Manufactured Materials, 37 in Machinery and 41 in Miscellaneous Manufacturing.



       Table 6: First-Stage Optimization Results, By Manufacturing Industry
 E C           -C             D   P                                  Q        49

                                                                   OLS
                                    5 - Chemicals     6 - Manuf Mat   7 - Machinery          8 - Misc Manuf
         Impure Price Index             0.005             0.001           -0.016                  0.001
                                        0.005             0.004            0.007                  0.005
         Trade Costs                   -0.005              -0.056              0.016               -0.001
                                        0.012               0.020              0.059                0.015
         Observations                   400                 608                533                  610
          2
         R                              0.98                0.96               0.92                 0.96

                                                                    2SLS
                                    5 - Chemicals     6 - Manuf Mat     7 - Machinery        8 - Misc Manuf
         Impure Price Index             -0.100            -0.202 **         -0.110 ***           -0.054 **
                                         0.934             0.103             0.041                0.033
         Trade Costs                    0.109              0.011               0.009               0.016
                                        1.016              0.041               0.077               0.018
         Observations                    400              608                 533                610
           2
         R                               0.86             0.66               0.86                0.94
         First-Stage F Statistic         0.01             4.22               34.3                13.6
         Notes: Table reports OLS and 2SLS regression results for equation (37). The instrument for the
         Impure Price Index is the real exchange rate. Coefficients for country fixed effects and time
         trends are omitted. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the
         country level are reported below each coefficient. The instrument for the Impure Price Index in
         the 2SLS results is the real exchange rate. ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 5 and
         1 percent level, respectively.




Table 7: Second-Stage Regression Results, by Manufacturing Industry


                                                                     2SLS
                                                SITC 65             SITC84             SITC6584
                  Impure Price Index            -0.023 *            -0.045 *            -0.056 *
                                                 0.015               0.026               0.031
                  Trade Costs                   -0.002              0.002               -0.003
                                                 0.004              0.004                0.008
                  Observations                     434               528               579
                   2
                  R                                0.97              0.93             0.94
                  First-Stage F Statistic          4.58              11.8             16.0
                  Notes: Table compares 2SLS regression results for estimation of equation
                  (37) on noted two digit industries and a hybrid industry that combines SITC 65
                  and SITC 84. The instrument for the Impure Price Index is the real exchange
                  rate. Coefficients for country fixed effects and time trends are omitted.
                  Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the
                  country level are reported below each coefficient. * denotes statistical
                  significance at the 10 percent level.



 Table 8: Second-Stage Regression Results for Apparel and Textiles
         E C             -C           D   P                                Q             50




                                         lnH cd
                                             s                                    lnLcd
                                                                                     s
                                                             cd                 co                 do
                                                   lnP s =             lnP s          -   lnP s




Figure 1: Maximizing the Likelihood that the Observed Paasche and Laspeyres Bounds
Contain the Estimated Impure Price Index


                              Normalized Impure Price Indexes, 1989 v 2003
                                                    All Manufacturing, Mean=0
                 1




                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                            NOR
                 .5




                                                              HUN                            SWE
                                                                                    BEL       DNK
                                                                                  NLD ITAFINFRA
                                                                                  ESP GBR
                                                                                        DEU
                                                                                         AUT
                                                                        PRT            NZL
                                              MAR
               2003




                                                                              CAN
                                                                                JPN       AUS
                0




                                                            GRC
                                                              ARG

                                                POL    TURCHLKOR
                                                              ZAF
                                       ROM              PHL BRA     SGP
                                                           COL
                                                         MEX
                                                                HKG
                                                    IDN MYS
                                                          TWN
                 -.5




                                                    INDTHA

                                   PAK             CHN
                 -1




                       -1                    -.5                     0                       .5                       1
                                                                    1989
                       Note: Indexes are in logs and are normalized by the mean index across countries in each year




       Figure 2: First-Stage Estimated Impure Price Indexes, 2003 versus 1989
  E C                              -C             D   P                                  Q      51




                                                     Normalized Quality Index Intercept
                                             All Manufacturing; With 95 Percent Confidence Interval
                      1
          Log Intercept (Mean=0)
          -.5        0-1      .5




                                    COL
                                    ZAF




                                    PRT




                                    AUT
                                     IND




                                   KOR

                                   CAN




                                    JPN


                                     FIN
                                   CHL

                                    PHL



                                    POL




                                    NZL
                                   ROM
                                    PAK
                                   MYS




                                   MEX
                                   BRA

                                   SGP




                                    AUS
                                    ESP



                                   DNK


                                     ITA
                                    FRA
                                   SWE
                                   CHE
                                   MAR
                                    IDN

                                   GRC
                                   CHN


                                   TUR

                                   HUN




                                   TWN

                                     ISR
                                   NOR

                                    NLD
                                   GBR




                                   DEU
                                   ARG




                                   HKG
                                   THA




                                   BEL
                                     IRL
                                                       Normalized Quality Index Slope
                                             All Manufacturing; With 95 Percent Confidence Interval
                      .1
          Log Slope (Mean=0)
            0         .05
                      -.05




                                    IND




                                   KOR

                                   CAN




                                    JPN


                                     FIN
                                   COL
                                    ZAF




                                   PRT




                                   AUT
                                   PAK
                                   MYS




                                   MEX
                                   BRA

                                   SGP




                                   AUS
                                   ESP



                                   DNK


                                     ITA
                                   FRA
                                   SWE
                                   CHE
                                   MAR
                                    IDN

                                   GRC
                                   CHN


                                   TUR

                                   HUN




                                   TWN

                                    ISR
                                   NOR

                                   NLD
                                   GBR




                                   DEU
                                   CHL

                                   PHL



                                   POL




                                    NZL
                                   ROM
                                   THA




                                   ARG




                                   HKG




                                   BEL
                                     IRL




                                   Note: Intercepts and slopes are in logs and are normalized by their means across countries.




Figure 3: Normalized Log Quality Index Intercept and Slope, by Country
         E C                                      -C             D   P                             Q            52




                                    Normalized Quality Indexes for Nine Countries, 1989-2003
                                                        All Manufacturing; With 95 Percent Confidence Intervals
                                                          China                            France                         Germany
                                    -.75 0 .75
               Log Index (Mean=0)




                                                          Greece                          Hungary                             Japan
                                    -.75 0 .75




                                                         Malaysia                         Singapore                       Thailand
                                    -.75 0 .75




                                                 1990     1995      2000         1990      1995     2000         1990     1995        2000

                                    Note: Index for each year is normalized by the mean across countries.




      Figure 4: Normalized Log Quality Index for Select Countries, 1989 to 2003




                                                  Change in Quality vs Raw Export Prices, 1989 to 2003
                                                                                    All Manufacturing
                                                                                    IRL
                                    1




                                                                     MYS
                  Change in Normalized Quality




                                                           SGP

                                                                                    PHL
                                    .5




                                                                                                                        HUN
                                                                                IDNCHL
                                                                                                                    MAR
                                                                  THA
                                                                                  PAK
                                                                                                           ROM
                                                                           KOR NLD
                                                                               BEL NOR
                       0




                                                                          FIN     PRTGRCPOL
                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                 TUR
                                                                          MEX
                                                             CHN IND COL
                                                                              CHE
                                                                       BRA
                                                                         ITA
                                                               AUTDNK
                                                                   FRASWE
                                                                TWNGBR
                                                                 JPN       ESP
                                                                  DEUCAN
                                                          AUS       NZL
                                    -.5




                                                                 HKG

                                                 -.5                       0                      .5                                         1
                                                                     Change in Normalized Impure Price Index




Figure 5: Change in Normalized Quality from 1989 to 2003 vs Change in Normalized
Impure Price Indexes 1989 to 2003
         E C                                    -C            D   P                           Q        53




                                                Normalized Impure, Quality and Pure Price Indexes
                                                                               All Manufacturing
                                                                                      Malaysia
                                 .25
                Log Index (Mean=0)
               -.5   -.25   0




                                                     1990                         1995                             2000


                                                      Impure Prices              Net Trade               Quality          Pure Prices

                           Note: All series are normalized by the mean across countries in each year.




Figure 6: Decomposition of Malaysia’s Impure Price Index into Quality and Pure Price
Indexes




                                                        Change in Manufacturing Quality vs Income
                                                                                   1989 to 2003
                                                                                                          IRL
                               1




                                                                                             MYS
                Change in Normalized Quality




                                                                                SGP

                                                                PHL
                                  .5




                                                                       HUN
                                                                                IDN     CHL
                                                                MAR
                                                                                       THA
                                                                      PAK
                                                         ROM
                                                               ZAF
                                                                     BEL
                                                                      NLD   NOR                    KOR
                     0




                                                                    FRA
                                                                  ARG  GRC
                                                                         PRT POL
                                                                 MEXTURISR
                                                              COL                IND                                        CHN
                                                            CHE
                                                        BRA       ITA AUT ESP
                                                                  SWE  GBR
                                                                 FINGER
                                                                JPN                          TWN
                                                                     CAN
                                                                     DNK
                                                                          AUS
                                                                        NZL
                               -.5




                                                                         HKG

                                               -.5                            0                    .5                               1
                                                                            Change in Normalized PCGDP




Figure 7: Change in Normalized Quality from 1989 to 2003 vs Change in Normalized
Income 1989 to 2003
         E C                                  -C           D   P                                  Q             54




                                                Normalized Quality vs PCGDP Indexes, 1989-2003
                                                        All Manufacturing, Average by 1989 Income Group

                                   1 1.5
               Log Norm Index (Mean=0)
                -1 -.5    0-1.5.5




                                                1990                            1995                                2000


                                                       Mean PCGDP High Income                            Mean PCGDP: Low Income
                                                       Mean Quality: High Income                         Mean Quality: Low Income
                                           Note: Countries are divided into high- and low-income cohorts based on 1989 per capita gdp (PCGDP).




Figure 8: Evolution of Mean Normalized Quality and PCGDP for Countries with High
and Low Income in 1989




                                                Normalized Impure Price Indexes, 1989 v 2003
                                                                By Manufacturing Industry, Mean=0
                                                          5 - Chemicals                                  6 - Manuf Materials
                                 1




                                                                                                                              CHE
                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                                        IRL
                                 .5




                                                               AUT CHE                                            SWEFRA
                                                               FRAJPN
                                                              FIN                                            HUN NOR
                                                                                                                   SGP
                                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                FINDEU
                                                                                                                   BEL
                                                             BEGBR
                                                             DNKL SWE
                                                                DEU                                              AUS
                                                                                                                NLD
                                                                                                                 ITA
                                                                                                                ESP
                                                                                                                PRT
                                                           NOR                                                 CAN DNK
                                 0




                                                          ESP
                                                        HKG   NLD
                                                               ITA
                                                        BRA IND                                           CHL
                                                                                                        POL
                                                                                                         MYS ARG
                                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                                            KOR
                                                                                                              NZL
                                                         KOR
                                                       MEX    AUS                                       PHLTUR
                                                                                                            BRA
                                                        CAN                                                HKG
                                                                                                         COL
                                 -1 -.5




                                                         ARG
                                                       TWN                                            THA  TWN
                                                                                                       INDIDN
                                                       CHN                                           CHN
                                                                                                      PAK
               2003




                                                          7 - Mac hinery                               8 - Mis c Manufactures
                                                                                                                          CHE
                                 1




                                                                     NOR
                                                                    IRL                                                 DNKFRA
                                                          ARG            DNK                                         IRL
                                                                                                                     SWE   AUT
                                 .5




                                                                 NLD SWEFIN                                         NLDITA
                                                                                                                        DEU
                                                             ESP CHE                                          PRT JPN
                                                                                                                   ES
                                                                                                                   BELGBR
                                                                                                                      P
                                                               BEL
                                                                DEU
                                                            ITAGBRAUT
                                                                   AUS                                      HUN CAN
                                                                                                          GRC          AUS    FIN
                                                                 FRA
                                                               CAN                                   MAR
                                                                                                   POL
                                 0




                                                        BRA
                                                 PHLKORMEX JPN
                                                      PRT
                                                      SGP                                         ROM TUR ARG  SGP
                                                 POL
                                                  MYS                                                       CHL
                                                                                                          COLKOR
                                                                                                           PHL
                                                                                                             HKG
                                 -1 -.5




                                                                                                        IDN
                                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                       IND BRA
                                                                                                           THA
                                                  TWN
                                                   IND                                                 CHNTWN
                                                                                                            MYS
                                                   THA
                                                    HKG
                                                                                                 PAK ZAF
                                                CHN

                                           -1             0              1             2    -1              0                 1        2
                                                                                     1989
                             Note: Indexes are in logs and normalized by the mean index across countries in each year




Figure 9: Normalized Log Impure Price Indexes Across Manufacturing Industries, 2003
vs 1989
facturing Industry
                                                                                                                                                                                               -.1     0         .1       .2    .3             -2   -1       0       1       2                             -4     -2       0     2   4              -5         0        5
                                                                                                                                                                                       IDN                                            IDN                                                          T HA                                    THA
                                                                                                                                                                                      T HA                                            T HA                                                        HKG                                     HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                      PHL                                             PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                     MYS                                             MYS                                                          CHN                                      CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E C




                                                                                                                                                                                     CHN                                             CHN                                                            IND                                     IND
                                                                                                                                                                                      TUR                                             TUR                                                         KOR                                      KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                     H UN                                            H UN
                                                                                                                                                                                     HKG                                             HKG                                                          MEX                                      MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                      PR T                                            PR T                                                        BRA                                      BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                      Z AF                                            Z AF
                                                                                                                                                                                      POL                                             POL                                                         T WN                                    T WN
                                                                                                                                                                                       IN D                                           IN D                                                        ARG                                      ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                     T WN                                            T WN                                                          ESP                                     ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                     KOR                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                     M EX                                            M EX                                                            FIN                                     FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                     BRA                                             BRA                                                          CAN                                      CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                     AR G                                            AR G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -C




                                                                                                                                                                                      N ZL                                            N ZL                                                         AUT                                     AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                      ESP                                             ESP                                                         GBR                                     GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN                                             CAN                                                          DNK                                      DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                     NOR                                             NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                        ITA                                            ITA                                                           ITA                                     ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                      AUT                                             AUT                                                          BEL                                     BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                     AUS                                             AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                      NLD                                             NLD                                                         F RA                                     FRA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7 - Machinery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOR                                     NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5 - Chemicals




                                                                                                                                                                                        IRL                                            IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                       ISR                                            ISR                                                           ISR                                     ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                      JPN                                             JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                     GBR                                             GBR                                                           NLD                                     NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                       FIN                                            F IN                                                        D EU                                     DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA                                             FRA                                                         AUS                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                      BEL                                             BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                     CHE                                             CHE                                                          SWE                                     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                     DNK                                             DNK                                                           JPN                                     JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                     DEU                                             DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                     SGP                                             SGP                                                          CHE                                      CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                     SWE                                             SWE                                                             IRL                                     IRL



                                                                                                                                                                                               -.3   -.2   -.1        0    .1   .2             -2   0    2       4       6   8                             -.05        0       .05   .1            -1    -.5   0   .5       1
                                                                                                                                                                                      Z AF                                            Z AF                                                        T HA                                     THA
                                                                                                                                                                                     SGP                                             SGP                                                          CHN                                     CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                      POL                                             POL                                                         HKG                                     HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                     R OM                                            R OM                                                         C HL                                     CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                     MEX                                             MEX                                                          MYS                                      MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                      CHL                                             CHL                                                          PH L                                    PH L
                                                                                                                                                                                       IND                                             IND                                                          IND                                     IND
                                                                                                                                                                                      PAK                                             PAK                                                          POL                                     POL
                                                                                                                                                                                     MAR                                             MAR                                                          SGP                                      SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                     GRC                                             GRC                                                          MEX                                      MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                     BRA                                             BRA                                                           PAK                                     PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                     COL                                             COL                                                            IDN                                     IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                     T UR                                            T UR                                                         T UR                                     TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                     ARG                                             ARG                                                          COL                                      COL
                                                                                                                                                                                       IDN                                             IDN                                                        ARG                                     ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                     C AN                                            C AN                                                         T WN                                    T WN
                                                                                                                                                                                     HUN                                             HUN                                                          HUN                                      HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                      NLD                                             NLD                                                          BR A                                    BR A
                                                                                                                                                                                      PHL                                             PHL                                                         GRC                                      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                      BEL                                             BEL                                                          NZL                                     NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D   P




                                                                                                                                                                                     SWE                                             SWE                                                          CAN                                      CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                      AUS                                             AUS                                                         KOR                                      KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                      ESP                                             ESP                                                          Z AF                                    ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                       ISR                                             ISR                                                          ISR                                     ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                     GBR                                             GBR                                                           PRT                                     PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                     CHN                                             CHN                                                          AUS                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                      JPN                                             JPN                                                          NLD                                     NLD




                                                                                      Note: Intercepts and slopes are in logs and are normalized by th eir means across countries.
                                                                                                                                                                                     M YS                                            M YS                                                         ESP                                      ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                      AUT                                             AUT                                                         NOR                                      NOR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8 - Misc Manuf
                                                                                                                                                                                     DEU                                             DEU                                                          GBR                                      GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                     DNK                                             DNK                                                           JPN                                     JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6 - Manf Materials




                                                                                                                                                                                      THA                                             THA                                                            ITA                                     ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                      FR A                                            FR A                                                        DEU                                      DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                     KOR                                             KOR                                                           F RA                                    FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                     CHE                                             CHE                                                          DNK                                      DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                       FIN                                             FIN                                                         AUT                                     AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                        IRL                                             IRL                                                       SWE                                     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                      PRT                                             PRT                                                          BEL                                     BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                        IT A                                            IT A                                                        F IN                                    F IN
                                                                                                                                                                                     T WN                                            T WN                                                           IRL                                     IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                     HKG                                             HKG                                                          CHE                                      CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Normalized Quality Index Intercepts and Slopes, By Industry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   55




Figure 10: Normalized Log Quality Index Intercepts and Slopes, by Country and Manu-
         E C                                  -C           D   P                                Q              56




                                                       Normalized Quality Indexes, 1989-2003
                                                                        By Manufacturing Industry
                                                       China                           France                          Germany
                                    -1 0 1
               Log Index (Mean=0)




                                                       Greece                          Hungary                          Japan
                                    -1 0 1




                                                      Malaysia                        Singapore                        Thailand
                                    -1 0 1




                                              1990    1995       2000          1990    1995       2000        1990     1995       2000


                                                       6 - Manuf Materials                   7 - Machinery              8 - Misc Manuf

                                    Note: Indexes are in logs and are normalized by the mean across countries in each year.




Figure 11: Normalized Log Quality Indexes Across Manufacturing Industries, 1989 to
2003




                                                      Normalized Quality Indexes, 1989-2003
                                                By Manufacturing Industry; Average by 1989 Income Group
                                                      6 - Manuf Materials                                    7 - Machinery
                        .5
                        -1 -.5 0




                                                                                              1990           1995       2000             2005

                                                     8 - Mis c Manufactures
                        .5
                        -1 -.5 0




                                             1990        1995           2000          2005
                                                                                      year
                                                                        High Income                      Low Incom e
               Note: Countries are divided into high- and low-income cohorts based on 1989 per capita gdp.




Figure 12: Evolution of Mean Normalized Quality for Countries with High and Low
Income in 1989, by Industry
