NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCHEDULE SELECTION BY AGENTS:
FROM PRICE PLANS TO TAX TABLES
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Richard J. Zeckhauser
Working Paper 13808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13808

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

We would like to thank Chris Avery, Jerry Green, Michael Grubb, Daniel Hojman, Nolan Miller, Eugenio
Miravete and seminar participants at Cornell, Harvard, and Michigan for helpful conversations and
insightful comments. Erzo Luttmer gratefully acknowledges funding from the National Institute on
Aging through Grant Number T32-AG00186 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Schedule Selection by Agents: from Price Plans to Tax Tables
Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 13808
February 2008
JEL No. D42,D82,H21
ABSTRACT
Requiring agents with private information to select from a menu of incentive schedules can yield efficiency
gains. It will do so if, and only if, agents will receive further private information after selecting the
incentive schedule but before taking the action that determines where on the incentive schedule they
end up. We argue that this information structure is relevant in many applications. We develop the
theory underlying optimal menus of non-linear schedules and prove that there exists a menu of schedules
that offers a strict first-order interim Pareto improvement over the optimal single non-linear schedule.
We quantify the gains from schedule selection in two settings. The first is a stylized example of a
monopolistic utility company increasing profits by offering a menu of price plans. The second is a
simulation based on U.S. earnings data, which shows that moving to a tax system that allows individuals
to choose their tax schedule increases social welfare by the same amount as would occur from a 4.0
percent windfall gain in the government budget (or about $600 per filer per year). The resulting reduction
in distortions accounts for about two thirds of the increase in social welfare while the remainder comes
from an increase in redistribution.

Erzo F.P. Luttmer
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Mailbox 25
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu
Richard J. Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Agents select schedules in many contexts. Individuals choosing a phone plan choose among a
number of alternative schedules, each typically consisting of a subscription fee, a low price per
minute for a certain number of minutes with a high price per minute thereafter. Similarly,
consumers may select among price plans offered by a utility company. Employers may offer
their sales force various compensation schedules – some with a relatively low base compensation
and high commissions, and others with a relatively high base compensation and low
commissions. Governments also offer a menu of incentive schedules in many contexts. When
closely held firms decide whether to function as Schedule C or Schedule S corporations, they are
essentially choosing between schedules. So too are spouses in the U.K., who for tax purposes
must choose ex-ante how to allocate joint capital income between them. Individuals deciding
how much to contribute to their medical flexible spending account in effect decide on the
schedule of marginal costs they will face for medical spending in the coming year. American
senior citizens face a schedule selection challenge when deciding whether to participate in the
Medicare drug program and, if so, which plan to choose. More generally, anyone deciding
whether or not to enroll in some money-saving plan with an up-front fee is choosing from a twoitem menu of schedules.
This paper determines when offering a menu of schedules can generate an efficiency
improvement over the optimal non-linear incentive schedule. The essential setup is an expanded
screening model. As with the standard screening model, an agent’s type is private information,
and agents of different types have preferences that differ in the space of the incentive schedule.
Thus, in the cell phone example, an agent with a higher type would value additional cell phone
minutes more highly for each usage level. The model expands the standard screening model
because agents secure private information at two stages, not merely one. Thus, each agent
possesses private information about her future type before she selects one of the schedules the
principal offers. Then after choosing her schedule, she receives additional private information
that precisely defines her type. Given her type, she picks a single point on her previously
selected incentive schedule. We will refer to the initial private information, i.e., the information
at the point of schedule selection, as the agent’s signal, and the subsequent private information as
the agent’s type. For example, the agent might know that she generally will be a heavy cell
phone user (her signal), but before she chooses her phone plan, she is unlikely to know whether
2

some lengthy calls will become desirable that month (her type). When she must choose among
the menu of schedules, the agent will select the one that maximizes her expected utility, given
her subjective distribution of her future types. We shall assume rational expectations, i.e., that
these subjective distributions are accurate. Note, an agent’s signal only affects the probability
distribution of the agent’s type and is therefore no longer pay-off relevant once she learns her
type.
The principal offers a menu of non-linear schedules to maximize his objective function.
The maximand would be social welfare were the principal a welfare-maximizing government
offering a menu of tax schedules. The maximand would be profits were the principal a cell
phone company. The timing of this setup is summarized in Figure 1. Because an agent learns
her type with certainty only after she has chosen her incentive schedule, some agents will regret
their choice of incentive schedule once they learn their type.
Figure 1: Timing of events
Principal
offers a
choice of
incentive
schedules

Agent gets
a signal σ
about her
type

Agent selects
an incentive
schedule
(reveals her
signal σ)

Agent
learns her
type θ

Agent chooses
a point on her
incentive schedule
(reveals her type θ )

Providing the principal with additional instruments cannot hurt the principal (there are no
commitment problems). Thus, it is immediate that offering a menu of non-linear schedules
yields a weak gain to the principal over the constrained optimal outcome given a single nonlinear schedule. The more surprising result is that, in a wide range of cases, this gain is strict and
first order.1 Part of this gain is due to the fact that the menu of schedules allows resources to be
redistributed to the principal’s advantage. If the principal were a profit-maximizing company,
this redistribution would take the form of the principal extracting more rents from the agents. If

1

The qualifier “a wide range of cases” is spelled out in detail in Proposition 2. In particular, our proof assumes
separable utility and a standard solution to the optimal single incentive schedule (no corner solution, no bundling,
binding incentive constraints). With this setup, an interim-by-type, first-order efficiency gain is achieved except in
the following two cases: (i) the degenerate case where the signal is either perfectly informative or perfectly
uninformative and (ii) one combination of parameters that has Lebesgue measure zero. We also prove that when
there are two or fewer types, offering a menu of schedules can never produce a strict welfare gain. Of course, this
does not rule out cases with two or fewer agents, because a single agent could have many potential types.

3

the principal were a government, part of the social welfare increase would come from more
redistribution from richer individuals to poorer ones.
However, even if one has no interest in any gains stemming from a redistribution of
resources, the schedule-selection approach still offers advantages. We prove that it generically
produces a first-order interim Pareto efficiency gain. The Pareto gain is interim in the sense that
average utility of each type increases (where the average is taken with respect to the signal
received). The interim Pareto efficiency gain implies an ex-ante efficiency gain. Behind the veil
of ignorance, i.e., before learning one’s signal or type, all agents would prefer the menu of
schedules to the optimal single non-linear schedule.
If functional form restrictions are imposed on a price schedule, allowing agents to select
from a menu of price schedules can yield welfare gains simply because the menu effectively
relaxes the functional form restrictions. For example, as Faulhaber and Panzar (1977)
acknowledge, the menu of two-part tariffs in their model is equivalent to a single non-linear
pricing schedule. Similarly, the menu of tax schedules in Alesina and Weil (1992) is effectively
a single non-linear schedule. This equivalence between a menu of schedules and a single nonlinear schedule breaks down when agents receive further private information about their type
after selecting a schedule from the menu. Such an information structure is employed in Baron
and Besanko (1984), Clay et al. (1992), Miravete (1996, 2002, 2005), Courty and Li (2000), and
Grubb (2007). These papers differ in the types of screening problems modeled, restrictions
imposed on the schedules, and restrictions imposed on type and signal distributions. Clay et al.
(1992) compare a menu of two-part tariffs to a single three-part (or tapered) tariff rather than
allowing arbitrary functional forms for the tariffs. Miravete (1996, 2002) also limits the menu of
schedules to a menu of two-part tariffs. The remaining papers impose no functional form
restrictions on the schedules. Their contributions, nicely synthesized in Rochet and Stole (2003),
lie in characterizing the design of optimal menus of non-linear schedules.
The theoretical contribution of this paper consists of two new results concerning the
welfare properties of a menu of schedules. First, we prove that the gain to the principal of
offering a menu of schedules generically is strict and first-order. Second, we show that
generically there exists a menu of schedules that yields an interim-by-type efficiency gain over
the optimal single non-linear schedule.

4

The empirical contribution of this paper is to characterize the magnitudes of the gains to
the principal and to decompose this gain into a component due to a reallocation of resources to
the principal’s advantage and a component due to an increase in efficiency. We provide two
simulations. One highly-stylized simulation shows how a monopolistic utility company can
increase its profits by offering a menu of rate schedules. We demonstrate to what extent this
increase in profits comes from an efficiency gain, and to what extent it is driven by the
principal’s increased ability to extract rents from the agents. The second simulation is more
ambitious. It starts from the optimal non-linear income tax schedule for the actual ability
distribution in the Unites States. We estimate a signal distribution that people have about their
future ability level, and examine the welfare gain from offering a choice of two non-linear tax
schedules instead of one. We find that, for our baseline parameters, the choice of tax schedules
increases social welfare by the same amount as would occur from a 4.0 percent windfall gain in
the government budget (or about $600 per filer per year). This gain in social welfare is over two
times as large as the gain in social welfare that comes from going from the optimal linear to the
optimal non-linear tax schedule. About two thirds of the increase in social welfare derives from
the efficiency gain of offering a menu of tax schedules (the average marginal tax rate falls) while
the remainder comes from an increase in redistribution.

2. Formal Results
We start by considering the standard screening problem, which captures the majority of problems
described in the literature, though only a fraction of the problems that arise in the real world.
Consider a situation where, once an agent contracts with the principal, she receives no further
private information, in other words, her signal is perfectly informative. This would occur, for
example, if a firm had to hire a salesperson with private knowledge about her capabilities, but
those capabilities remained fixed, and the firm could monitor conditions that changed sales
prospects, e.g., whether a potential client was recalcitrant. In this case, i.e., where signals are
perfectly informative or agents have perfect information about their type, offering a menu of
schedules yields no benefit. As Clay et al. (1992) note, if an agent always knew her type with
certainty when selecting her schedule, she could always predict with certainty which point she
would choose on the incentive schedule. In that case, the principal could simply offer a single
5

incentive schedule consisting of the set of bundles that agents end up choosing on the menu of
schedules. The outcome with this single incentive schedule would be identical to the outcome
with the menu of schedules.
In two additional cases, offering a menu of incentive schedules offers no benefit beyond
an optimal single non-linear schedule. First, if there is no initial signal, or that signal is
completely uninformative, a menu of incentive schedules yields no benefit because the agent has
no information on which to base her choice of incentive schedule. Second, and far less obvious,
there is no benefit to offering a menu of schedules if there are only two types. In a two-type
screening model, the model most often considered in the literature, the principal makes a tradeoff
between the cost of distorting the behavior of the low type and giving informational rents to the
high type.2 If the fraction of high types increases, the optimal plan raises the distortion to the
low types so as to reduce the informational rent paid to the high types. It does so since this
distortion is relative cheap (few low types) and informational rent to be paid to high types is
relatively expensive (many high types). Thus, if an agent truthfully reports that she has a high
signal (raising the probability she is of the high type), the optimal incentive scheme would
reduce her informational rent should she prove to be a high type. Similarly, upon a truthful
report of a low signal, the optimal incentive scheme would boost the informational rent. But this
means that those with a high signal would have an incentive to declare falsely that they received
a low signal. A similar argument shows that low types would also have an incentive to declare
falsely. In short, it is not possible to get truthful declarations of the signals in a two-type model
if the signals will be used to improve social welfare.
Proposition 1 captures these three negative cases for offering a menu of schedules:3
Proposition 1: Offering a choice of schedules can not yield a strict welfare gain over the
optimal single incentive schedule if any one of the following three conditions holds: (i) the signal
is perfectly informative, (ii) the signal is completely uninformative, or (iii) there are only two
types.

2

It is never optimal to distort the behavior of the high type, because this would reduce the surplus that can be
extracted from her.

6

Proof in the appendix.
The remaining results in the paper exclude the conditions in Proposition 1, and assume
that agents receive further private information after their contracts with the principal are struck,
i.e., that the initial signals are imperfect, and that there are N types, with N ≥ 3. To provide
motivation and intuition, we frame the setup in terms of optimal non-linear income taxation.
However, the framework applies immediately to a wide range of screening problems.
2.1 Setup with the Optimal Single Non-Linear Schedule
Consider the standard screening problem, i.e., one where agents receive no signals and
the optimal single non-linear schedule is offered. All agents derive utility from consumption, C,
and disutility from effort, X, according to utility function U(C, X) = V(C) - F(X). We assume that
agents are expected-utility maximizers and that V(C) is concave and increasing in C while F(X)
is convex and increasing in X. Let θ denote an agent’s type (θ = 1, 2, … N), and let wθ be the
wage or return to effort for that type. Without loss of generality, we assume that w is increasing
in θ. The population fraction of each type of agent is denoted by αθ. The principal, logically
thought of as the government in this context, observes income Y = wθ X, but neither X nor wθ
separately. The principal maximizes an objective function or social welfare function given by
Σθ αθ Φ(U(Cθ, Xθ)). We assume that the social welfare function Φ(.) is weakly increasing and
weakly concave; i.e., the principal wishes to redistribute resources towards the lower types. The
principal maximizes the objective function by offering a feasible, incentive-compatible incentive
schedule consisting of N bundles {Cθ , Yθ}θ=1..N. By the revelation principle, we can limit our
analysis to direct mechanisms, those where the principal maximizes his objective function
subject to a resource constraint (RC) and the agents’ incentive constraints (IC).

(1)

Max

{C! ,Y! }! =1.. N

N

$ " # (U (C , Y
! =1

!

!

!

/ w! )) ,

s.t.

3

Since the single incentive schedule is a special case of a menu of incentive schedules (namely a menu with two
identical items), the menu of schedules can by definition attain at least the social welfare achieved by a single
incentive schedule.

7

N

%"
! =1

!

(C! # Y! ) $ 0 , and

U(Cθ′ , Yθ′ /wθ ) - U(Cθ , Yθ/wθ ) ≤ 0 for any θ, θ′ .

(RC)
(IC)

While this sets up the screening problem as one where the principal maximizes his measure of
social welfare, this is much less restrictive than it may at first seem. Screening problems in
which the principal maximizes profits subject to a participation constraint by the agent are a
special case of the dual of the screening problem of a welfare-maximizing principal. To see this,
note that the resource constraint is simply the negative of the principal’s profits, and that setting
the derivative of Φ(.) to zero for all but the lowest type turns the objective function into the
participation constraint for the lowest type (which is the binding participation constraint).
Maximizing the utility of the lowest type subject to a zero-profit constraint is merely the dual of
maximizing profits subject to a constraint on the utility of the lowest type.
2.2 Setup with Schedule Selection
Now, we extend the standard screening problem described above by letting the agents
receive a signal about their type, and letting the principal offer a choice of schedules to the
agents after the agents have received their signal but before they have learned their type. In this
setup, the agents initially do not know their own type θ; instead they receive a signal σ, where σ
is either equal to B (bad) or G (good). The principal cannot observe the signal, and conditional
on type the signal does not affect pay-offs. Let the joint probability of being of type θ and
receiving signal σ be denoted by αθσ. We assume that the signals are imperfectly informative.
The principal now offers a choice of two incentive schedules, with {CθG , YθG}θ=1..N
intended for those with a good signal and {CθB , YθB}θ=1..N for those whose signal is bad. After
receiving her signal but before learning her type, the agent chooses one of the two incentive
schedules.4 Because the principal does not observe the signal, these incentive schedules need to
be ex-ante incentive compatible – agents with a good signal must weakly prefer the schedule

4

We assume that agents are fully rational when they make this choice (i.e., they do not suffer from timeinconsistency nor are they subject to temptation). Miravete (2003) and Narayanan et al. (2007) provide evidence in
the context of phone plans that consumers generally choose the best schedule for them. DellaVigna and Malmandier
(2006), however, show that when choosing gym memberships, consumers systematically choose contracts that are
more expensive ex-post than other available contracts.

8

intended for them over the schedule intended for those with a bad signal, and vice versa. After
learning her type, the agent chooses a point on the incentive schedule she previously selected.
The principal’s objective function is Σθ Σσ αθσ Φ(U(Cθσ , Xθσ )). We consider direct
mechanisms in which the principal maximizes his objective function subject to a resource
constraint (RC), two ex-ante incentive constraints that ensure signals are truthfully revealed, and
2N(N-1) ex-post incentive constraints that ensure truthful revelation of type conditional on the
schedule selected.

(3)

N

+ +#

Max

{C!" ,Y!" }% ! =1.. N & " = B ,G ! =1

!"

$ ( U (C!" , Y!" / w! ))

'
(
) " = B ,G *

s.t.
N

& &#

" = B ,G ! =1

!"

(C!" $ Y!" ) % 0

N

& # (U (C
! =1

!"

!" '

, Y!" ' / w! ) $ U (C!" , Y!" / w! ) ) % 0

U(Cθ′σ , Yθ′σ/wθ) - U(Cθσ , Yθσ/wθ) ≤ 0

(RC)
for any σ, σ′

(Ex-Ante IC)

for any θ, θ′, σ .

(Ex-Post IC)

2.3 Results
We express the efficiency gain from offering a menu of schedules in terms of an interimby-type Pareto gain, which implies a welfare or ex-ante Pareto gain. The interim-by-type Pareto
gain, i.e., the expected utility of each type weakly increases, is most relevant in a context, such as
optimal taxation, where the government is concerned about redistribution across types.
Proposition 2: Posit that (i) there are at least three types, (ii) utility is separable, and (iii) the
optimal single incentive schedule has the incentive constraints for type θ binding toward type

θ-1, is not a corner solution, and does not involve bundling. Then, for generic distributions of
signals and types, there exists a menu of schedules that yields a strict first-order, interim-by-type
Pareto improvement over the optimal single non-linear incentive schedule.

9

Corollary: The principal will offer a menu of schedules that yields a strict first-order gain to
the principal compared to the optimal single non-linear incentive schedule.
Proofs in the appendix.
To understand the idea behind the proof of Proposition 2, consider the special case of three types,
L (low), M (medium) and H (high). We start from the optimal single incentive schedule {Ĉθ ,
Ŷθ}θ=L,M,H , which is the solution to the F.O.C.s of (1), and assume we have a standard interior
solution (no bundling, no corner solutions, two binding incentive constraints). In this optimal
solution, the effort levels of the low and medium types are distorted downwards.
The optimal single schedule is also a feasible, though generally not optimal, solution to
the problem in which the principal can offer a menu of schedules. Namely, the principal could
offer a (rather limited) menu consisting of the best single incentive schedule. Starting there, we
examine whether we can perturb this degenerate menu of schedules to produce the desired
interim-by-type Pareto improvement. We denote these perturbations by lower-case letters while
denoting the resulting non-degenerate menu of schedules by upper-case letters: {CθB = Ĉθ + cθB,
YθB = Ŷθ + yθB }θ=L,M,H and {CθG = Ĉθ + cθG , YθG = Ŷθ + yθG}θ=L,M,H. We then examine
perturbations {cθσ, yθσ}θ=L,M,H; σ=B,G such that (i) all the incentive constraints identified in (3)
remain satisfied, and (ii) the expected utility for each type remains constant. If such a
perturbation relaxes the resource constraint, extra resources are available, and all types can be
made better off. A strict interim Pareto improvement is available.
To find the required perturbation, we linearize all the binding incentive constraints of the
menu of schedules problem (3) around the optimal single incentive schedule. This imposes six
linear constraints on the perturbation (two ex-ante incentive constrains, and two ex-post
incentive constraints for each of the two schedules). In addition, we linearize expected utility for
each type around the optimal single incentive schedule and hold expected utility constant, which
imposes three additional constraints (one for each type). Finally, we do not perturb income for
the high type (yHB and yHG) because the first-order conditions of (3) tell us that these should be
set at the first-best level, as is well known to be the case for the optimal single incentive
schedule. In total, we impose 9 linear restrictions on a 10-dimensional perturbation. Let ε be the
one free parameter of the deviation, i.e., the perturbation in each choice variable is a linear

10

function of ε. By substituting the perturbations in the choice variables into the resource
constraint, we determine how the perturbation affects the resource constraint, and find that the
change in the resource constraint is proportional to ε and that the factor of proportionality is nonzero for generic distributions of αθσ. Because ε enters linearly, the efficiency gains are first
order. Since the change in the resource constraint depends on a first-order approximation of the
effects of a perturbation in the optimal single incentive schedule, this expression only holds for
small values of ε. For larger values, second-order effects could become important, and could
begin to offset the first-order gains.
2.4 Intuition for the Three-Type Case with Signals Satisfying the Monotone Likelihood Property
The intuition is most easily understood when the signals satisfy the monotone likelihood
property, though schedule selection can also offer welfare gains in cases where signals fail to
satisfy this property. When signals satisfy the monotone likelihood property, they change the
relative likelihoods of the three types: a bad signal increases the likelihood of the low type and
reduces the likelihood of the high type, whereas a good signal does the opposite. The effect of
the signal of the likelihood of a medium type is ambiguous. We know from the screening
literature that the optimal incentive schedule depends on the relative fractions of the types. The
optimal distortion to any given type decreases as its fraction in the population increases, because
a distortion’s efficiency cost is proportional to the numbers of those it is imposed upon. The
optimal distortion increases with the proportion of higher types, because increasing the distortion
reduces the informational rents paid to higher types, and these informational rents are
proportional to the higher types’ fraction of the population. Thus, if the population fraction or
the likelihood of a type increases, it is optimal to both reduce the distortion to and the
redistribution to this type.
Ideally, the incentive schedule conditional on a signal would reduce both the distortion
and the redistribution to the types that become more likely conditional on that signal. Thus,
efficiency considerations push towards less redistribution and less distortion to the more likely
types. However, when signals are private this is not incentive-compatible because agents with a
signal that makes a given type more likely would not choose a schedule that reduces
redistribution to that type. Thus, the incentive constraint that a signal be truthfully revealed
pushes in the opposite direction, namely in the direction of more redistribution towards types that
11

become more likely conditional on the signal. With just two types, high and low, these
contradictory forces cannot be resolved because only one type (low) is distorted. As a result,
offering a menu of schedules provides no benefit if there are only two types, as we proved in
Proposition 1.
Once three or more types are involved, the picture changes. At least two types get
distorted and these opposing efficiency and incentive forces no longer cancel out in general.
With two or more types distorted, the perturbation conditional on the signal can decrease the
distortion to one type, thereby raising efficiency and tightening the ex-ante incentive constraint,
but increasing the distortion to the other type, which lowers efficiency but simultaneously relaxes
the ex-ante incentive constraint. Only for highly specific parameter values, will the effect of a
distortion on efficiency relative to its effect on the ex-ante incentive constraint be exactly the
same for each type. Apart from that knife-edge case, one can increase efficiency by reducing the
distortion that is relatively costly in terms of efficiency but has relatively little effect on the
incentive constraint, and vice versa.
This intuition explains why, as the proof in the appendix shows, the perturbation always
moves yLB and yMG in one direction but yLG and yMB in the other. For example, if, conditional on
a bad signal, the distortion to the low type is increased, then the distortion to the medium type
will be decreased. Moreover, one can show that the perturbation always moves the utility of the
high and the low types in the opposite direction of the utility of the medium type. This nonmonotonic effect results from reducing redistribution where the efficiency costs of redistribution
are highest, and increasing redistribution where it most strongly relaxes the ex-ante incentive
constraint.

3. Application I: Monopolistic Utility Company Offering a Menu of Price Plans
We now present a highly stylized example to illustrate how giving agents a choice of schedules
can benefit the principal. In this example, the principal is a profit-maximizing firm, there are just
three types of agents, and parameter values are chosen to enhance exposition. Section 4 presents
a more empirically-based example in which the principal is a social-welfare maximizing
government, the agents come from a continuum of types, and parameter values are calibrated to
reality.
12

Consider a monopolistic utility company that produces an output X at a constant marginal
cost of β. The company, which maximizes profits, sells to consumers, who differ in how much
they value the good. Their valuation is determined by the taste parameter, wθ, which can take on
three values 0 < wL < wM < wH depending on whether the agent’s type θ is L (low), M (medium)
or H (high). The population fraction of each type of agent is denoted by αθ. Consumer surplus is
given by U! ( X , P) = w! X " P . Since there are just three types of consumers, the price plan
consists of three points in (X, P) space. The company finds the price plan that maximizes profits:
(4)

Max

{ X ! , P! }! = L ,M ,H

%

! = L,M ,H

"! ( P! $ # X ! ) - (fixed cost),

s.t.
Uθ (Xθ , Pθ) ≥ 0

for any θ, and

(IR)

Uθ (Xθ , Pθ) - Uθ (Xθ′ , Pθ′ ) ≥ 0

for any θ, θ′ .

(IC)

Thus, in setting its price plan, the company needs to ensure that each type’s individual rationality
constraint is satisfied (consumer surplus cannot be negative) and that all incentive constraints are
satisfied (each type of consumer chooses the point on the price schedule intended for her).
Next, we extend the standard screening problem described above by letting agents
receive a signal about their type and letting the company offer a menu of schedules to the agents
once the agents have received their signal, but before they have learned their type. That is,
agents receive a private signal σ, where σ takes on one of two values B (bad) or G (good). Let
the joint probability of receiving signal σ and being of type θ be denoted by αθσ. In this
application, we assume that the signals are informative and, more specifically, that they satisfy
the monotone likelihood property: the probability of receiving a good signal increases strictly
with type: αHG / αHB > αMG / αMB > αLG / αLB. In the context of a utility company, one can think
of the agent’s type as being independently re-drawn every month from a given distribution. The
distribution from which the type is drawn is determined by the signal. Thus, consumers with a
bad signal – low users on average – draw their type each month from a distribution that is
stochastically dominated by the distribution from which consumers with a good signal draw their
types.

13

The utility company now offers a choice of two price plans, with {XθG , PθG}θ=L,M,H
intended for those with a good signal, and {XθB , PθB}θ=L,M,H for those with a bad signal. After
receiving her signal but before learning her type, the consumer chooses one of the two price
plans. One can think of this as a one-time decision. Because the principal can never observe the
signal, these price plans need to be ex-ante incentive compatible – consumers with a good signal
must prefer the plan intended for them ex-ante over the plan intended for those with a bad signal,
and vice versa. Each month, upon learning the draw of her type for that month, the consumer
chooses how much output to consume – that is, she chooses a point on her previously selected
price plan.
The utility company now maximizes profits by offering a menu with two price plans:
(5)

Max

,

{ X!" , P!" }%! = L ,M ,H & " = B ,G
'
(
) " = B ,G *

,

! = L,M ,H

#!" ( P!" + $ X !" ) - (fixed cost),

s.t.
Uθ (Xθσ, Pθσ) ≥ 0

"

αθσ[Uθ (Xθσ , Pθσ) - Uθ (Xθσ′ , Pθσ′)] ≥ 0

for any θ, σ,

(IR)

for any σ, σ′, and

(Ex-Ante IC)

for any θ, θ′, σ .

(Ex-Post IC)

! = L,M ,H

Uθ (Xθσ , Pθσ) - Uθ (Xθ′σ , Pθ′σ) ≥ 0

We calculated the optimal single price plan and the optimal menu of price plans for a
marginal cost (β) equal to 1 and taste parameters wL =12, wM =15, wH = 20. Given this marginal
cost and these taste parameters, the first-best consumption levels are 36, 56.25 and 100. The joint
distribution of signals and types is chosen as:

(6)

! aLB
#
# aMB
#a
% HB

aLG " ! 9 30 1 30 "
$ #
$
aMG $ = # 5 30 5 30 $ .
aHG $& #% 1 30 9 30 $&

In other words, the unconditional probability of each signal is one half and the unconditional
probability of each type is one third. However, conditional on a good signal, the consumer is
nine times more likely to be of the high type than of the low type, and vice versa for a bad signal.

14

The circles in Figure 2 show the choices for the three types under the optimal single nonlinear price plan. That plan produces three quantity-price combinations: 9 units for a price of 36
(chosen by the low type), 25 units for a price of 66 (chosen by the medium type) and 100 units
for a total price of 166 (chosen by the high type). The figure also plots the indifference curves
for the three types. These curves show that the high type is indifferent between the bundle of the
high type and the one for the medium type. In other words, the incentive constraint for the high
type binds. Similarly, the incentive constraint binds for the medium type. Finally, the low type
is indifferent between its bundle and not purchasing at all, showing that the individual rationality
constraint binds for the low type.
Panel A of Table 1 shows quantity sold, revenue, consumer surplus, producer surplus and
social surplus associated with the optimal single non-linear price plan. The utility company
maximizes profits by distorting the consumption of low and medium types downwards, but
setting the consumption level for the high type at its first-best level. This is the standard result in
this type of screening model – the distortion to the lower types allows the principal to charge a
higher price from the high type because the distortion makes it less attractive for the high type to
select a quantity-price combination intended for a lower type. We find that the consumption
level for the medium type is distorted strongly downwards from a first-best level of 56.25 to 25,
which is the same distortion as would be caused by a 50% tax on the consumption good. The
distortion to the low type is even more severe. Its consumption is distorted downwards by a
factor of 4 (from 36 to 9), which is the same distortion as would be caused by a 100% tax on the
consumption good.
The optimal menu of non-linear price plans consists of two plans: one plan is preferred
by those who received a bad signal (σ=B), and the other is preferred by those who received a
good signal (σ=G). The triangles in Figure 2 show the price-quantity combinations for the plan
chosen by those with a good signal while the diamonds show the plan chosen by those with the
bad signal. Panel B of Table 1 shows the outcomes associated with this menu of price plans. The
consumption level for the high type in the menu of plans remains at the first-best level, as was
also the case in the single price plan. Compared to the optimal single price plan, however, the
price plan chosen by those with a good signal increases the distortion to the low type so as to
extract more rent from and reduce the distortion to the medium type. Since relatively few
individuals receiving a good signal are of the low type, the efficiency cost of the increased

15

distortion to the low type is relatively low, while the efficiency gain that comes from reducing
the distortion to the medium type is relatively large. In contrast, the plan chosen by those getting
a bad signal curtails the distortion of the low type, but increases the distortion to the medium
type. The increased distortion to the medium type allows the monopolist to reduce the surplus
going to the high type, which ensures that this plan is unattractive to those with a good signal
(among whom the fraction of high types will be high). Indeed, this consideration is important as
those with a good signal are indifferent between the price plan for those with a good signal and
the price plan for those with a bad signal (see row 5 of panel B).
In this example, the menu of plans allows the utility company to increase its profit as a
fraction of sales by about one percentage point. Given that profits are typically around 5%-10%
of sales, this boosts profits by roughly 10% to 20%. This increase in profits is made possible by
two factors. First, the menu of price plans gives the utility company an additional mechanism for
extracting surplus from consumers. Since the utility company has no concern for efficiency per
se, it will still extract additional surplus even if the efficiency cost of doing so is extremely high.
Second, for a given amount of surplus going to consumers, the menu of price plans allows the
utility company to make the price plans more efficient. Table 2 disentangles these two effects
for five different pricing mechanisms. These pricing mechanisms include two infeasible ones,
namely first-best (requires that types be observable) and non-linear pricing conditional on signal
(requires that signals be observable). These two infeasible pricing mechanisms provide a
theoretical benchmark. The three feasible schedules presented are the menu of non-linear price
plans, the single non-linear price plan, and the single linear price plan. The two non-linear price
plans are the focus of this paper, while the linear price plan, which is a two-part tariff consisting
of a base price plus a price per unit of consumption, serves as a comparison.
The first three columns show consumer surplus, profit and deadweight loss produced by
these five pricing mechanisms when there is no constraint on consumer surplus. Not
surprisingly, profits decrease monotonically as we move down these five pricing mechanisms,
because, as we move down the list, successively more constraints are imposed on the pricing
mechanisms (in order, we add: type is unobservable, signal is unobservable, only one plan can be
offered, the plan must be linear).
As pricing mechanisms become more constrained, two tendencies emerge: First,
consumer surplus tends to rise, which makes sense given that a more constrained schedule makes

16

it harder for the utility company to extract surplus from the consumers. Second, the deadweight
loss tends to rise. These tendencies are reflected in the table, with two exceptions. First, as we
move from the menu of non-linear price plans to the single non-linear price plan, the deadweight
loss falls. Apparently, constraining the pricing mechanism to a single plan eliminates some very
distortionary ways of extracting surplus from consumers, leading to an overall drop in
deadweight loss. Second, the linear price plan lowers consumer surplus compared to the single
non-linear plan.
To disentangle the inherent efficiency effects of the pricing mechanisms from the effects
caused by a change in the amount of surplus extracted from consumers, the last three columns
show the effect of the pricing mechanism on profits and DWL when consumer surplus is
constrained to remain at the level associated with the single non-linear plan. Such constraint
might be put in place, for example, were a regulator considering letting the monopolist move to
the choice-of-plans format. Here we find that the menu of non-linear prices indeed allows the
company to raise its profits without reducing consumer surplus. In other words, the menu of
non-linear price plans is also inherently more efficient, even though unimpeded the company will
squander these gains in the service of higher profits.

4. Application II: Menu of Income Tax Schedules
Whether the metric be monies paid, people covered, or deadweight loss imposed, the tax-andtransfer system is probably the preeminent schedule for individuals in the United States and in
most developed nations. It has also received considerable attention from economists. Thus we
select it for our second application, and assess the welfare gains that could be reaped if the
government offered people a menu of tax-and-transfer schedules before they earned income in a
period. We define income taxes broadly, including means-tested transfers that in effect are
negative income taxes.
Following Mirrlees (1971), we assess the design of the optimal income tax as a screening
problem: the government maximizes social welfare by redistributing income across agents whose
differing ability (or skill) levels are private information. There is a continuum of abilities or
types. We follow Mirrlees with one major exception. His analysis was static: agents’ ability
levels were known to them at the outset and stayed constant. In contrast, we specifically assume
17

that agents secure additional private information about their ability after they select a tax
schedule. We employ the term “later learning” for such situations. Golosov, Kocherlakota,
Tsyvinski (2003), Kocherlakota (2005), Albanesi and Sleet (2006), Battaglini and Coate (2006),
and Golosov and Tsyvinski (2006) have expanded Mirrlees’ static setup in a related direction;
they allow unobserved ability to vary over time. Thus, they too allow for later learning, but in
their setup ability actually changes whereas in our setup ability does not change; individuals
merely learn more about their ability over time.
In either later-learning situation, offering a menu of schedules can be beneficial if
individuals have some, but imperfect, private information about their future ability. In the
framework with time-varying abilities, the government could allow individuals to repeatedly
choose a tax schedule (say for the coming year or the coming 5 years). In the static laterlearning situation, where ability is constant but only learned over time, the choice of tax
schedules would be offered once, namely at a point in time when the agent has some but not
perfect information about her ability.
In this analysis, we follow Mirrlees’ static setup of the optimal income tax problem and
augment it with a one-time choice of tax schedules for a group of individuals who are initially
indistinguishable to the government, or amongst whom the government is not permitted to
distinguish. Using U.S. data, we calculate the welfare gains that would accrue were a menu of
schedules offered, as opposed to a single schedule for all. To compute the welfare gains reaped,
we first need to find the optimal schedule for the base case, namely the optimal single non-linear
income tax schedule for the U.S. To do this, we follow the general approach of Saez (2001).
Thus, we use the actual distribution of wage earnings of joint-filers in the 1999 public-use tax
file and assume, following Saez, that the upper right tail of the earnings distribution is a Pareto
distribution with parameter 2.5 The distribution of earnings of couples with labor earnings is
depicted in Figure 3.
We use this earnings distribution to derive the distribution of unobserved ability levels.
The unobserved ability level is the pre-tax wage when wages are measured as compensation per
unit of effort (not necessarily per hour). We use a standard iso-elastic labor supply function with
5

The tax file does not separate out the earnings of each individual of couples who file jointly. Rather than
attributing earnings across individuals, we will treat couples as one unit with a single utility function. We exclude
the 15% of couples without substantive (>$1000/yr) labor income. The vast majority of these are retired couples,
and they are beyond the scope of the optimal income tax model.

18

a labor supply elasticity of ε: X= w! , where X denotes effort or labor supply and w denotes
ability or the pre-tax wage. Following Saez, we approximate the current tax system as one with
a constant marginal rate of 40%. We can now infer the pre-tax wage from observed earnings,
since we know that total pre-tax earnings equal the pre-tax wage times the labor supply as a
function of the after-tax wage: Y = w X((1-τ)w) = (1 # " )! w! +1 , where Y denotes pre-tax earnings
and τ denotes the marginal tax rate. This relationship between Y and w allows us to infer the
distribution of unobserved ability from the distribution of earnings. The inferred cumulative
distribution of ability levels is denoted by G(w), while the corresponding density function is
denoted by g(w).
We use a quasi-linear utility function U(C, X) = C " ! !+1 X 1+1/ ! . We then solve the
standard Mirrlees optimal tax problem, in which the government designs a non-linear tax
schedule. That schedule is implicitly defined by relating consumption and income, C(w) and
Y(w), as a function of ability. The government sets the tax schedule to maximize social welfare
subject to the resource constraint (RC) and an incentive constraint (IC):

Max

{C ( w ),Y ( w )}

" ! (U (C (w), Y (w) / w) ) g (w)dw ,

s.t.

# (C (w) + E ! Y (w) ) g (w)dw " 0 , and

(RC)

U X (C ( w), Y ( w) / w)
C '( w)
+w
= 0 !w ,
U C (C ( w), Y ( w) / w)
Y '( w)

(IC)

where Φ(.) is the social welfare function and E is government consumption. In the screening
problem with continuous types, the incentive constraint becomes the condition that the after-tax
tax wage rate (w C'/Y') equals the marginal disutility of labor (UX /UC); that is, agents locally
have no incentive to deviate from choosing the bundle intended for them. We follow Saez
(2001) by setting government consumption, E, equal to 25% of pre-tax income. Since the
government budget is balanced, net tax revenue is also equal to 25% of pre-tax income. We
posit a logarithmic social welfare function.

19

We solve this problem using the dynamic programming approach developed by Mirrlees
(1971), and extended by Saez (2001). This yields a system of two differential equations, which
we solve numerically. We compute the optimal single non-linear income tax schedule to provide
a basis of comparison for our menu-of-schedules approach. Hence, we will present it below,
after we first calculate the menu of optimal non-linear tax schedules.
The cornerstone of our approach is that individuals get an imperfect signal on their
ability. We take a person’s decision whether or not to attend college as a proxy for the signal the
person received about his or her ability. We can then calculate the fraction of individuals at
each earnings level that went to college, and take that as the fraction of people at that earnings
level that received a good signal. Because the optimal tax schedules are calculated for joint
filers, we define a good signal as both individuals in the couple having at least some college
education. Because people probably know more about their likely ability than is reflected in
their choice of going to college, we consider this proxy to be a lower bound on the
informativeness of the signal.
We use the 5% Public Use Micro Sample from the 2000 Census to estimate the
probability of having received a good signal as a function of position in the cumulative earnings
distribution. The circles on Figure 4 show these probabilities by percentile in the earnings
distribution using data from 2.3 million couples in the 2000 Census. We fit a 3rd order
polynomial (solid line) through these probabilities, and will use this polynomial as the “weakly
informative” signal distribution in the simulations. Under this signal distribution, the lowest
earner (lowest ability type) has an 18% chance of receiving a good signal, the highest earner has
an 87% chance of a good signal, while the unconditional probability of a good signal is 45%.
The precision of the signal distribution, defined as the probability that the signal correctly
predicts the person to be in the top 45% of the earnings distribution, is 63%. This 63% should be
compared to a precision of 50% for a completely random signal and a precision of 100% for a
completely informative signal. In short, this signal distribution is only weakly informative about
future earnings. Because we believe this “weakly informative” signal distribution may
underestimate the precision of the true signal distribution, we also use two more informative
signal distributions, also plotted in Figure 4. The “medium informative” signal distribution is
formed by keeping the unconditional probability of a good signal at 45% but increasing the
signal’s average precision by 10% (from 63% to 69%) and by letting the signals at the extremes

20

of the ability distribution have a precision of 95% (rather than about 85% in the weakly
informative distribution). Finally, the “strongly informative” signal distribution is a symmetric
distribution where the probability of a good signal is 50% and where the precision at the
extremes is 99%.
Using Bayes’ rule to combine the earnings distribution from administrative tax data
(Figure 3) with the probability of a good signal conditional on position in the earnings
distribution (Figure 4), we find the earnings distributions conditional on the signal received.
Figure 5 plots these distributions for the medium informative signal distribution. As before,
given a labor supply function, the underlying ability distribution can be inferred from the
earnings distribution. This yields the underlying ability distributions conditional on the signal
received: g(w|σ), where σ equals G for a good signal and B otherwise.
We now adapt the standard Mirrlees problem to allow for a choice of tax schedules so as
to assess the improvement. The government now offers two schedules: {C(w, G), Y(w, G)} for
those who announce a good signal and {C(w, B), Y(w, B)} for those who announce a bad signal.
Formally, the government solves the following maximization:
Max

{C ( w , B ),Y ( w , B ),
C ( w ,G ),Y ( w ,G )}

$ " % # (U (C (w, ! ), Y (w, ! ) / w) ) g (w | ! )dw
!

!

w

s.t.

% " & (C (w, ! ) # Y (w, ! ) ) g (w | ! )dw + E $ 0

(RC)

U X (C ( w, ! ), Y ( w, ! ) / w)
C '( w, ! )
+w
= 0 "w, ! ,
U C (C ( w, ! ), Y ( w, ! ) / w)
Y '( w, ! )

(Ex-Post IC)

!

!

w

% (U (C (w, ! '), C (w, ! ')) " U (C (w, ! ), C (w, ! )) ) g (w | ! )dw # 0

$! , ! '

(Ex-Ante IC)

w

The resource constraint (RC) and the ex-post incentive constraint are the same as in the
standard Mirrlees problem, except that the RC is summed over signals, and the ex-post incentive
constraints are conditional on the signal. In addition, there are now two ex-ante incentive
constraints that ensure that the signal is truthfully revealed. Once again we invoke the dynamic
programming techniques employed in the standard Mirrlees problem. This yields a system of
two differential equations for each signal, but these systems of differential equations are

21

interlinked and different from the one in the standard Mirrlees problem because of the ex-ante
incentive constraints. The systems of differential equations are solved numerically.
We now turn to the comparison we sought, namely between the optimal single tax
schedule and the pair of optimal tax schedules contingent on the announced signal. Figure 6
shows the total tax paid as a function of earnings for the three situations, where labor supply
elasticity is assumed to equal 0.5 and the signal-dependent schedules are based on the medium
informative signal distribution. We express the total tax as a fraction of the consumption level
under the optimal single schedule.6 The optimal single schedule has a transfer level of $13,467
per year at no income, the optimal schedule conditional on a bad signal starts at $15,395 and the
optimal schedule conditional on a good signal starts at $10,235. Thus, as the figure shows, the
tax schedule for those with a bad signal starts off with a relatively high level of transfers and
relatively low marginal rates, but around $50,000 of earnings the marginal tax rate starts to rise
relatively steeply, and beyond $100,000 of earnings those with a low signal pay more tax than
those with a high signal. This excess tax above $100,000 is what prevents those receiving a
good signal from pretending they received a bad signal.
Figure 7 shows more clearly that the marginal tax rates for those with a bad signal are
lower than the marginal tax rates of the single schedule when earnings are low, but become very
high at high levels of earnings. In contrast, the marginal tax rates for those with a good signal
are lower than the marginal tax rates of the single schedule when earnings are high. Thus,
effectively, those with a high signal purchase low marginal tax rates in their likely earnings
range. The price to them is a low transfer level and high initial marginal tax rates. For either
signal, the menu of tax schedules offers relatively low marginal rates for the earnings range
where the agent is most likely to be given her signal. This feature drives the efficiency gains that
come from offering a menu of schedules. These relationships between marginal and average
rates over various ranges are the norm with schedule selection applied to optimal income
taxation.
Figure 8 plots the marginal tax rate as a function of an agent’s percentile in the
unconditional ability distribution. It also plots the expected marginal tax rate conditional on the
6

We need to divide the total tax by consumption or income in order to create a graph that is easily comprehensible.
Dividing by income results in average tax rates going to minus infinity at low income levels. Because own
consumption differs by schedule, dividing by own consumption is not desirable. Hence, we divide all three
schedules by the consumption level that the agent would have received under the single schedule.

22

agent’s type (computed by taking a weighted average of the two schedules)7. This shows that,
for each level of unobserved ability, the expected marginal tax rate is lower for the menu of
schedules than it is for the optimal single schedule. This reduction in the expected marginal tax
rate generates the efficiency gain secured from offering a choice of tax schedules.
Figure 9 shows the redistributive effects of a menu of schedules. It plots the log
difference in utility at each ability level between the single schedule and each of the signaldependent schedules. Because the social welfare function is logarithmic, the average across
signals of the log change in utility also represents the contribution to social welfare of offering a
choice of tax schedules. The figure shows that those with low ability levels gain on average, as
do those with the highest ability levels. However, the social welfare of the upper middle class is
lower with menu of tax schedules than with the single schedule.
Table 3 shows the effect of offering a menu of tax schedules on behavior, characteristics
of the tax schedule, welfare, and efficiency for our baseline parameter assumptions (medium
informative signal distribution and a labor supply elasticity of 0.5). In panel A, the comparison
is made holding net government revenue (= government expenditure) constant. This is the
relevant comparison when evaluating the effects of introducing a menu of schedules. We find
that offering a menu of schedules reduces the marginal tax by 3.8 percentage points on average,
which produces increased average earnings and consumption. This reduction in average
marginal tax rates reduces DWL by 12.1 percent, which is equivalent to $440 per tax filer or 2.8
percent of government revenue. The menu of schedules not only increases efficiency, it also
allows the government to redistribute more towards lower ability types, as was evident in Figure
9. The combined effect of the efficiency gain and the increased redistribution is to increase
social welfare by 2.4%. Panel B provides an alternative metric for this welfare gain. It asks how
much more revenue can the government raise when it offers a menu of schedules compared to
the optimal single schedule if it holds social welfare constant. The answer to this question is
$636 per filer per year, or about 4.0 percent of tax revenue. In other words, offering a menu of
schedules yields the same gain in social welfare as would a 4.0 percent windfall gain in
government revenue.

7

The weighted average is calculated as the square root of the weighted mean of the squared tax rates associated with
each type, where the weights are the fractions of each type at that level of ability. We do this because deadweight
loss is proportional to the square of the tax rate.

23

In Table 4, we compare the optimal single non-linear schedule to three alternative
schedules. Panel A shows that the welfare gain of offering a menu of taxes would rise to 4.5
percent if the government could observe the signal. Since the welfare gain is only 2.3 percent
when the signal is unobservable, roughly half of the potential welfare gain of offering a menu of
schedules is foregone because of the need to satisfy the ex-ante incentive constraints. The
government can observe the signal when it consists of having attained some college education.
However, by treating the signal as unobservable, we ensure that offering a menu of tax schedules
will not affect the individuals’ incentives to go to college. It thus makes sense to treat observable
signals that are reflections of endogenous decisions as unobservable to the government. A
number of recent papers have examined the benefits of making the tax schedule dependent on
exogenous characteristics such as age, height, and gender (Kremer 2001, Alesina et al. 2007,
Mankiw and Weinzierl 2007, and Weinzierl 2007). Mankiw and Wienzierl note that the idea of
conditioning tax schedules based on exogenous characteristics such as height generates
considerable opposition. These authors explore a number of reasons for this opposition, but
much such opposition would vanish if the people of different heights chose to be on different tax
schedules rather than were forced to be on a different schedule. Offering a choice of schedules
would yield a smaller welfare gain than forcing people onto different schedules, but this
reduction in the size of the welfare gain may be acceptable if it makes it politically feasible to
use multiple schedules.
We saw in Table 3 that the expected utility of those with a good signal is lower under a
menu of schedules than under the optimal single schedule. Thus, at the point when agents know
their signal but not their type, all those with a good signal would oppose moving from the
optimal single schedule to a choice of schedules. If the support of those with a good signal is
needed for political feasibility, the government needs to offer a menu of schedules that offers an
interim-by-signal Pareto improvement. That is, conditional on her signal (but before learning her
type), each agent must expect to achieve a higher level of utility when given the menu of
schedules. Panel B of Table 4 shows that this additional restriction on the choice of tax
schedules would reduce the welfare gain of offering a choice of schedules from 2.3% to 1.9%.
To place the welfare gain from offering a choice in tax schedules in perspective, we also
calculated the welfare gain of going from the optimal linear schedule to the optimal non-linear
schedule. Panel C of Table 4 shows that this welfare gain to be 1.0 percent, implying that the

24

welfare gain from offering a menu of tax schedules is about twice as large as the gain from
offering a single non-linear rather than a single linear schedule.
Table 5 explores the sensitivity of the welfare and efficiency gains to assumptions about
the labor supply elasticity and the informativeness of the signal distribution. Row 5 reproduces
the results for our baseline assumptions. Offering a menu of schedules leads to a welfare gain of
2.4 percent, which is the same welfare gain that would be reaped were there a windfall gain to
the government budget of 4.0 percent or $636 per filer. The efficiency gains from offering a
menu of schedules are equivalent to 2.8 percent of the government budget or $440 per filer, and
thus account for more than half of the welfare gain. Increased redistribution accounts for the
remainder of the welfare gain. Rows 4 and 6 show that the welfare gains are quite sensitive to
the informativeness of the signal distribution. The welfare and efficiency gains are about one
fifth as great for the weakly informative signal distribution as for the medium informative signal
distribution, while the strongly informative signal distribution yields welfare and efficiency gains
that are about 30 percent larger than in the base case. In contrast, the results are relatively
insensitive to assumptions about the labor supply elasticity. The welfare and efficiency gains in
absolute dollars are about 30 percent lower when the labor supply elasticity is 0.2 and about 30
percent higher when the labor supply elasticity is 1.0. These effects are much less than
proportional to the labor supply elasticity because the optimal tax rate also decreases as the labor
supply elasticity increases. Overall, the table shows that even under relatively conservative
assumptions about the labor supply elasticity and the informativeness of the signal distribution,
offering a menu of schedules will still yield worthwhile welfare and efficiency gains.

5. Conclusion
In a wide variety of settings, principals let agents select their incentive schedule from a menu of
schedules. The advantages are diverse. It may be an alternative way of presenting a single
complicated non-linear schedule (Alesina and Weil, 1992). The principal may use a menu of
schedules to take advantage of agents’ time-consistency problems or other behavioral anomalies
(Esteban and Miyagawa 2005, Eliaz and Spiegler 2006, 2007, or Grubb 2007). We explore a
quite different rationale for offering a menu of schedules in a setting where agents are fully
rational: Where agents acquire more information about their type over time, offering the agent a
25

choice of schedules at the point where the agent’s private information about his own type is
imperfect will generically be beneficial to the principal.
We make two main theoretical contributions beyond the existing literature that compares
menus of schedules to the optimal single non-linear schedule in settings with fully rational agents
(Baron and Besanko 1984, Miravete 2005, and Courty and Li 2000). The first contribution is our
result that, generically, the benefit to the principal of offering a menu of schedules is strict and
first-order. Schedule selection benefits the principal because it allows the principal to screen the
types more efficiently. Our second contribution is our result that this efficiency gain can, in
principle, be used to achieve a first-order interim-by-type Pareto improvement. Efficiency gains
emerge because the menu of schedules induces each type to select the schedule that contains
relatively few distortions to the action that that type is likely to take. In addition, a menu of
schedules benefits the principal because it gives him a more flexible tool to redistribute rents to
suit his objectives, namely more profits if the principal is a profit-maximizing company, or more
income redistribution if the principal is a government maximizing a redistributive social welfare
function. Generally, this redistribution of rents means that the menu of schedules that the
principal selects will not Pareto dominate the optimal single incentive schedule.
Our empirical contribution is to empirically assess the possible benefits of schedule
selection in a tax setting. To do so, we compared the optimal non-linear income tax schedule for
the U.S. to the optimal menu of two non-linear tax schedules. For our baseline parameter
choices, we found that offering a choice of tax-schedules would boost social welfare by 2.4%.
To put this welfare gain in perspective, it is equivalent to the welfare gains under the optimal
single schedule of a windfall gain to the government budget of 4.0 percent or $636 per filer. To
provide another metric, the welfare gain from offering a menu of schedules is more than twice as
large as the welfare gain from going from the optimal linear to the optimal non-linear tax
schedule, a topic that has received considerable attention in the economics literature. Our
simulation of the welfare gain admittedly relies on many assumptions. Nevertheless, we believe
that it shows that schedule selection has the potential to yield significant welfare gains.
Three decades ago, nonlinear schedules started to receive considerable research attention,
and research findings and practical applications proliferated side by side. Schedule selection, an
equivalently promising technology, has had limited but important real world applications. If it is
to reach its potential, it now merits much greater attention in both research and practice.

26

References
Albanesi, Stefania and Christopher Sleet (2006), “Dynamic Optimal Taxation with Private
Information,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), pp. 1-30.
Alesina, Alberto, Andrea Ichino, and Loukas Karabarbounis (2007), “Gender Based Taxation
and the Organization of the Family,” NBER working paper no. 13638.
Alesina, Alberto and Philippe Weil (1992), “Menus of Linear Income Tax Schedules,” NBER
working paper no. 3968.
Baron, David P. and David Besanko (1984), “Regulation and Information in a Continuing
Relationship,” Information Economics and Policy, 1(3), pp. 267-302.
Battaglini, Marco and Stephen Coate (2006), “Pareto Efficient Income Taxation with Stochastic
Abilities,” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.
Clay, Karen B., David S. Sibley, and Padmanabhan Srinagesh (1992), “Ex Post vs. Ex Ante
Pricing: Optional Calling Plans and Tapered Tariffs,” Journal of Regulatory Economics,
4(2), pp. 115-138.
Courty, Pascal and Hao Li (2000), “Sequential Screening,” Review of Economic Studies, 67(4),
pp. 697-717.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier (2006), “Paying Not to Go to the Gym,” American
Economic Review, 96(3), pp. 694-719.
Eliaz, Kfir and Ran Spiegler (2006), “Contracting with Diversely Naive Agents,” Review of
Economic Studies, 73(3), pp. 689-714.
Eliaz, Kfir and Ran Spiegler (2007), “Speculative Contracts,” Unpublished Manuscript, New
York University.
Faulhaber, Gerald R. and John C. Panzar. (1977), “Optimal Two-Part Tariffs with SelfSelection,” Bell Laboratories Economics Discussion Paper No. 74.
Esteban, Susanna and Eiichi Miyagawa (2005), “Optimal Menu of Menus with Self-Control
Preferences,” Unpublished manuscript, Pennsylvania State University.
Golosov, Mikhail, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2003), “Optimal Indirect and
Capital Taxation,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, pp. 569-587.
Golosov, Mikhail and Aleh Tsyvinski (2006), “Designing Optimal Disability Insurance: A Case
for Asset Testing,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(2), pp. 257-279.

27

Grubb, Michael D. (2007), “Selling to Overconfident Consumers,” Unpublished manuscript,
MIT.
Kocherlakota, Narayana (2005), “Zero Expected Wealth Taxes: A Mirrlees Approach to
Dynamic Optimal Taxation,” Econometrica, 73(5), pp. 1587-1621.
Kremer, Michael (2001), “Should Taxes Be Independent of Age?” Unpublished manuscript,
Harvard.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew Weinzierl (2007), “The Optimal Taxation Of Height: A Case
Study Of Utilitarian Income Redistribution,” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard.
Miravete, Eugenio J. (1996), “Screening Consumers through Alternative Pricing Mechanisms,”
Journal of Regulatory Economics, 9(2), pp. 111-132.
Miravete, Eugenio J. (2002), “Estimating Demand for Local Telephone Service with
Asymmetric Information and Optional Calling Plans,” Review of Economic Studies,
69(4), pp. 943-71.
Miravete, Eugenio J. (2003), “Choosing the Wrong Calling Plan? Ignorance and Learning,”
American Economic Review, 93(1), pp. 297-310.
Miravete, Eugenio J. (2005), “The Welfare Performance Of Sequential Pricing Mechanisms,”
International Economic Review, 46(4), pp. 1321-1360.
Mirrlees, James A. (1971), “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,”
Review of Economic Studies, 38(114), pp. 175-208.
Narayanan, Sridhar, Pradeep K. Chintagunta, and Eugenio J. Miravete. (2007), “The Role of
Self Selection, Usage Uncertainty and Learning in the Demand for Local Telephone
Service,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 5, pp. 1-34.
Rochet, Jean-Charles and Lars Stole. (2003), “The Economics of Multidimensional Screening.”
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World
Congress, M. Dewatripont, L. P. Hansen and S. J. Turnovsky (eds.), Cambridge
University Press.
Saez, Emmanuel (2001), “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of
Economic Studies, 68(1), pp. 205-229.
Weinzierl, Matthew (2007), “The Surprising Power of Age-Dependent Taxes,” Unpublished
manuscript, Harvard.

28

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1
The proofs of parts (i) and (ii) are immediate (as explained in the body of the paper). Below
follows the proof to part (iii).
Suppose that schedule SM = {CLB, YLB, CLG, YLG, CHB, YHB, CHG, YHG} is an optimal menu of
incentive schedules that satisfies the resource constraint, ex-ante incentive constraints and the expost incentive constraints. This incentive schedule yields social welfare of:
V(SM)

= αLB Φ(U(CLB,YLB/wL)) + αLG Φ(U(CLG,YLG/wL)) +
αHB Φ(U(CHB,YHB/wH)) + αHG Φ(U(CHG,YHG/wH))

and satisfies the following resource and incentive constraints:
αLB(CLB-YLB) + αLG(CLG-YLG) + αHB(CHB-YHB) + αHG(CHG-YHG) ≤ 0
αLG/αG (U(CLB,YLB/wL) - U(CLG,YLG/wL)) + αHG/αG (U(CHB,YHB/wH) - U(CHG,YHG/wH)) ≤ 0
αLB/αB (U(CLG,YLG/wL) - U(CLB,YLB/wL)) + αHB/αB (U(CHG,YHG/wH) - U(CHB,YHB/wH)) ≤ 0
U(CLB,YLB/wH)- U(CHB,YHG/wH) ≤ 0
U(CLG,YLG/wH)- U(CHG,YHG/wH) ≤ 0
Using the identities αHG/αG = 1-αLG/αG and αHB/αB = 1- αLB/αB , adding the two ex-ante incentive
constraints yields:
(1-αLG/αG) (U(CHB,YHB/wH) - U(CHG,YHG/wH)) + αLG/αG (U(CLB,YLB/wL) - U(CLG,YLG/wL)) +
(1- αLB/αB) (U(CHG,YHG/wH) - U(CHB,YHB/wH)) + αLB/αB (U(CLG,YLG/wL) - U(CLB,YLB/wL)) ≤ 0
Rearranging:
(-αLG/αG)(U(CHB,YHB/wH)-U(CHG,YHG/wH)) + αLG/αG (U(CLB,YLB/wL)-U(CLG,YLG/wL)) +
(-αLB/αB)(U(CHG,YHG/wH)-U(CHB,YHB/wH)) + αLB/αB (U(CLG,YLG/wL)-U(CLB,YLB/wL))≤0
(αLG/αG-αLB/αB)[(U(CHG,YHG/wH)-U(CHB,YHB/wH))-(U(CLG,YLG/wL)-U(CLB,YLB/wL))] ≤0
Since (αLG/αG - αLB/αB) < 0, this implies:
(A.1) U(CHG,YHG/wH) - U(CHB,YHB/wH) ≥ U(CLG,YLG/wL) - U(CLB,YLB/wL)
Next, we prove by contradiction that U(CLG,YLG/wL) - U(CLB,YLB/wL) ≤ 0. Suppose that
U(CLG,YLG/wL) - U(CLB,YLB/wL) > 0. Then, the following ex-ante incentive constraint
αHB/αB (U(CHG,YHG/wH) - U(CHB,YHB/wH)) + αLB/αB (U(CLG,YLG/wL) - U(CLB,YLB/wL)) ≤ 0

29

implies that αHB/αB (U(CHG,YHG/wH) - U(CHB,YHB/wH)) < 0. But this contradicts equation (A.1).
Hence, it follows that
(A.2)

U(CLG,YLG/wL) - U(CLB,YLB/wL) ≤ 0

Now consider a single incentive schedule, i.e., a schedule that is independent of the signal.
Hence, it consists of two consumption/income bundles:
SS = {CL, YL, CH, YH}
Let this incentive schedule be defined by:
YL= (αLBYLB + αLGYLG)/ αL
YH= (αHBYHB + αHGYHG)/ αH
CL= (αLBCLB + αLGCLG)/ αL - P
CH= (αHBCHB + αHGCHG)/ αH
where P ≥ 0 is the solution to:
(A.3)

αLBU(CLB,YLB/wL) + αLGU(CLG,YLG/wL) = αL U(CL,YL/wL)

By concavity of U(), the agent prefers the mean consumption-exertion bundle over the lottery.
Hence, she is willing to pay a positive premium (P ≥ 0) to obtain the mean consumption-exertion
bundle.
Next, we show that SS, the single schedule, satisfies the resource and incentive constraints but
weakly increases social welfare, and that therefore the optimal menu of schedules, SM, offers no
benefit over the single incentive schedule.
V(SM) =
≤

αLB Φ(U(CLB,YLB/wL) + αLG Φ(U(CLG,YLG/wL) +
αHB Φ(U(CHB,YHB/wH) + αHG Φ(U(CHG,YHG/wH)
(by concavity of Φ)
αL Φ((αLB/αL)U(CL,YL/wL)+(αLG/αL)U(CLG,YLG/wL)) +
αHB Φ(U(CHB,YHB/wH) + αHG Φ(U(CHG,YHG/wH)

=

(by definition of P)
αL Φ(U(CL,YL/wL)) +
αHB Φ(U(CHB,YHB/wH) + αHG Φ(U(CHG,YHG/wH)

≤

(by concavity of U)
αL Φ(U(CL,YL/wL) + αH Φ(U(CH,YH/wH) =

V(SS)

30

Hence, social welfare is weakly higher for SS than for SM. The resource constraint of SS is
satisfied:
αLB(CL-YL) + αLG(CL-YL) + αHB(CH-YH) + αHG (CH-YH)
= αLB(CLB-P-YLB) + αLG(CLG-P-YLG) + αHB(CHB-YHB) + αHG(CHG-YHG)
≤ αLB(CLB-YLB) + αLG(CLG-YLG) + αHB(CHB-YHB) + αHG(CHG-YHG) ≤ 0
where the equality sign follows from the definition of SS, the first inequality sign follows from P
≥ 0 and the final inequality follows from SM satisfying the resource constraint. The schedule SM
satisfies the following two ex-post incentive constraints:
U(CLB,YLB/wH)- U(CHB,YHG/wH) ≤ 0
U(CLG,YLG/wH)- U(CHG,YHG/wH) ≤ 0
Hence, taking a linear combination we have:
(αHB/αH)[U(CLB,YLB/wH)- U(CHB,YHB/wH)] + (αHG/αH) [U(CLG,YLG/wH)- U(CHG,YHG/wH)]

≤0

by concavity of U, this implies:
(αHB/αH)U(CLB,YLB/wH) + (αHG/αH) U(CLG,YLG/wH) –U(CH,YH/wH) ≤ 0
rearranging:
(αLB/αL)U(CLB,YLB/wH) + (αLG/αL) U(CLG,YLG/wH) + (αHB/αH - αLB/αL)U(CLB,YLB/wH) + (αHG/αH αLG/αL)U(CLG,YLG/wH) – U(CH,YH/wH) ≤ 0
using the identities αHB/αH = 1 - αHG/αH and αLB/αL = 1 - αLG/αL, we have:
(αLB / αL)U(CLB,YLB/wH) + (αLG / αL) U(CLG,YLG/wH) +(αHB/αH - αLB/αL)(U(CLB,YLB/wH) U(CLG,YLG/wH)) – U(CH,YH/wH) ≤ 0
Because signals are informative, a high type is less likely to receive a bad signal than a low type,
so (αHB/αH - αLB/αL) ≤ 0. Moreover, from equation (A.2), we know that (U(CLB,YLB/wH) U(CLG,YLG/wH)) ≤ 0. Thus, the inequality is preserved if we drop the product of these to terms,
which is positive:
(A.4) (αLB/αL)U(CLB,YLB/wH) + (αLG/αL) U(CLG,YLG/wH) – U(CH,YH/wH) ≤ 0
Now note that by construction (see eq. A.3), we have:
(αLB/αL)U(CLB,YLB/wL) + (αLG/αL) U(CLG,YLG/wL) = U(CL,YL/wL)
Substituting this equation into (A.4), we get:
U(CL,YL/wH) – U(CH,YH/wH) ≤ 0

31

Thus, the IC is satisfied for this incentive schedule that does not rely on declarations of the
signal. We showed earlier that this single incentive schedule satisfies the resource constraint and
yields a weak welfare improvement over the optimal menu of schedules. Hence, a menu of
schedules is never necessary to maximize social welfare if there are only two types.
Proof of Proposition 2 and its corollary
To prove proposition 2, we show that a menu of schedules can be formed by applying a specific
perturbation to the optimal single incentive schedule and that this perturbation yields the desired
interim Pareto improvement. It turns out that we can restrict our attention to a particular class of
perturbations, namely those in which (i) the labor supply (or effort) of types 3 through N is held
constant and (ii) the change in utility is the same for types 3 through N. Because we consider
perturbations to labor supply of the lowest two types, we first need to derive the optimal levels of
labor supply for these types under the single optimal incentive schedule. We use the assumption
that the utility function is separable in order to rewrite U(C, X) = V(C)-F(X). It is convenient to
define Zθ(Y) = F(Yθ/wθ), so that we can write U(C , Y/wθ ) = V(C) - Zθ(Y). Moreover, we assume
that we have a standard interior solution with the resource constraint holding with equality and
without bundling (i.e., each type has a distinct bundle at the optimum). Because the utility
function satisfies the single crossing property, only the incentive constraints of type θ towards
type θ-1 may bind. We assume that Φ(V(.)) is sufficiently concave that these constraints indeed
bind. (If this were not the case, the principal could redistribute without distorting labor supply,
which is not a relevant case). We can thus rewrite the optimization problem as:
(A.5)

Max

{C! ,Y! }! =1.. N

N

% " # (V (C ) $ Z
! =1

!

!

!

(Y! ) ) ,

s.t.
N

$"
! =1

!

(C! # Y! ) = 0 , and

(V (C! "1 ) " Z! (Y! "1 ) ) " (V (C! ) " Z! (Y! ) ) = 0

for θ = 2 .. N.

Let the Lagrange multiplier on the resource constraint be denoted by µ0 and the Lagrange
multiplier on the incentive constraint of type θ+1 toward the bundle of type θ by µθ. The firstorder conditions associated with (C1, C2, … , CN, Y1 and Y2) are :
(A.6a)
(A.6b)
(A.6c)
(A.6d)
(A.6e)

α1 µ0 + (α1 ϕ1 + µ1) v1
= 0,
α2 µ0 + (α2 ϕ2 + µ2 + µ1) v2
= 0,
αθ µ0 + (αθ ϕθ + µθ - µθ-1 ) vθ
= 0 for θ = 3 .. N (and where µN = 0),
-α1 µ0 - (α1 ϕ1 + µ1 r2) z11
= 0,
-α2 µ0 - (α2 ϕ2 - µ1 + µ2 r3) z22 = 0,

where vθ denotes dV(Cθ)/dCθ, or the marginal utility of consumption evaluated at the
consumption level of type θ, and zθ'θ denotes dZθ (Yθ')/dYθ' , or type’s θ marginal disutility of
earning income evaluated at the income level of type θ'. Let rθ be the ratio [dZθ (Yθ-1)/dYθ-1] /
[dZθ (Yθ)/dYθ ] or the disutility of earnings at the income level of the next lower type relative to

32

the disutility of earnings at the own income level and let ϕθ denote dΦ(U)/dU evaluated at U=
V(Cθ)- Zθ (Yθ).
Because we restrict our attention to this class of perturbations that only affect the labor supply of
types 1 and 2, we can simplify the analysis by aggregating types 3 through N into a single
aggregate type. This effectively turns the N-type problem into a 3-type problem: type 1 (denoted
by the subscript L), type 2 (denoted by the subscript M) and a weighted average of types 3
though N (denoted by the subscript H). We first divide equation (A.6c) by vθ and then sum this
equation for θ =3 … N. This yields:
(A.7)

N

N

! =3

! =3

µ0 % "! v! + % "! #! $µ2 = 0 .

Now define αH =

N

N

! =3

! =3

# "! , " H = $ #! "! /# H , and vH = " H

N

#"
! =3

!

v! . Multiplying (A.7) by vH

yields:
(A.8)

αH µ0 + (αH ϕH - µ2 ) vH = 0

In words, equation (A.8) effectively aggregates types 3 through N into a single type, the high
type. Renaming the type 1 type L, and renaming type 2 type M, we can rewrite the system of
N+2 equations (A.6a-e) into a system of 5 equations:
(A.9a)
(A.9b)
(A.9c)
(A.9d)
(A.9e)

αL µ0 + (αL ϕL + µL) vL = 0
αM µ0 + (αM ϕM + µM + µL) vM = 0
αH µ0 + (αH ϕH - µM ) vH = 0
-αL µ0 - (αL ϕL + µL rM) zLL = 0
-αM µ0 - (αM ϕM - µL + µM rH) zMM = 0

Before proceeding, we make two normalizations that will simplify the expressions that follow.
First, we multiply the utility function U(C,Y) with a constant such that:
(A.10)

αL vM vH + αM vL vH + αH vL vM = 1

Second, we multiply the social welfare function Φ(U) with a constant such that:
(A.11)

αL ϕL + αM ϕM + αH ϕH = 1

We solve the first-order conditions (A.9a-e) to find expressions for disutility of earnings (zLL and
zMM) that must hold at the optimal single incentive schedule, {Ĉθ , Ŷθ}θ=1..N. We find:
(A.12)

z LL
vM vH
=
vL vM vH + ! H (" L vL # " H vH )vM + ! M (" L vL # " M vM )vH (1 # rM )

33

(A.13)

zMM
! M vL vH
=
vM
! M vL vH + ! L! H (" L vL # " H vH )vM + ! M ! H (" L vL # " M vM )vH (1 # rH )

Note that both ratios are less than one, implying that the marginal disutility of earnings is less
than the marginal utility of consumption. In other words, at the optimum, the labor supply of the
low and medium types is below the first-best level.
We now define a set of perturbations {cθσ , yθσ}σ=G,B; θ=1..N such that the menu of schedules is
equal to the optimal single incentive schedule plus these perturbations:
(A.14)

{Cθσ , Yθσ}={Ĉθ + cθσ, Ŷθ + yθσ } for σ=G,B and θ=1..N.

Because of the assumption that the optimal single incentive schedule has a standard interior
solution without bundling, there are no restrictions on the signs of the perturbations and, for
sufficiently small perturbations, the perturbed solution is also interior and has no bundling. We
require that the perturbations satisfy the ex-ante and ex-post incentive constraints of the schedule
selection problem:

% # (V (Cˆ
N

(A.15)

! =1

(A.16)

!"

(V (Cˆ

! #1

!

)
) )= 0 for θ=2 .. N,

+ c!" ' ) $ Z! (Yˆ! + y!" ' ) $ V (Cˆ! + c!" ) + Z! (Yˆ! + y!" ) = 0 for any σ, σ′,

)(

+ c! #1," ) # Z! (Yˆ! #1 + y! #1," ) # V (Cˆ! + c!" ) # Z! (Yˆ! + y!"

and σ=B,G . In addition, we require that the deviations hold the expected utility of each type
constant:
(A.17)

"! B
"
V (Cˆ! + c! B ) # Z! (Yˆ! + y! B ) + ! G V (Cˆ! + c! G ) # Z! (Yˆ! + y! G ) = V (Cˆ! ) # Z! (Yˆ! )
"!
"!

(

)

(

)

for θ = 1 .. N. Note that when the perturbations are all equal to zero, equations (A.15) and
(A.17) hold trivially and equation (A.16) holds because it coincides with the incentive
constraints of the single incentive schedule. We now linearize these constraints:
N

(A.18)

% # (v (c
! =1

!"

!

!" '

$ c!" ) $ z! ! ( y!" ' $ y!" ) ) = 0 ,

(A.19)

(v! #1c! #1," # z! ! r! y! #1," ) # (v! c!" + z!! y!" ) = 0

for θ=2 .. N; σ = B,G, and

(A.20)

"! B (v! c! B # z! ! y! B ) + "! G (v! c! G # z! ! y! G ) = 0

for θ=1..N.

We do not perturb the labor supply of types 3 though N, thus yθσ = 0 for σ=G,B and θ=3 .. N.
We set cθσ = (v3/vθ) c3,σ for σ=G,B and θ = 3.. N. Substituting cθσ = (v3/vθ) c3,σ and yθσ = 0 for
σ=G,B and θ = 3.. N into equation (A.19) shows that this equation holds for θ = 4 ... N. Making
the same substitutions into equation (A.20) shows that this equation holds for θ = 4 .. N if and
34

only if this equation holds for θ = 3. Next, we define average consumption among the high types
N

as cH ! = $ #" c"! /# H . Using the definition vH = " H
" =3

N

#"
! =3

!

v! and cθσ = (v3/vθ) c3,σ, it follows

that:
(A.21)

N

N

" =3

" =3

cH ! = $ #" c"! /# H = $ #" (v3 / v" )c3! /# H = (v3 / vH )c3! .

Using equation (A.21), renaming the type 1 type L, and renaming type 2 type M, we can rewrite
the system of 3 N equations (A.18-A.20) into a system of 9 equations:

$

"! G (v! (c! B # c! G ) # z! ! ( y! B # y! G ) ) = 0

$

"! B (v! (c! G # c! B ) # z! ! ( y! G # y! B ) ) = 0

! = L,M ,H

! = L,M ,H

(A.22)

(vL cL ,! " zMM rM yL ,! ) " (vM cM ! + zMM yM ! ) = 0

for σ=B,G

(vM cM ,! " z HH rH yM ,! ) " (vH cH ! + z HH yH ! ) = 0

for σ=B,G

"! B (v! c! B # z! ! y! B ) + "! G (v! c! G # z! ! y! G ) = 0

for θ=L,M,H.

Since the permutation is 10-dimensional (cLB, cLG, cMB, cMG, cHB, cHG, yLB, yLG, yMB, yMG) and
system of equations (A.22) consist of 9 constraints, the perturbation has one degree of freedom.
Let this degree of freedom be taken up by the parameter ε. The expressions for the perturbations
can be simplified considerably by defining “contrasts” γij that measure how strongly the signal
distinguishes between type i and type j:
$
',
)
! $
! ! #!
" HL = LB HB & HG % LG ' , and
! L ! H ( ! HB ! LB )
! $
! ! #!
" HM = MB HB & HG % MG ' .
! M ! H ( ! HB ! MB )

" ML =
(A.23)

! LB ! MB # ! MG ! LG
%
&
! L ! M ( ! MB ! LB

We assume that the signals are informative and, in that case, these three contrasts are generically
different from zero. In the special case that they satisfy the monotone likelihood property (the
probability of receiving a good signal is strictly increasing with type), αHG / αHB > αMG / αMB >
αLG / αLB and, as a result, the contrasts γij are strictly positive. Solving (A.22) and making use of
the definitions (A.23), we find the following expressions for perturbations that satisfy the ex-ante
and ex-post incentive constraints and that keep the expected utility of each type constant:

35

(A.24a)

yLB = ! (" LG# HM + " MG# HL )(1 $ rH ) / z LL

(A.24b)

yLG = $! (" LB# HM + " MB# HL )(1 $ rH ) / z LL

(A.24c)

yMB = $! (" HG# ML + " MG# HL )(1 $ rM ) / zMM

(A.24d)

yMG = ! (" HB# ML + " MB# HL )(1 $ rM ) / zMM

(A.24e)

cLB = ! (" LG# HM rM + " MG# HL )(1 $ rH ) / vL

(A.24f)

cLG = $! (" LB# HM rM + " MB# HL )(1 $ rH ) / vL

(A.24g)

cMB = $! (" HG# ML + " MG# HL rH )(1 $ rM ) / vM

(A.24h)

cMG = ! (" HB# ML + " MB# HL rH )(1 $ rM ) / vM

(A.24i)

cHB = $! " HG# ML (1 $ rM )(1 $ rH ) / vH

(A.24j)

cHG = ! " HB# ML (1 $ rM )(1 $ rH ) / vH

Substituting these perturbations into the resources constraint and using equations (A.12) and
(A.13) to simplify the resulting expression yields the effect of the perturbation on the resource
constraint (RC):
(A.25)

&RC = "

! ML (1 % rM )(1 % rH )
' ()# M ! HL (# M ($ L vL % $ M vM )vH + # H ($ L vL % $ H vH )vM ) %
vL vM vH # M2 # L
# L! HM (# L ($ L vL % $ H vH )vM + # M ($ M vM % $ H vH )vL )*+

All terms in parentheses in (A.25) are positive, and the sign of this expression thus depends on
the term in square brackets. If we select a value of ε with the same sign as this expression, the
resource constraint will be strictly relaxed, except for the combination of parameters where the
term in square brackets is exactly zero. Since the set of parameter combinations for which the
term in square brackets is zero has Lebesgue measure zero, the resource constraint will be
relaxed for generic distributions of α. Moreover, since ε enters linearly, the efficiency gains are
first order. Since the change in the resource constraint depends on a first-order approximation of
the effects of perturbing the optimal single incentive schedule, this expression only holds for
small values of ε. For larger values, second order effects could become important, and could
generally offset the first-order gains. The first-order gains from the relaxation of the resource
constraint can be divided between the principle and each type of agent, thus achieving an
interim-by-type Pareto improvement.
The corollary follows immediately. The menu of schedules defined by the perturbation is
inside the principal’s choice set and yields a strict first-order gain to the principal. Hence, the
menu of schedules selected by the principal must offer the principal a gain that is at least as
large, and this gain must therefore also be strict and first-order.

36

FIGURES AND TABLES

Figure 2: Utility Company’s Optimal Single Price Plan and Optimal Menu of Price
Plans

Figure 3: The Cumulative Distribution of Pre-tax Earnings of Couples in the U.S.
37

Figure 4: Informativeness of Signals

Figure 5: The Density Function of Ability Conditional on Signal

38

Figure 6: Total Tax as a Function of Earnings

Figure 7: Optimal Marginal Tax Rates as a Function of Earnings

39

Figure 8: Optimal Marginal Tax Rates as a Function of Ability

Figure 9: Effect of a Menu of Schedules on Social Welfare and Utility

40

Table 1. The Optimal Single Non-Linear Price Plan and the Optimal Menu of Non-Linear Price Plans
(1)
(2)
Low type
σ=B
σ=G

(3)
(4)
Medium type
σ=B
σ=G

(5)
(6)
High type
σ=B
σ=G

(7)

(8)

(9)

E[•| σ=B]

E[•| σ=G]

E[•]

9.0
36.0
27.0
0
27.0

25.0
66.0
41.0
9.0
50.0

100.0
166.0
66.0
34.0
100.0

20.4
54.7
34.3
5.3
39.5

68.9
124.0
55.1
23.4
78.5

44.7
89.3
44.7
14.3
59.0

17.7
50.2
32.6
5.2
2.7
37.7

73.3
131.7
58.4
20.2
20.2
78.6

45.5
91.0
45.5
12.7

Panel A: Single non-linear price plan
1. Quantity sold (X)
2. Revenue (P)
3. Producer Surplus (P-X)
4. Consumer Surplus (U)
5. Social Surplus
Panel B: Menu of non-linear price plans
1. Quantity sold (X)
2. Revenue (P)
3. Producer Surplus (X-P)
4. Consumer Surplus (U) from own plan
5.
Consumer Surplus from other plan
6. Social Surplus

10.8
39.4
28.6
0

0.2
5.6
5.4
0

13.6
45.4
31.9
9.8

39.9
93.3
53.4
1.4

100.0
171.7
71.7
28.3

100.0
167.0
67.0
33.0

28.6

5.4

41.7

54.8

100.0

100.0

58.2

Table 2. Distributional and Efficiency Effects of a Menu of Price Plans

1. First-Best (type is observable)
2. Non-Linear Pricing Conditional on Signal
3. Menu of Non-Linear Price Plans
4. Single Non-Linear Price Plan
5. Single Linear Price Plan (two-part tariff)

U
0
8.7
12.7
14.3
14.0

Profit
23.9
10.3
5.3
4.5
-6.2

DWL
0
4.9
5.9
5.1
16.0

Consumer Surplus is constrained
to remain constant
U
Profit
DWL
14.3
9.6
0
14.3
8.2
1.4
14.3
5.2
4.4
14.3
4.5
5.1
14.3
-6.5
16.0

Fixed costs are calibrated such that profit is equal to 5% of revenue in the case of the optimal single non-linear price plan.

41

Table 3. Menu of Schedules Versus Optimal Single Non-linear Schedule
Effects on Behavior
Average
Earnings
($/filer)

Average
Cons.
($/filer)

Average
Net Tax
Revenue
($/filer)

Panel A: Menu of non-linear schedules vs. single non-linear schedule
1. Optimal menu of schedules
64,608
48,816 15,792
Average | bad signal
35,200
33,771
1,429
Average | good signal
100,044
66,944 33,100
2. Optimal single nonlinear schedule

Average | bad signal
Average | good signal
Percentage change
Absolute change

63,170
35,481
96,533

47,377
30,790
67,363

15,792
4,690
29,170

2.3%
$1,438

3.0%
$1,438

0.0%
$0

Tax Schedules

Welfare Effects

Distortions

Average
Intercept Marginal
($)
Tax Rate

Average Average
Utility
Social
($)
Welfare

Average
Average DWL /
DWL
Tax
($)
Revenue

15,395
10,235

38.7%
43.6%
32.7%

34,953
26,944
44,602

10.314
10.150
10.511

3,423 21.7%
2,809 196.6%
4,163 12.6%

13,467
13,467
13,467

42.5%
46.9%
37.2%

34,492
23,826
47,343

10.290
10.011
10.626

3,863
2,517
5,485

-9.4%
-3.8%

1.3%
$461

2.4%

Panel B: Menu of non-linear schedules vs. the single non-linear schedule that yields the same social welfare
1. Optimal menu of schedules
64,608
48,816 15,792
38.7% 34,953 10.314
3. Optimal single nonlinear schedule
63,290
48,133 15,156
13,964 42.2% 35,176 10.314
Change
$636
0.0%

24.5%
53.7%
18.8%

-12.1% -12.1%
-$440 -2.8%
3,423
3,815

21.7%
25.2%

Note: These calculations are based on a labor supply elasticity of 0.5 and the medium informative signal distribution.

42

Table 4. Alternative Tax Schedules
Effects on Behavior
Average
Earnings
($/filer)

Average
Cons.
($/filer)

Panel A: Menu if signals are publicly observable
4. Optimal menu, observable signals
65,495 49,702
2. Optimal single nonlinear schedule
63,170 47,377
Change
Panel B: Menu that yields Pareto-by-signal improvement
5. Conditional
66,573
50,780
Average | bad signal
36,713
33,686
Average | good signal
102,551
71,377
2. Optimal single nonlinear schedule
Average | bad signal
Average | good signal

63,170
35,481
96,533

47,377
30,790
67,363

Change
Panel C: Non-linear vs. linear schedule
2. Optimal single nonlinear schedule
6. Optimal single linear schedule
Change

Average
Net Tax
Revenue
($/filer)

15,792
15,792
$0
15,792
3,027
31,174
15,792
4,690
29,170

Tax Schedules

Welfare Effects

Distortions

Average
Intercept Marginal
($)
Tax Rate

Average Average
Utility
Social
($)
Welfare

Average
Average DWL /
DWL
Tax
Revenue
($)

35.1%
13,467 42.5%

35,306 10.335
34,492 10.290
4.5%

3,048
3,863
-$815

13,669
10,225

35.6%
40.6%
29.6%

35,676
25,993
47,343

10.309
10.097
10.563

2,690
2,150
3,340

17.0%
71.0%
10.7%

13,467
13,467
13,467

42.5%
46.9%
37.2%

34,492
23,826
47,343

10.290
10.011
10.626

3,863
2,517
5,485

24.5%
53.7%
18.8%

1.9%

-$2,145

-7.4%

10.290
10.280
1.0%

3,863
4,271
-$408

24.5%
27.0%
-2.6%

$0
63,170
61,892

47,377
46,100

15,792
15,792
$0

19.3%
24.5%
-5.2%

13,467
10,811

42.5%
42.1%

34,492
34,066

Note: These calculations are based on a labor supply elasticity of 0.5 and the medium informative signal distribution.

43

Table 5: Sensitivity of the Welfare and Efficiency Gains to Parameter Assumptions
Effect of a menu of tax schedules relative to
the optimal single nonlinear tax schedule
Welfare gains
Informativeness
Elasticity of
(percent of
($)
(percent)
of signal
labor supply
tax revenue)

Reduction in DWL
(percent of
($)
(percent) tax revenue)

1.
2.
3.

Weak
Medium
Strong

0.2
0.2
0.2

$72
$406
$535

0.21%
1.17%
1.54%

0.49%
2.75%
3.63%

$59
$318
$424

1.73%
9.64%
13.07%

0.40%
2.16%
2.88%

4.
5.
6.

Weak
Medium
Strong

0.5
0.5
0.5

$123
$636
$833

0.47%
2.39%
3.11%

0.78%
4.03%
5.27%

$83
$440
$542

2.16%
12.09%
15.11%

0.52%
2.79%
3.43%

7.
8.
9.

Weak
Medium
Strong

1.0
1.0
1.0

$173
$844
$1,066

0.91%
4.35%
5.46%

0.92%
4.47%
5.64%

$104
$568
$460

2.44%
14.07%
11.26%

0.55%
3.01%
2.44%

44

