                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         RARE DISASTERS AND EXCHANGE RATES

                                           Emmanuel Farhi
                                            Xavier Gabaix

                                        Working Paper 13805
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13805


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




For helpful comments, we thank Andy Atkeson, David Backus, Robert Barro, Daniel Cohen, Alex
Edmans, Christian Julliard, Pat and Tim Kehoe, Raj Mehra, Emi Nakamura, Eric van Wincoop, and
seminar participants at Boston University, Dartmouth, LBS, LSE, Minneapolis Fed, NBER, New York
Fed, NYU, UBC, and the University of Virginia. Gabaix thanks the NSF for support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Emmanuel Farhi and Xavier Gabaix. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates
Emmanuel Farhi and Xavier Gabaix
NBER Working Paper No. 13805
February 2008
JEL No. E43,E44,F31,G12,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

We propose a new model of exchange rates, which yields a theory of the forward premium puzzle.
Our explanation combines two ingredients: the possibility of rare economic disasters, and an asset
view of the exchange rate. Our model is frictionless, has complete markets, and works for an arbitrary
number of countries. In the model, rare worldwide disasters can occur and affect each country's productivity.
Each country's exposure to disaster risk varies over time according to a mean-reverting process. Risky
countries command high risk premia: they feature a depreciated exchange rate and a high interest rate.
As their risk premium mean reverts, their exchange rate appreciates. Therefore, currencies of high
interest rate countries appreciate on average. To make the notion of disaster risk more implementable,
we show how options prices might in principle uncover latent disaster risk, and help forecast exchange
rate movements. We then extend the framework to incorporate two factors: a disaster risk factor, and
a business cycle factor. We calibrate the model and obtain quantitatively realistic values for the volatility
of the exchange rate, the forward premium puzzle regression coefficients, and near-random walk exchange
rate dynamics. Finally, we solve a model of stock markets across countries, which yields a series of
predictions about the joint behavior of exchange rates, bonds, options and stocks across countries.
The evidence from the options market appears to be supportive of the model.


Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu

Xavier Gabaix
New York University
Finance Department
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu
1       Introduction
We propose a new model of exchange rates, which yields a theory of exchange rate “excess volatility”
and of the forward premium puzzle. We build on the idea proposed by Rietz (1988), Barro (2006)
and Weitzman (2007) that the possibility of rare but extreme events is a major determinant of
risk premia in asset markets, and develop a tractable framework to study its consequences for
international asset prices.
    Our model allows us to propose a solution for a major puzzle in international macroeconomics,
the failure of uncovered interest rate parity (UIP). According to the UIP equation, the expected
depreciation of a currency should be equal to the interest rate diﬀerential between that country
and the reference region. A regression of exchange rate changes on interest rate diﬀerentials should
yield a coeﬃcient of 1. However, empirical studies starting with Hansen and Hodrick (1980) and
Fama (1984), and recently surveyed by Froot and Thaler (1990), Lewis (1995) and Engel (1996),
consistently produce a regression coeﬃcient that is less than 1, and often negative. This invalidation
of UIP has been termed the forward premium puzzle: currencies with high interest rates tend to
appreciate. In other words, currencies with high interest rates feature positive predictable excess re-
turns. There are four possible explanations: time-varying risk premia, Peso problems, expectations
errors, and illiquid markets1 .
    Our paper provides a theory of international time-varying risk premia in a complete markets,
frictionless and rational framework. In our model, the exchange rate is both a relative price of
non-traded and traded goods, and an asset price: it is the net present value of the export sector’s
productivity. For this, we develop a “stock view” of the exchange rate. We postulate (to the
best of our knowledge, in a novel way), a linear technology by which an initial investment of non-
tradable goods yields a stream of future export goods, with stochastic productivity. As a result, the
exchange rate is the present value of the country’s future export productivities, discounted using
the international pricing kernel. This “stock view” of the exchange rate could be used in other
contexts, e.g. with habit formation. In our model, risky countries are those whose productivity will
fall by a lot during disasters.
    Risky countries command high risk premia: they feature a depreciated exchange rate and a high
interest rate. As their risk premium reverts to the mean, their exchange rate appreciates. Therefore,
the currencies of high interest rate countries appreciate on average. This provides an explanation
for the forward premium puzzle. The model is consistent with a forward premium puzzle, both in
sample with and without disasters. Therefore it does not suﬀer from a Peso problem. The driving
force of our result is that the risk premium covaries positively with interest rate. In other words, our
theory does not rely on mismeasurement of expectations. We calibrate a version of the model and
obtain quantitatively realistic values for the volatility of the exchange rate, the forward premium
    1
     Maynard and Phillips (2001) argue that the forward premium puzzle is the result of misspecification issues. The
Fama (1984) regression assumes short-memory stationarity of the data, but evidence contradicts this. Misspecification
arises from long memory in the forward premium (the independent variable), and this may induce a bias away from
1.



                                                         2
puzzle regression coeﬃcients, and near-random walk exchange rate dynamics.
    The model is very tractable, and expressions for the exchange rate, interest rate, risk premia, and
forward premium puzzle coeﬃcients are obtained in closed forms2 . For this, it uses the modelling
of environments with stochastic intensity of disasters proposed in a closed economy in Gabaix
(2007b) (Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006) have constant intensity of disasters), and the “linearity-
generating” processes developed in Gabaix (2007a). Our framework is also very flexible. We show
that it is remarkably easy to extend the basic model to incorporate several factors corresponding
to productivity, disaster risk and inflation.
    Currency option prices potentially contain rich information both on the probability and severity
of disasters and on currency risk premia. The model generates a rich pattern of implicit volatility
curves for a given pair of currencies, with both a time varying “smile” — higher implicit volatilities
for out of the money options — and a time varying “skew” — higher implicit volatilities for out of
the money puts than out of the money calls. Indeed, the presence of extreme events generates a
smile and the possibility for a country to be riskier than the other generates a skew. We show
that in the model, the price of out of the money risk-reversals — and indicator of the premium
of out of the money puts on out of the money calls — can be directly linked to currency risk
premia. According to our theory, when out of the money puts are relatively more expensive, the
corresponding currency should be depreciated and expected to appreciate. Campa, Chang and
Reider (1998) and Carr and Wu (2007) provide evidence that, as predicted by the model, when
out of the money put prices increase relative to out of the money call prices, the corresponding
currency simultaneously depreciates. Farhi, Gabaix, Ranciere and Verdelhan (2008) confirm this
result on a larger sample of currencies for a longer time period; in addition, this paper shows that
high risk-reversal prices predict currency appreciations and tests a number of other joint predictions
of the model for currency option prices and other international and domestic asset prices.
    Finally, we provide a calibration of the model. We show that under some simple conditions,
we match the volatility of exchange rates, interest rates, risk premia, and their half-life. Those
conditions involves taking Barro’s (2006) numbers, which imply that rare disasters matter 10 times
as much as they would if agents were risk neutral. As tail events have their importance multiplied
by 10, changes in beliefs about disasters translate into meaningful volatility. This is why the model
yields a sizable volatility, which is hard to obtain with more traditional models (e.g., Obstfeld Rogoﬀ
1995).
    The model also oﬀers a number of additional predictions. First, there should be a clear link
between equity and currency risk premia through interest rates. High domestic interest rates imply
high currency risk premia — an expected appreciation of the domestic currency — and low equity
risk premia. Fama and Schwert (1977) and Campbell and Yogo (2006) provide evidence of the link
between equity excess returns and nominal interest rates. Hau and Rey (2004) find that for Japan,
   2
    Pavlova and Rigobon (2007) also provide an elegant and tractable framework for analyzing the joint behavior
of bonds, stocks and exchange rates, which is successful at accounting for comovements among international assets.
However, the model is based on a tradition consumption CAPM and therefore generates small risk premia and small
departures from UIP.


                                                        3
France, Germany and Switzerland, a negative shock to the foreign stock market — relative to the
US— lead to a foreign currency appreciation.
    Second, the model has rich implications for the relation between the relative shape of the yield
curves between two countries and the expected change in the bilateral exchange rate. Boudoukh,
Richardson and Whitelaw (2006) regress the exchange rate movement on the T -period forward rate
from T periods ago, and find that the regression coeﬃcient increases towards 1 with the horizon
T . Indeed, our theory is consistent with this empirical finding in a context where risk-premia are
rapidly mean-reverting, and productivity is slowly mean-reverting.
    The pricing kernels we derive are flexible and attractive reduced-form candidates for models
with time varying risk premia associated with large currency movements. This is, we believe, a
prevalent feature of foreign exchange markets: the carry trade is often referred to “picking dimes in
front a of steam roller.” Although we take the extra-step of linking these risk-premia to aggregate
consumption risk, this step is not needed to derive the asset pricing implications of our framework:
our model does not live or die on this particular hypothesis.
    Moreover, time varying disasters are inherently diﬃcult to assess. As such, they might be
especially vulnerable to expectations errors. Although our model embodies rational expectations,
it can also be interpreted along behavioral lines as a consistent framework to analyze the impact of
investor sentiment on international asset prices3 .
    Relation to the literature. This paper adds to a large body of theoretical work on the UIP
condition. On the empirical side, Frankel and Engel (1984) show that a simple CAPM has diﬃculty
explaining deviations from UIP. Most papers test the UIP condition on nominal variables. Two
recent studies cast the puzzle in terms of real variables. Hollifield and Yaron (2003) decompose
the currency risk premium into conditional inflation risk, real risk, and the interaction between
inflation and real risk. They find evidence that real factors, not nominal ones, drive virtually all
of the predictable variation in currency risk premia. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007a) find that real
aggregate consumption growth risk is priced on currency markets. This provides support for a
model which — like ours — focuses on real risk, abstracting from money and inflation. However,
Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleschelski and Rebelo (2006) document that forward premium strategies
yield very high Sharpe ratios, but argue that the payoﬀs of such strategies are not correlated with
traditional risk factors. This disagreement spurred a debate on whether or not consumption growth
risk explains excess returns on currency speculation (Burnside 2007, Lustig and Verdelhan 2007b).
    Our paper also contributes to the large literature on Peso problems in international finance.
See Lewis (2008) for a recent survey. Of most interest to us is Kaminsky (1993) and Evans and
Lewis (1995). Kaminsky (1993), extending the work of Engel and Hamilton (1990), considers the
possibility for rare events to explain investors expectations about the exchange rate. Rare events
in her model are infrequent switches from contractionary to expansionary monetary policy. She
provides evidence that investors’ expectations are consistent with the model. However, she does
   3
   See Frankel and Froot (1989) for an empirical investigation of the irrrationality of investors’ expectations, and
more recently Frankel (2007) for an insightful discussion.



                                                         4
not examine the forward premium puzzle, and only considers one exchange rate (dollar-sterling)
and a short time period. Interestingly, Evans and Lewis (1995) show that a reasonably calibrated
regime switching model induces important biases in Fama regressions in small samples. These biases
disappear, however, in large samples.
    To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to adapt the Rietz-Barro paradigm to exchange
rates. Guo (2007), subsequently, also adopts this paradigm, in the context of a monetary model,
whereas the essence of our model is real.
    On the theory side, numerous studies have attempted to explain the UIP puzzle in rational ex-
pectations settings. Few models, however, are able to reproduce the negative UIP slope coeﬃcient.4
Here we concentrate on some of the most successful studies. We start by reviewing arguments
that rely on counter-cyclical risk premia. We then discuss the literature that departs from rational
expectations and introduces behavioral biases.
    Frachot (1996) shows that a two-country Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985) framework can account
for the UIP puzzle but it does not provide an economic interpretation of the currency risk premium.
Backus, Foresi and Telmer (2001) pursue a similar line of research and show that aﬃne models of
the term structure can only rationalize the forward premium puzzle if either the state variables have
asymmetric eﬀects on state prices in diﬀerent currencies or nominal interest rates take on negative
value with positive probability. Our model is outside of the scope of their criticism: it is entirely
real and does not belong to the aﬃne class.
    Alvarez, Atkeson, and Kehoe (2002) rely on a model with endogenously segmented markets
to generate qualitatively the forward premium anomaly. In their model, higher money growth
leads to higher inflation. This induces more agents to enter the asset market because the cost of
non-participation is higher. This, in turn, decreases risk premia. They later extend this type of
mechanism in Alvarez, Atkeson and Kehoe (2006).
    Most recently, Verdelhan (2007) generates counter-cyclical risk premia via the varying habit
formation models pioneered by Abel (1990) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999). In his model,
the domestic investor expects to receive a positive foreign currency excess return in bad times
when he is more risk-averse than his foreign counterpart. Times of high risk-aversion correspond to
low interest rates at home. Thus domestic investors expect positive currency excess returns when
domestic interest rates are low and foreign interest rates are high.
    Finally, Colacito (2006) and Colacito and Croce (2006) apply Bansal and Yaron (2004)’s model
with Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences to international economics. Bansal and Shaliastovich (2007)
have two-country setting, rely on a perfect cross-country correlation among shocks to the long run
components of consumption growth rates to reproduce the UIP puzzle.
    Turning to explanations based on behavioral biases, Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006) develop
a model where information is costly to acquire and to process. Because of these costs, many
investors optimally choose to assess available information and revise their portfolios infrequently.
This rational inattention mechanism produces a negative UIP coeﬃcient along the lines suggested
  4
      For the diﬃculty of generating a negative coeﬃcient, see Hollifield and Uppal (1997).


                                                          5
by Froot and Thaler (1990) and Lyons (2001): if investors are slow to respond to news of higher
domestic interest rates, there will be a continued reallocation of portfolios towards domestic bonds
and a appreciation of the currency subsequent to the shock.
    Finally, another strand of the literature departs from the assumption of frictionless markets.
Using microstructure frictions, Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2007) rely on asymmetric infor-
mation and behavioral biases to explain the forward premium puzzle.
    Outline. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we set up the basic model
and derive its implications for the forward premium puzzle. In Section 3, we extend the model to
incorporate a business cycle factor in addition to the disaster risk factor. In Section 4, we present
a calibration of the model. In Section 5, we derive the implications of our model for the pricing
of currency options and explain how to extract information about currency risk premia from the
volatility smile. The rest further extends the model. In Section 6, we look at the joint properties
of currency risk premia and bond risk premia by examining the information contained in the yield
curve. We also develop a nominal version of the model which allows for nominal risk premia. In
Section 7, we analyze the relationship between currency risk premia and equity premia. Section 8
concludes. Most proofs are in Appendix B.


2       Model setup
2.1     Macroeconomic environment: The stock view of the exchange rate
We consider a stochastic infinite horizon open economy model. There are N countries indexed by i.
Each country i is endowed with two goods, a traded good, called T , and a non-traded good, called
NTi . The traded good is common to all countries, the non-traded good is country-specific.
                                                                 ¡          ¢
   Preferences. In country i, agents value consumption streams CitT , CitNTi t≥0 according to
                                       "∞            ¡ T ¢1−γ ¡ NTi ¢1−γ #
                                        X             C       + Cit
                                  E0         exp(−δt) it                                                        (1)
                                       t=0
                                                             1−γ
    Note that the two goods enter separably in the utility function. Together with the assumption
of complete markets, this will allow us to derive a simple expression for the pricing kernel.
    Numéraires. Our choice of numéraires follows the Harberger convention: we choose the traded
good T to be the international numéraire, and the non-traded good NTi to be the numéraire in
country i. We will sometimes call the traded good the “international good” or the “world currency”.
    We call eit the exchange rate of country i in terms of the international good, with the convention
that a high eit means a “high value” domestic currency (when eit increases, the domestic currency
appreciates).5 Hence, if a good has a price pit in the currency of country i, it has price p∗t = eit pit
in terms of the world currency. Stars (∗ ) denote values in terms of the international good.
    5
    This choice of numéraire, although it does not follow the tradition which is to define the numéraire as a basket
of goods in the country, brings tractability to the analysis.



                                                         6
   As the non-traded good NTi is the numéraire in country i, its price in country i is pNT
                                                                                        it
                                                                                           i
                                                                                             = 1.
                                                 NTi ∗        NTi
Hence, its price in terms of the traded good is pt     = eit pi t , so that

                                                        eit = ptNTi ∗                                 (2)

The exchange eit rate of country i, in terms of the international currency (i.e., in terms of the traded
good), is simply the price of the non-traded good of country i in terms of the traded good.
     So, the exchange rate between country i and country j is the ratio of the e’s of the two countries,
eit /ejt .
     Markets. Markets are complete: there is perfect risk sharing across countries in the consump-
tion of international goods. Let CtT ∗ be the world consumption of the traded good. The pricing
kernel in terms of the traded good can therefore be expressed as
                                                     ¡      ¢−γ
                                       Mt∗ = exp(−δt) CtT ∗     .

The pricing kernel means that an asset producing a stochastic stream (Dt+s )s≥0 of the traded good,
                 £P∞      ∗
                                 ¤     ∗
has a price: Et     s=0 Mt+s Dt+s /Mt .
    Technology. There is a linear technology to convert the non-traded good of country i into the
traded good. By investing one unit of the non-traded good at time t, one obtains exp(−λs)ωi,t+s
units of the international good, at all periods s ≥ t. The interpretation is that ω it is the productivity
of the export technology, and the initial investment depreciates at a rate λ.
    Hence, the non-traded good is a capital good that produces dividends Dt+s = exp(−λs)ωi,t+s .
So, in terms of the traded good, the price of the non-traded good NTi of country i is:
                                              "                              #
                                                  X
                                                  ∞
                              ptNTi ∗ = Et               ∗
                                                        Mt+s exp(−λs)ω i,t+s /Mt∗
                                                  s=0


Given that eit = ptNTi ∗ (Eq. 2), the following obtains.

Proposition 1 (Stock view of the exchange rate) In terms of the “international currency,” the
exchange rate eit of country i is the discounted present value of its future export productivity:
                                          "                              #
                                              X
                                              ∞
                                                     ∗
                               eit = Et             Mt+s exp(−λs)ω i,t+s /Mt∗                         (3)
                                              s=0


with the convention that an increase in eit means an appreciation of country i’s currency.

                                                                                         ∗
    In Eq. 3, ωi,t+s is the productivity of country i’s export sector at time t + s. Mt+s   is the
international pricing kernel, and is independent of country i.
    To our knowledge, the above formulation is novel, complete-market microfoundation for the
“asset view” of the exchange rate (Engel and West 2005 survey earlier “asset view” models, that
feature incomplete markets). The exchange rate is the relative price of two goods, the traded and

                                                             7
the non-traded good.6 At the same time, Eq. 3 gives us a stock view of the exchange rate: the
exchange is a present value of future levels of productivity in the country. The above formulation
could be used for many other models of the exchange rate. For instance, the stochastic discount
          ∗
factor Mt+s   could come from a model with habit formation (Abel 1990, Bekaert 1996, Campbell
Cochrane 1999), long run risk (Bansal and Yaron 2004), or first order risk aversion (Bekaert, Hodrick
and Marshall 1997). We choose to study disasters, in part because they have been less studied.
    Potential variants. To keep the model simple, we made a series of modelling choices that
could be modified.
    Let us first discuss our specification of technology. We have made the arguably strong assumption
that the investment technology transforms non traded goods in a flow of traded goods. This as-
sumption, however, is not crucial. We could have assumed, for example, that investment goods are a
composite of traded and non traded goods. Let f (et ) be the relative price of investment goods — cor-
responding to the technology for producing investment goods — in terms of traded goods. We would
                                                                     £P∞      ∗
                                                                                                  ¤
then have the following formula for the exchange rate: f (eit ) = Et    s=0 M t+s exp(−λs)ω i,t+s   /Mt∗ .
Similarly, we could have let the output of the investment technology be a basket of traded and non-
traded goods. The stochastic process for the exchange rate would then have had to be solved as the
fixed point of a functional equation. The economics of the model would not be changed materially,
but the analysis would become much more complex and closed form solutions would be lost.
    Likewise, we could have used a diﬀerent price index than the “Harberger” index puts a weight
of 1 on non-tradables. This more sophisticated index would put a small positive weight on non-
tradables. This would not importantly change our results, but would make the analysis more
complex.
    Last but not least, the utility function (1) could be changed to:
                                     "                  ¡ T ¢1−γ #
                                         X
                                         ∞
                                                         C
                                E0             exp (−δt) t         + V ({CtNTi }t≥0 ),                               (4)
                                         t=0
                                                         1−γ

where V is any utility function over non-traded goods consumption processes {CtNTi }t≥0 . With this
formulation, our formulas for the exchange rate (e.g., Eq. 10-11) would still hold. The only thing
that matters here is the marginal utility from one unit of tradable. Were we to follow this route, our
model would generate a very imperfect correlation between total consumption and real exchange
rates, which Backus and Smith (1993) have demonstrated holds in the data. For instance, V could
incorporate habit formation or adjustment costs.
   6
     In our model, the real exchange rate is the relative price of non-tradables in terms of tradables. The merit of this
identity has been investigated in the literature. The debate has focused on whether the relative price of non-tradables
is as volatile as the real exchange rate. An important obstacle that any study in this area has to overcome is the
identification in the data of pure tradable goods and pure non-tradable goods. Engel (1999) used diﬀerent measures
of tradable goods to conclude that variations in their relative price accounted for a small fraction of real exchange
rate movements. Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005, 2006) emphasize that that retail prices of tradable goods
contain a substantial fraction of non-tradable inputs. Using prices of traded goods at the dock, they find that the
price of nontradable goods relative to tradable goods accounts for a substantial fraction of the movements in the real
exchange rate.


                                                             8
2.2     Macroeconomic environment: Disaster risk
World consumption of the traded good. We will study equilibria where the world consumption
of the traded good C T ∗ follows the following stochastic process. As Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006),
we assume that in each period t + 1, a disaster may happen, with a probability pt . If a disaster
                    T∗
does not happen, Ct+1   /CtT ∗ = exp(g), where g is the normal-times growth rate of the economy.
                               T∗
If a disaster happens, then Ct+1  /CtT ∗ = exp(g)Bt+1 , with Bt+1 > 0.7 For instance, if Bt+1 = 0.7,
consumption falls by 30%. To sum up:
                                     (
                            T∗
                           Ct+1          exp(g)            if there is no disaster at t + 1
                                 =                                                                                    (5)
                           CtT ∗         exp(g)Bt+1        if there is a disaster at t + 1

Hence the pricing kernel is given by
                                     (
                          ∗
                         Mt+1            exp(−R)            if there is no disaster at t + 1
                              =                  −γ                                                                   (6)
                         Mt∗             exp(−R)Bt+1        if there is a disaster at t + 1

where
                                                     R = δ + γgc

is the risk-free rate in an economy that would have a zero probability of disasters. For future
reference, we refer to it as the Ramsey interest rate.
    Process (5) can be rationalized as the general equilibrium outcome in a model with a finite
number of countries, provided the endowments of those countries satisfy some conditions spelled
out in Lemma 1 of Appendix B.
    Productivity. We assume that productivity of country i follows:
                                     (
                         ω i,t+1         exp(gωi )          if there is no disaster at t + 1
                                 =
                          ωi,t           exp(gωi )Fi,t+1    if there is a disaster at t + 1

i.e. during disaster, the relative productivity of the traded good is multiplied by Fi,t+1 . For instance,
if productivity falls by 20%, then Fi,t+1 = 0.8. We define the “resilience” of country i as:
                                ¡ £ −γ                            ¤   ¢
                       Hit = pit Et Bt+1                                       bit .
                                         Fit+1 | Disaster at t + 1 − 1 = Hi∗ + H                                      (7)

where Hi∗ and H  bit are respectively the constant and variable part of the resilience. This is a
measure of how well productivity is insulated from world disaster.8 In (7), the probability pt and
world intensity of disasters Bt+1 are common to all countries, but the recovery rate Fi,t+1 is country-
specific. Of course, the recovery rates could be correlated across countries. In order to facilitate
taking the continuous time limit, it is useful to define hi∗ = ln (1 + Hi∗ ).
   7
   Typically, extra i.i.d. noise is added, but given that it never materially aﬀects the asset prices, it is omitted here.
   8
   This model addresses the concern of Brandt, Cochrane and Santa-Clara (2006), who note that discount factors
must be highly correlated across countries. They are in this model, because the crisis aﬀect all countries.


                                                             9
  For tractability, we postulate a Linearity-Generating process (Appendix A) for Mt∗ e−λt (1, ω it ).
The law of motion for Hb it is:

                                   b it+1 = 1 + Hi∗ exp(−φH )H
                                   H                         b it + εH
                                                                     i,t+1 ,                                    (8)
                                            1 + Hit        i


          £      ¤     £ H                       ¤
where Et εH i,t+1 = Et εi,t+1 | Disaster at t + 1 = 0.
    Eq. 8 means that H   b t mean-reverts to 0, but as a “twisted” autoregressive process. As Hit
hovers around Hi∗ , 1+H  i∗
                      1+Hit
                             is close to 1, so that the process behaves much like a regular AR(1):
b                   b
Hit+1 ' exp(−φHi )Hit + εi,t+1 , an equation that holds up to second order terms. The 1+H
                            H                                                              ∗
                                                                                             term is
                                                                                       1+Ht
a “twist” term that makes the process very tractable. It is best thought as economically innocuous,
and simply an analytical convenience. Gabaix (2007a, Technical Appendix) shows that the process,
physically, behaves indeed like an AR(1).9
    Its continuous time analogue is:
                                            ³         ´
                                     bit = − φH + H
                                     H            b it Hb it dt + dNitH ,                                       (9)
                                               i


                             £    ¤      £                       ¤
where NtH is a martingale, Et dNtH = Et dNtH | Disaster at t + 1 = 0.
   This assumption allows us to derive the equilibrium exchange rate in closed form.

Proposition 2 (Level of the exchange rate) In terms of the “international currency,” the exchange
rate of country i is:
                                                  µ                            ¶
                                       ω it             exp (−rei − hi∗ ) b
                            eit =                  1+                      Hit                                 (10)
                                  1 − exp (−rei )     1 − exp (−rei − φH )

where ωt is the current productivity of the country. In the limit of small time intervals, the exchange
rate is:                                         Ã              !
                                            ωit           b it
                                                          H
                                      eit =       1+                                               (11)
                                             rei      rei + φHi
with
                                            rei ≡ R + λ − gωi − hi∗ .                                          (12)

    Formula (11) is a modified version of Gordon’s formula. It can be verified that eit is decreasing
in rei : the exchange rate is decreasing in the Ramsey interest rate R, decreasing in the depreciation
rate of capital λ, increasing in the growth of productivity gω . Formula (11) implicitly exhibits a
Balassa-Samuelson eﬀect: more productive countries — countries with a higher ωt — have a higher
real exchange rate. Countries with a high expected productivity growth also have high exchange
rates.
   9
    Here, changes in resiliences are changes in the technological exposure of the country. One might endogenize them
more, as optimal use of growth options by the countries, along the lines of Berk, Green and Naik (1999)’s model of
use of growth options by firms.



                                                        10
                                            b t : Risky countries have a low exchange rate. Finally, at
    Importantly, et is increasing in h∗ and H
                                                                                            b t . Later,
this stage, the volatility of the exchange rate comes from the volatility of its resilience H
we generalize the setup and introduce other factors.
    In Section (5), we explain how to infer a country’s resilience from currency options data and
provide evidence that riskier countries have depreciated real exchange rates.


2.3     The forward premium puzzle
Consider a one period domestic bond in country i, that yields 1 unit of the currency of country i
at time t + 1. It will be worth ei,t+1 of the international currency. Hence the domestic price of that
bond is given by:10                                  ∙ ∗          ¸
                                           1          Mt+1 ei,t+1
                                                = Et                                              (13)
                                        1 + rit         Mt∗ ei,t
where rt is the domestic interest rate — the nominal interest rate in domestic currency.

Proposition 3 (Level of the domestic short term interest rate, when there is no inflation on the
home good). The value of the domestic short term rate in country i is
                                         "                                                  #
                                                                                  b it
                                                    (1 − exp (−rei )) exp (−hi∗ ) H
                   rit = exp (rei − λ) 1 −                                                      −1                (14)
                                                                                   bit
                                                1 − exp (−rei − φH ) + exp (−hi∗ ) H

In the limit of small time intervals, the interest rate is:

                                                                     bit
                                                                 rei H
                                         rit = rei − λ −                                                          (15)
                                                                      bit
                                                           rei + φH + H

    When a country is very “risky”, (Hbit low), its interest rate is high (15), because its currency has
a high risk of depreciating in bad states of the world. Note that this risk is a risk of depreciation,
not a default risk. 11
    Hence, countries with high interest rates will see their exchange rate appreciate — that’s the
“forward exchange rate premium puzzle” or “uncovered interest rate parity puzzle” highlighted by
Hansen and Hodrick (1980) and Fama (1984), and replicated for various countries and time periods
many times since (Engel 1996, Lewis 1995 provide surveys).
    We analyze the predictions of our model for Fama regressions in two diﬀerent types of samples:
with disaster and with no disaster. We consider countries with identical constant parameters, but
possibly diﬀerent Hb t and ω t .
    We start with the regression in a sample without disasters. In the continuous time limit, the
expected growth rate of the exchange rate, conditional on no disasters is, dropping the index i for
  10
   h The
       ∗
           derivation
               i        is standard. In the international currency, the payoﬀ of the bond is et+1 , so its price is
     Mt+1 et+1
Et      Mt∗     , and its domestic price is (13).
  11
     Safe countries can borrow at a lower interest rate, which may explain while historically the dollar or Swiss Franc
interest rates were low (Gourinchas and Rey 2007).


                                                          11
country i,                                                     h          i            ³    ´
                            ∙        ¸                    Et       dHet                   bt H
                                                                                        φ+H   bt
                                1 det                               dt
                       Et             = gω +             = gω −             .
                                et dt                 bt
                                             re + φ + H                  bt
                                                                re + φ + H
                                  bt :
In a first order approximation in H
                                                  ∙         ¸
                                                      1 det             φ b
                                             Et               = gω −        Ht
                                                      et dt          re + φ

When the country is very risky, Hb t is high, and its exchange rate is low (11); as the exchange rate
                                                            £ t¤
mean-reverts, its exchange rate will appreciate, so that Et de
                                                             dt
                                                                 /et > 0.
  Similarly, in a first order approximation in H bt:

                                                                                  bt
                                                                               re H
                                                      rt = re − λ −
                                                                              re + φ
Hence                                    ∙         ¸
                                             1 det    φ          φ (re − λ)
                                   Et                = rt + gω −
                                             et dt    re             re
   Consider the Fama (1984) regression of the changes in the exchange rate between countries A
and B regressed on the diﬀerence in interest rates, in a sample with no disasters:
                                                  ∙                         ¸
                                                      eA      A
                                                       t+1 − et   eB      B
                                                                   t+1 − et
                  Fama regression: Et                           −             = α − β(rtA − rtB )   (16)
                                                          eA
                                                           t         e B
                                                                       t


The expectation hypothesis predicts β = 1. The present model however predicts a negative co-
eﬃcient. For simplicity, we consider the case where the two countries, A and B, have the same
re .

Proposition 4 (Coeﬃcient in the Fama regression, conditionally on no disasters). In the Fama
regression (16), in a sample with no disasters, the coeﬃcient is:

                                                              φ
                                                           β=− .                                    (17)
                                                              re

In the Fama regression (16), in an unconditional sample, in the case where Bt ≡ B, the coeﬃcient
is:
                                                  φ
                                     β F ull = 1 − (1 − B γ )                               (18)
                                                  re

    With the calibrated numbers φ = 20%/year and re = 10%/year, the coeﬃcient in a yearly
regression should be β = −2. This is in the order of magnitude of the estimates in the literature.
We conclude that even quantitatively, the UIP puzzle seems to be accounted for by the framework.
    The Fama coeﬃcient in a sample without disasters does not depend on B. Even when disasters
are not associated with risk premia — B = 1— the Fama regression in a small sample with no
disaster would indicate a violation of UIP. Time varying risk premia are crucial to explain the

                                                                   12
forward premium puzzle in a sample with disasters. In particular, for B = 1, there is no disaster
risk (consumption doesn’t fall during disasters), so that β F ull = 1. Hence, the Fama regression
yields a negative coeﬃcient only if disaster risk is high enough. We note that the negative β F ull
does not come from a Peso problem explanation in the sense that, in the model, even in a sample
that includes disasters, there can be a negative coeﬃcient in the Fama regression.

    Other Interpretations The model can be interpreted alternatively in two diﬀerent ways.
First, while we have derived our diﬀerent pricing kernels from a CCAPM framework adapted for
disasters, there are other possibilities. The pricing kernels we derive are flexible and attractive
reduced-form candidates for models with time varying risk premia associated with large currency
movements. This is, we believe, a prevalent feature of foreign exchange markets: the carry trade
is often referred to “picking dimes in front a of steam roller.” Although we take the extra-step of
linking these risk-premia to aggregate consumption risk, this step is not needed to derive the asset
pricing implications of our framework: our model does not live or die on this particular hypothesis.
In fact, this particular dimension of the model is hard to test since the problem of estimating time
varying correlations with consumption is compounded in our case by the fact that rare disasters
that might not occur in short samples are crucial to computing the relevant correlations. Using
option prices in Farhi, Gabaix, Ranciere and Verdelhan (2008), we test a higher level implication of
the model — that there are time-varying risk premia associated with large movements in exchange
rate.
    Second, while the model is presented as rational, it can also be viewed as a tractable way to
capture time-varying perception of risk, or investor sentiment. Disasters are rare by nature and
their probability of occurrence as well as their severity make them prone to expectations errors,
herds and other behavioral biases. In the model, the varying beliefs about the probability and
intensity of crashes could be rational, or behavioral. Under this interpretation, this paper oﬀers a
way to model time-varying “perception of risk”, “risk appetite” or “sentiment” — people’s estimate
of how their asset would perform in a crisis. Under that interpretation, one doesn’t need to use the
“macroeconomic consumption drop” interpretation. In fact, one can interpret more loosely disasters
as small probability bad events as “financial crashes.” Our international pricing kernel (6) does not
refer to consumption. The agents basically follow an expected value maximization, except that B −γ
term increases the eﬀective weight put on low probability events, consistent with Prospect theory.
The model then oﬀers a coherent way to think about the joint behavior of sentiment and prices.


3    A setup with a risk factor and a business cycle factor
The above setup gave the essence of the disaster mechanism, but it has only one factor, so that,
controlling for current productivity, exchange rate and risk premia are perfectly correlated, which
in a variety of contexts is not a desirable feature. Accordingly, we extend the framework to a
two-factor model, a risk factor, and a business cycle factor.


                                                 13
3.1    Setup with a risk factor and a business cycle factor
In the baseline model, the real rate varies only because of the risk premium. We can easily extend
the model to business cycle movements in the interest rates. For ease of notations, we typically drop
the index i for country i. We say that the country’s productivity is ω t = ω t (1 + yt ), where ω t is
the “permanent” component of productivity, and yt is a “business cycle” fluctuation or “deviation
of productivity from trend”. We model:
                                         (
                              ωt+1           exp (gω )            in normal times
                                   =
                               ωt            exp (gω ) Ft+1       if disaster

and LG-twisted process for yt :

                                                      1 + H∗    ¡   ¢
                                       Et [yt+1 ] =          exp −φy yt
                                                      1 + Ht

with innovation uncorrelated to the ones of ωt and Mt . As before, that means that, to a first order,
                                      ¡    ¢
yt follows an AR(1), Et [yt+1 ] = exp −φy yt + O (yt2 ). The “twist” term, 1+H  ∗
                                                                             1+Ht
                                                                                  , is close to 1 in
practice, and makes the process tractable without aﬀecting importantly the dynamics of yt . This
allows to calculate the exchange rate.

Proposition 5 (Exchange rate with a business cycle factor) The exchange rate is
                                   Ã                                                     !
                       ωt                exp (−re − h∗ ) b         1 − exp (−re )
             et =                   1+                     Ht +         ¡         ¢ yt           (19)
                  1 − exp (−re )       1 − exp (−re − φH )      1 − exp −re − φy

and in the continuous time limit, it is:
                                              Ã                                  !
                                        ωt            bt
                                                      H      re yt
                                   et =         1+        +                                      (20)
                                        re         re + φH re + φy

while the interest rate is:
                                                            re bt +         re φy
                                                       − re +φ H                  y
                                                                           re +φy t
                                                              H
                                   rt = re − λ +                 et         re yt
                                                                                                 (21)
                                                                 H
                                                        1+    re +φH
                                                                       +   re +φy


                                 b t has the same eﬀect as before. But there is an additional factor,
   In this setup, the resilience H
the deviation of productivity from trend yt , which is not associated with any risk premium. As
would be expected, when productivity is high, the exchange rate is high. Also, it is expected to
depreciate, so that the interest rate rate is high.




                                                        14
3.2    Fama regression with two factors
Let us revisit the Fama regression (16):
                                ∙                         ¸
                                    eA      A
                                     t+1 − et   eB      B
                                                 t+1 − et
                           Et                 −             = α0 − β 0 (rtA − rtB ).
                                        eA
                                         t          eB
                                                     t


The next Proposition relates the coeﬃcient β 0 in a sample with no disaster, and the coeﬃcient β 0F ull
in full sample, to their corresponding values β and β F ull previously derived for the one-factor model.

Proposition 6 (Value of the β coeﬃcient in the Fama regression, with two factors). Up to second
order terms, in the Fama regression, the coeﬃcients are:

                                                β 0 = νβ + 1 − ν                                    (22)
                                           β 0F ull = νβ F ull + 1 − ν                              (23)

where β and β F ull are given in Eqs. 17 and 18, and ν is the share of variance in the interest rate
       bt ,
due to H                                   ³        ´2     ³ ´
                                                re
                                                       Var  Hbt
                                             re +φH
                            ν=³         ´2       ³ ´ ³           ´2           .                 (24)
                                     re            b       re φy
                                  re +φ
                                           Var Ht + re +φ           Var (yt )
                                            H                       y



    In Eq. 22, β 0 is the weighted average of two Fama coeﬃcients. One, β, comes from the variations
in the risk premium. The second, 1, comes from the cyclical variations in productivity, and is the
value predicted by the expectation hypothesis. The weight ν is the relative share of the two factors
in the variance of the interest rate.


4     Calibration
4.1    Choice of Parameter Values
We use yearly units.
    Disaster and risk aversion. To keep the calibration parsimonious, the probability and intensity
of disasters are constant. The probability of disaster is p = 1.7%, as estimated by Barro (2006).
The key parameter in the calibration is pE [B −γ ], the risk-adjusted probability of disasters: disasters
are overweighted compared to their physical probability by a factor E [B −γ ]. This factor is very
sensitive to the severity of disasters and to the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. Increasing γ from
2 to 4 for example increases the risk-adjusted probability of disasters by a factor of 2.8. Going from
γ = 4 to γ = 6 increases it by another factor of 5.
    We present three main scenarios which diﬀer by the implied risk-adjustment factor E [B −γ ].
These scenarios can be thought alternatively as varying the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion or



                                                        15
the actual severity of disasters:12 these two parameter enter our results only through the summary
statistics E [B −γ ] . Under our preferred calibration (Calibration 1), the implied risk-adjustment
factor is E [B −γ ] = 10.9. This number is in line the numbers reported by Barro (2006) and Barro
and Ursua (2008) for a coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion γ = 4. We also present a Calibration
2 with more benign disasters (higher B or lower γ) where E [B −γ ] = 2.44. Finally, we present a
Calibration 3 with more extreme disasters (lower B or higher γ) where E [B −γ ] = 24.4.
    Growth rates. We choose the growth rates so that in normal times, consumption of nontradables
grows at rate gc = 3%. We set gω = gc , but values are not really sensitive to that parameter. We
make sure that the riskless domestic short term rate is on average around 1%, which pins down the
rate of time preference, δ.13
    Exchange rate. An initial investment depreciates at a usual rate λ = 8%. To specify the
volatility of the recovery rate Ft , we specify that it has a baseline value F∗ = 0.8, and its range is
Ft ∈ [Fmin , Fmax ] = [0.2, 1.2]. That means that the technology of transforming domestic goods into
international goods could improve. This is because ωt is really the ratio between two productivities
— to produce domestic or international goods, so that relative ratio could increase or decrease. This
possibility of a worst-case fall of productivity to 0.2 of its initial level may seem high. Perhaps it
proxies for disruptions not directly linked to productivity, e.g. the introduction of taxes, regulation,
or a loss of property rights (as in Barro 2006), though we do not model those interpretations here.
    The speed of mean-reversion is φH = 0.2, which gives a high-life of ln 2/φH = 3.5 years, and is
in line with typical estimates from the exchange rate predictability
                                                          h             iliterature (Rogoﬀ 1996).
                                       b       −γ           b      b
    This translates into a range for Ht = p (B Ft − 1), Hmin , Hmax . We parametrize the volatility
according to Appendix C, with
                        ³ ´        ¯        ¯     ³             ´2 ³            ´2
                         b = 2vφH ¯¯H
                      σ2 H           b min ¯¯ H
                                              bmax 1 − H/
                                                       b Hb min         b H
                                                                    1 − H/ b max ,

                                      h            i
                      b                 b     b
which guaranties that H remains within Hmin , Hmax , as the volatility dies down fast enough at
                                                        b and F . For instance, a country with
the boundaries. The parameter v controls the volatility H
volatile riskiness will have a high v.
     To calibrate the exchange rate fluctuations, we start from (11), and take the benchmark of a
constant productivity ω t during the “normal times” period under study. Then, the only changes
in the real exchange rates are due to expectation about the “resilience” of a country if a disaster
happens. Diﬀerentiation of (11) gives a bilateral exchange rate volatility between two uncorrelated
  12
      Here we take the Barro and Ursua numbers at face value: each observation is a realization of B. Another possi-
bility would have been to estimate a distribution of B for world consumption. This should decrease the importance
of disasters, via diversification. However, many disasters are correlated (as they often occur during wars or global
economic or financial crises). There are several diﬃculties in implementing this approach, from pure data issues to
conceptual issues — for instance, distinguishing between tradable and non-tradable consumption. The data is not
available yet, but Barro and Ursua are in the process of computing these numbers.
   13
      Note that for Calibration 2, this forces us to adopt a negative value for δ . Alternatively, for the purpose of this
particular calibration, we could have adjusted the consumption growth rate gc ; we could also have introduced Epstein
Zin Weill preferences with a higher intertemporal elasticity of substitution while maintaining a coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion of 4. We chose to vary as few parameters as possible.


                                                           16
                         √
exchange rates14 σ eij ' 2σ H / (re + φ). If two countries are perfectly correlated, then σ ei = 0,
while if they have a correlation of −1, then σ eij ' 2σ H / (re + φ). We report the values for the
uncorrelated case.
    Default risk. To keep the model parsimonious, we assume no default risk on debt. This is the
cleanest assumption for developed countries. Of course, in many cases (e.g. to price sovereign debt),
default can be added without changing anything to the exchange rate.


4.2        Implications for levels, volatilities and correlations
Table 1 presents the main results. In Calibration 1, with v = 0.2, the volatility of the bilateral
exchange rate is 11%, and with v = 0.1, 8%. In our low risk calibration (Calibration 2), the
corresponding volatilities of the exchange rate are almost trivial: 1.8% and 2.5%. In our high
risk calibration (Calibration 3) these volatilities are magnified and become 25.7% and 18.7%, re-
spectively. Hence, the model can reasonably generate a high volatility of the exchange rate. The
reason is that disasters have a high importance: their importance is magnified by E [B −γ ], which is
10.9 (Calibration 1), and 24.4 (Calibration 3). By contrast, in Calibration 2, disasters are milder,
risk premia are lower and less volatile, and as a consequence, exchange rates themselves are much
smoother.

              Table 1: Calibrations of the Model with Medium, Low and High Disaster Risk


                                                               Calibration 1     Calibration2    Calibration 3
                                                               Medium risk       Low risk        High risk
       Postulated importance of disasters E [B −γ ]            10.9              2.44            24.4
       Implied values
       Range of domestic riskless short rate (in %)            −0.9; 1.5; 5.1    1.0; 1.5; 2.3   −3.8; 1.5; 9.58
       Volatility of domestic riskless short rate (in %)       0.7               0.17            1.7
       Range for FX et / (ω t /re )                            0.62; 1; 1.25     0.91; 1; 1.06   0.16; 1; 1.56
       Baseline Fama regression coeﬃcient, −φ/re               -2.1              −2.1            -2.1
       Bilateral FX volatility σ e (in %) when v = 0.1;0.2     9.0; 12.7         1.8; 2.5        17.9; 25.3


Explanation: Each calibration starts with a postulated importance of disasters, E [B −γ ]. For instance
if E [B −γ ] = 10.9, rare disasters matter 10.9 times as much as they would if agents were risk neutral.
We then fit the rate of time preference δ, to get a typical value of the interest rate close to 1.5%. We
report the minimum, typical (corresponding to H     b t = 0) and maximum range for the domestic short
term interest rate; the minimum, typical and maximum value for the exchange rate over “steady state
fundamentals” (ωt /re ). Finally, we report for volatility of the bilateral exchange rate for currencies with
two uncorrelated fundamentals. Perfectly correlated currencies have 0 bilateral FX     √ volatility, perfectly
anticorrelated currencies, a volatility equal to the one reported in the table, times 2. The time unit is
the year.


       In all three calibrations, the volatility of Ft (defined as Var1/2 (Ft+1 − Ft )) is 9% per year when
  14                     det         et
                                     H            et
                                                  H
       This is because    et   =   r+φ+Het   '   r+φ ,
                                            and the bilateral exchange rate eij = ei /ej has twice the variance of any
                              b
of the exchange rates, if the Ht shocks are uncorrelated.


                                                         17
ν = 0.1, and 12.7% when ν = 0.2: expectations about recovery rate vary pretty rapidly from year
to year. As Hbt is quite volatile, the exchange rate is hard to forecast (the same way stocks are hard
to forecast). At short horizons, it behaves like a random walk (qualitatively consistent with Meese
and Rogoﬀ 1983).
    In the remaining of this section, we focus on our preferred calibration (Calibration 1) and dig
deeper into its implications. We turn to the model’s implications for the correlation between the
changes in the exchange
                 µ         rate and the changes
                                             ¶     in the interest rate. More precisely we are interested in
                   ∆(et /et )
                       A   B     ¡          ¢
comparing Corr       eA /eB
                              , ∆ rtA − rtB    in the data and in the model. In the data, this correlation
                          t   t

is close to 0. In the simple version of Calibration 1 we have only one real factor. Hence the correlation
is −1 almost by definition. However, a two-factor version of our model similar to that developed
in Section 3 performs much better. The reason for this is that although the disaster factor pushes
towards a negative correlation, the business cycle factor by contrast, pushes towards a positive
correlation. For the purpose of the calibration, it is more intuitive to model business cycle shocks
as shocks to productivity trend growth rather than shocks to the level of productivity.15
     We choose the average standard deviation of the innovation in b     gω,t to be σ geω,t = 1.4% and a
mean-reversion coeﬃcient φg = 10%. With these numbers, we have
                                          Ã    ¡        ¢                !
                                              ∆ eAt /eB
                                                      t      ¡          ¢
                                   Corr         A B
                                                          , ∆ rtA − rtB    = −0.027.
                                               et /et

The volatility of the bilateral exchange is 11.1%, the volatility of the domestic interest rate is 1.0%.
The Fama coeﬃcient is still negative but smaller in absolute value: β 0 = −0.04. This of course, is
to be anticipated because we have introduced a business-cycle factor with significant variance. To
some extent, there is tension in the
                                   µ assumed volatility of     ¶ the business-cycle factor σ ĝω,t , between
                                     ∆(eA /et )
                                            B      ¡          ¢
matching small correlation Corr         t
                                      eA /eB
                                                , ∆ rtA − rtB    and generating a large negative Fama
                                                 t   t

regression coeﬃcient.


5        Option prices and exchange rate risk premia
5.1        Theory
Option prices incorporate direct information about the probability and severity of disasters. In
particular, consider the implied volatility smile of a pair of currencies: a risky currency and a safe
currency. The smile will be much steeper on the risky currency side. A high “smile-skew” should
  15
       More precisely, we assume that productivity growth has deviations from trend, gbω,t
                                                                ½
                               ω t+1                              1    in normal times
                                     = (1 + gbω,t ) exp (gω ) ×
                                 ωt                               Ft+1 if disaster

                                                         1+H∗ exp(−φg )e
                                                                       gω,t
which follows a twisted AR(1) process, Et [b
                                           gω,t+1 ] =    1+Ht    1+e
                                                                   gω,t     .   Then, Eq. 20 and 21 hold to a first order,
replacing re yt by gbω,t .


                                                            18
predict currency appreciation, high interest rate diﬀerential and high bond returns.
    Consider two countries A and B. The currency B price at date 0 of a call ∙ that gives the option
                                               B                                ∗
                                                                                  ³             ´+ ¸
                                              e0                         1    MT    B      eB A
to buy at date 1 one unit of currency B for K eA units of currency A is eB E0 M ∗ e1 − K eA e1
                                                                                            0
                                                                                                    ,
                                                           0                                       0       0       0

i.e.                                                     "          µ               ¶+ #
                                                             M1∗        eB
                                                                         1     eA
                                                                                1
                                       V Call (K) = E0                     − K             .                            (25)
                                                             M0∗        eB
                                                                         0     eA
                                                                                0

    Likewise, the currency B price at date 0 of a put that gives
                                                              ∙ the³ option to ´sell¸ at date 1 one unit
                                                                                 +
                     eB                                         M∗     eA   eB
of currency B for K e0A units of currency A is V P ut (K) = E0 M1∗ K e1A − e1B       .
                           0                                                        0          0       0

    In order to gain in tractability, we make two simplifying assumptions, as in Gabaix (2007b).
First we assume that if a disaster occurs in period t + 1, εH   t+1 is equal to zero. Second, we assume
that the distribution of et+1 conditional on date t information and no disaster occurring in period
t + 1 is lognormal with drift μi,t and volatility σ i,t where i ∈ {A, B} indexes countries: ei,ND
                                                                                               1  /ei0 =
exp (μi + εi − σ 2i /2) with εi ∼ N(0, σ 2i ).16

Proposition 7 The price of a call with strike K is:
                                                        ¡                        ¢
              V Call (K) = exp (−R + μB ) (1 − p0 ) C BS K exp (μA − μB ) , σ A|B +                                     (26)
                                                   £ −γ                             +¤
                           + exp (−R + μB ) p0 ED
                                                0 B1 (F1,B − K exp (μA − μB ) F1,A )


where C BS (K, σ) is the Black-Scholes call value when the strike is K, the volatility σ, the interest
rate 0, the maturity 1, the spot price 1 and
                                                                         µ       µ B A ¶¶1/2
                                ¡                            ¢1/2                 e e
                      σ A|B    ≡ σ 2A + σ 2B − 2ρA,B σ A σ B      =       V ar ln 1B / 1A
                                                                              ND
                                                                                  e0 e0

is the standard deviation of the bilateral log exchange rate if there is no disaster. The price of a put
is given by the Put-Call parity equation:

                                                                          K       1
                                      V P ut (K) = V Call (K) +               −                                         (27)
                                                                        1 + rA 1 + rB

   The option price (26) is the sum of two terms. The first one is a familiar Black-Scholes term. The
second is a purely disaster term. For strikes close to the spot, the Black-Scholes term dominates.
But far out of the money, if the disaster term is not 0, it will typically dominate.


5.2      Risk Reversals
Option prices reveal the risk-neutral distribution — that is, the physical probabilities adjusted for
risk— of future exchange rates. Disasters are associated with large movements in exchange rates.
  16                                                                                                            g
                                                                                                                  ¡     ω
                                                                                                                            ¢
    This£ can ¤be insured as
                      £ ω H ¤in  Gabaix (2007b). We  assume  that, if there is no disaster, then ω t+1 /ω t = e    1 + εt+1  ,
           ω
with Et εt+1 = Et εt+1 εt+1 = 0. This does not change any of the formulas for the exchange rate and the interest
                                                                     i,N D i
rate. The disturbance term εω   t+1 can be designed to insure that e1     /e0 has the lognormal noise announced above.

                                                               19
Information about disaster risk-premia can logically be extracted from out of the money option
prices. Indeed, consider the price of a “risk reversal”:
                                  ∙        µ         ¶        µ           ¶¸
                                1     P ut   1 + rA      Call   1 + rA −1
                       RR (k) ≡     V               k −V               k                           (28)
                                T            1 + rB             1 + rB

with k > 0, and T is the duration of a “period” in years. This is the price of a put at a fraction
k ≤ 1 of the forward rate, minus the price of a call at a fraction 1/k ≥ 1 of the forward rate (indeed,
1+rA
1+rB
      is the forward rate of the currency, as a multiple of the current spot price). If there is a high
crash risk for currency B (i.e., currency B will do worse than currency A during disasters), then
RR should be positive. If there is higher crash risk for currency A, RR should be negative. If there
is no disaster risk, then RR is very close to 0. Risk-reversals are used routinely by traders engaged
in currency speculation and in the carry trade in particular as it allows them to bound the gains
and losses on their positions.
    Calculations show that it is approximately, for short time periods T , and for |k − 1| large
                   √
compared to σ AB T (so that the disaster terms mostly influence the value of RR):
                                       ³                          ´
                                 RR ' Ψ HbB − H
                                              b A , (1 − k) H∗ /T                                  (29)

where Ψ (x, y) = (x − y)+ − (−x − y)+ , a relation that has a shape illustrated in the left panel of
Figure 2. The risk reversal position is such that the Black-Scholes component of the put and call
have the same price in the limit
                           ¯     of short
                                        ¯ maturities. This allows us to extract the disaster intensities
                           ¯b       bA ¯¯ is large compared to |1 − k| H∗ /T ,
from option prices. When ¯HB − H

                                           RR ' H    bA.
                                                bB − H                                             (30)

Hence, the risk reversal is approximately the diﬀerence in resilience between the two countries.
   Conditionally on no disasters, the excess return on a position long on currency B, and short in
currency A, is:            ∙ B      B            A¸
                       N D et+T − et    eA
                                         t+T − et
                     Et               −             /T + rtA − rtB = HtB − HtA                 (31)
                                eB
                                 t          eA
                                             t

which is close to RR. That is, a currency with a high put price should have a low price, and should
subsequently appreciate. This is because it has a high risk premium, that aﬀects both the put value,
and a low value of the exchange rate. Equation 31 expresses quantitatively the magnitude of the
eﬀect.


5.3    Risk Reversals and Currency Returns
We illustrate the potential power of risk reversals to forecast currency returns. We consider two
countries, A and B, with same permanent resilience (HA∗ = HB∗ = H∗ ), but perhaps diﬀerent
transient resiliences, H     bBt . We take currency A’s at its steady state, H
                       bAt , H                                               b At = 0. We take a period


                                                  20
       Implied Volatility                                   Implied Volatility
           0.30
           0.25                                                0.35
           0.20                                                0.30
           0.15                                                0.25
           0.10                                                0.20
           0.05                                                0.15
                                              Strike                                               Strike
               0.8   0.9    1.0   1.1   1.2                              0.9     1.0   1.1   1.2



Figure 1: Implied volatility vs Strike. Units are annualized. Country B is riskier than country
A. So, the implied volatility of out of the money puts is high. The dotted line is the mirror image
of the solid curve, replacing the strike k by its symmetrical value around the forward exchange rate,
1/k. It illustrates that for deep puts, the implied volatility of an out of the money put on currency
B is higher than the implied volatility of an out of the money symmetrical call. The values chosen
     b A = 0, H
are: H         bB = −5% in annualized values. Finally, the left panel corresponds to no noise, and
the right panel corresponds to a noise ν = 0.5.

length of T equal to 3 months.
    At this stage, we need to specify a detail that did not matter before, the volatility of the realiza-
tion of FA in (26): for an option, the uncertainty about the realization of the risk matters. We choose
to say that if F A is the expected recovery of country A, its actual realization is FA = F A (1 ± ν),
where the noise ν will be chosen either equal to 0 (no uncertainty) or 0.5 (high uncertainty), no
correlations across countries. Given we have no strong prior on the value of that uncertainty, we
show the plots for two values. In Figures 1-3, the left panel corresponds to no noise (ν = 0), and
the right panel corresponds to a noise ν = 0.5.
    Implied volatility and risk reversals. Figure 1 shows the implied volatility of a put as a function
of the strike. We take the case where country B is riskier than country A. We take H      b B = −5% in
annualized values. So, the implied volatility of out of the money puts is high. The dotted line is
the mirror image of the solid curve, replacing the strike k by 1/k. It illustrates that for deep puts,
implied volatilities of the crash of currency B are higher than implied volatility of a boom. We see
that more noise increase implied volatility, as it should, and also decreases the diﬀerence between
the put implied volatility (evaluated at k < 1) and the symmetrical call volatility (evaluated at
1/k > 1).
    Resilience and risk reversals. Figure 2 analyzes the impact of country B’s resilience (H     b B ) on
the value of the risk-reversal, assuming a relative strike k = 0.8. The Figure illustrates that when
country B is riskier, its risk-reversal is more expensive. When there is enough noise, the relation is
approximately linear.
    Currency returns and risk reversals. Figure 3 plots the expected returns on a position of one
unit long of a currency B bill, and one unit short of currency A short term bill, vs the risk reversal.
We again assume a relative strike k = 0.8. When country B is riskier, its risk-reversal is higher

                                                       21
                                                                Risk Reversal
           Risk Reversal
                                                                 0.04
             0.04
                                                                 0.02
             0.02
                                                                                        Resilience
                                     Resilience          0.05
                                                             0.02             0.05
      0.05
          0.02           0.05
                                                             0.04
                                                             0.06


Figure 2: Risk-Reversal vs Resilience. Units are annualized. The figure plots the Risk-Reversal
                       b B , assuming the country A is at the steady state, H
(28) vs the resilience H                                                         bA = 0. The Figure
illustrates that when country B is riskier, its risk-reversal is higher. The left panel corresponds to
no noise, and the right panel corresponds to a noise ν = 0.5.




             Expected Return                             Expected Return


                0.05                                        0.05


                                   Risk Reversal                                 Risk Reversal
           0.05           0.05                         0.05           0.05

              0.05                                       0.05




Figure 3: Risk-Reversal vs Expected Returns. Units are annualized. The figure plots the
expected returns on a position of 1 unit long of a currency B bill, and 1 unit short of currency A
                                                                                            b A = 0.
short term bill, vs the the risk reversal. We assume that country A is at the steady state, H
The Figure illustrates that when country B is riskier, its risk-reversal is higher and its expected
returns are higher. The left panel corresponds to no noise, and the right panel corresponds to a
noise ν = 0.5.




                                                   22
and its expected returns are higher. We see that when the noise is higher, the relation becomes
approximately linear as in (30)-(31). Hence, one can hope to use risk-reversals to forecast currency
returns. We explore these issues in Farhi, Gabaix, Ranciere and Verdelhan (2008).


5.4       Some Evidence: Contemporaneous Correlations between Currency
          Movements and Risk Reversals
Carr and Wu (2007) compute the risk-reversals for two pairs of countries: UK and Japan versus
the US. They find a high correlation between changes in the price of risk-reversal options and
changes in nominal exchange rates: currencies that become riskier — for which puts become relatively
more expensive than calls — experience a simultaneous depreciation. Farhi, Gabaix, Ranciere and
Verdelhan (2008) extends their analysis to a sample of 25 countries. Their analysis confirms the
finding of Carr and Wu (2007) and shows that it also holds for real exchange rates, providing direct
evidence in favor of our model.17
    We next turn to two extensions of our model, to nominal rates, and to stocks.


6        Yield curve, forward rates, and exchange rates, real and
         nominal
6.1       Exchange rates and long term real rates
To study the forward premium puzzle for long term rates, we first derive the price ofh long term  i
                                                                                         M ∗ et+T
bonds. The price of a bond yield one unit of the currency at time t + T is: Zt (T ) = Et t+T
                                                                                           Mt∗ et
                                                                                                    .
   The yield at maturity T , Yt (T ), and the forward rates ft (T ) are defined by
                                                              Ã                    !
                                                                   X
                                                                   T
                           Zt (T ) = exp (−Yt (T ) T ) = exp −              ft (T 0 ) .
                                                                   T 0 =1


Proposition 8 (Price of a domestic bond, when there is no inflation on the home goods) The
                                                                                    bt and yt ,
domestic forward rate is, in the continuous time limit, up to second order terms in H

                                                                           ¡     ¢
                   ft (T ) = re − λ −
                                           re                bt + re φy exp −φy T yt
                                                exp (−φH T ) H                                           (32)
                                        re + φH                  re + φy

The proof to this Proposition also calculates the expressions for bonds, yields, forward rates, in
discrete and continuous time.

       The proof is in Appendix B.
  17
    In a contemporaneous paper, Brunnermeier, Nagel and Pedersen (2008) provide an interesting analysis of the
link between expected returns, crash risk (measured by realized skewness) and risk reversals.




                                                     23
     To illustrate the economics, suppose that the country has a very high Hb t , i.e. is very safe. Future
Hb t will, on average, mean-revert to 0. Hence, by (11), the exchange rate (which is high now) will
depreciate. The short terms rates are low (Eq. 15), which is the forward premium puzzle. Eq.
32 says that long term rates are low (the bond price is high because H    b t .is high). Hence, perhaps
paradoxically at first, investors expect the exchange rate to depreciate in the long term, and also,
long term rates are low. In the model, this is because investors perceive the country as very “safe”,
and require a small risk premium on it.

6.1.1   Fama regression with forward rates

Boudoukh, Richardson and Whitelaw (BRW, 2006) propose to regress the exchange rate movement
on the T −period forward rate from T periods ago:
                      ∙                    ¸
                    eA
                     t+1 − et
                             A
                                 eB      B
                                  t+1 − et
BRW regression: Et             −             = αF wd (T ) − β F wd (T ) (ft−T
                                                                          A              B
                                                                              (T + 1) − ft−T (T + 1))
                        eA
                         t           eB
                                      t
                                                                                                 (33)
  Our model’s prediction is in the next Proposition.

Proposition 9 (Value of the β coeﬃcient in the Fama regression, with two factors, with forward
rates). Up to second order terms, in the BRW (33) regression with forward rates, the coeﬃcients
are:
                                 β F wd (T ) = ν (T ) β + 1 − ν (T )                       (34)

and
                                     β F wd,F ull (T ) = ν (T ) β F ull + 1 − ν (T )                  (35)

where β and β F ull are given in Eqs. 17 and 18, and
                                             ³         ³ ´´2
                                                    re
                                                   Var H bt exp (−2φH T )
                                                 re +φH
             ν (T ) = ³            ´2    ³ ´                ³       ´2              ¡       ¢         (36)
                             re           b                   re φy
                          re +φH
                                      Var Ht exp (−2φH T ) + re +φ     Var (yt ) exp −2φy T
                                                                           y



                                                    b t . In particular, when φH > φy , the long horizon
is the share of variance in the forward rate due to H
regression have coeﬃcient going to 1: limT →∞ β F wd (T ) = limT →∞ β F wd,F ull (T ) = 1.

    BRW (2006) find that β f wd (T ) increases toward 1 with the horizon. Our theory is consistent
with this empirical finding. Indeed, to interpret Proposition 9, consider the case where risk-premia
are fast mean-reverting, and productivity is slowly mean reverting, φH > φy . Then, large T , ν (T )
tends to 0, which means that, at long horizons, the forward rate is mostly determined by the level
of yt , not of the risk premium. Hence, at long horizon the model behaves like a model without risk
premia, hence generates a coeﬃcient β close to 1.




                                                               24
6.2    A simple model of exchange rates and nominal yield curves
Until recently, forward real interest rates were not available. Only their nominal counterparts were
the support of actively traded securities. Even today, most bonds are nominal bonds.
    To model nominal bonds, we build on the real two factor model developed above. Let Qt =
   Y t
Q0      (1 − is ) be the value of money (the inverse of the price level). The nominal interest rate ret
   s=1                h ∗                i
            1          Mt+1 et+1
satisfies 1+hrt
                =  Et   M ∗ et
                                 (1 − it , so that, in the continuous time limit,
                                        )
                         t



                                                       ret = rt + it ,                                  (37)

the nominal interest rate is the real interest rate, plus inflation. The Fisher neutrality applies: there
is no burst of inflation during disasters. With a burst of inflation, even short term bonds would
command a risk premium.
    Inflation hovers around i∗ , according to the LG process:

                                                   1 − i∗
                                   it+1 = i∗ +            exp (−φi ) (it − i∗ ) + εit+1                 (38)
                                                   1 − it

where εit+1 has mean 0, and is uncorrelated with innovations in Mt+1 , in particular with disasters.
One could correlate this, but the analysis is a bit more complicated (the analysis is available upon
request). The expected value of 1 unit of currency T period later is:
                               ∙          ¸              µ                             ¶
                                   Qt+T                 T     1 − exp (−φi T ) it − i∗
                          Et                  = (1 − i∗ ) 1 −                                           (39)
                                    Qt                         1 − exp (−φi ) 1 − i∗
      h     i                 ³                              ´
or Et QQt+T
          t
              = exp (−i ∗ T )  1 − 1−exp(−φi T )
                                        φi
                                                 (i t − i ∗ )  in the continuous time limit.
    To fix notations, we denote nominal variables with a tilde. The      h ∗price of longi term nominal bonds
                                                                          Mt+T et+T Qt+T
yielding one unit of the currency at time t + T is Zet (T ) = Et             Mt∗ et Qt
                                                                                          . Because we assume
that shocks to inflation are uncorrelated with disasters, the value present value of one nominal unit
of the currency is
                                    ∙ ∗             ¸      ∙ ∗        ¸ ∙      ¸
                       e             Mt+T et+T Qt+T         Mt+T et+T     Qt+T
                       Zt (T ) = Et                   = Et             Et
                                        Mt∗ et Qt            Mt∗ et        Qt

Hence, the value of the zero coupon bond is:

Proposition 10 (Price of a nominal domestic bond, with no inflation risk premia) The domestic
                                                                                   bt and yt , it −i∗ :
nominal forward rate is, in the continuous time limit, up to second order terms in H

                                                         ¡     ¢
 ft (T ) = re − λ −
                         re                bt + re φy exp −φy T yt + i∗ + exp (−φi T ) (it − i∗ ) (40)
                              exp (−φH T ) H
                      re + φH                  re + φy

The proof to this Proposition also calculates the expressions for bonds, yields, forward rates, in


                                                            25
discrete and continuous time.

    The nominal forward rate in (40) depends on real and nominal factors. The real factors are the
resilience of the economy (the H b t ) term, the expected growth rate of productivity (−φy yt ). The
nominal factor is inflation it .
    Each of the three terms is multiplied by a term of the type exp (−φH T ). For small speeds of
mean reversion φ’s, it means that the forward curve is fairly flat.
    With Qt the value of money, the nominal exchange rate is: eet = et Qt . The expected depreciation
of the nominal exchange rate is, up to second order terms, and conditionally on no disasters:
                                           ∙        ¸                bt
                                               deet              φ H      re φy yt
                                      Et              /dt = gω − H      −          − it                    (41)
                                               eet              re + φH re + φy

We can derive the implications of our model for a Fama regression in nominal terms:
                                  ∙                             ¸
                                      ẽA       A
                                        t+1 − ẽt   ẽB       B
                                                      t+1 − ẽt               nom
                             Et              A
                                                  −        B
                                                                  = α̃nom − β̃ (r̃tA − r̃tB )              (42)
                                           ẽt           ẽt

where r̃tA and r̃tB are now, with some a slight abuse of notational, the nominal interest rates in
countries A and B. Our model’s prediction is in the next Proposition.

Proposition 11 (Value of the β coeﬃcient in the Fama regression in nominal terms). Up to second
order terms, in the nominal Fama regression (42) regression with forward rates, the coeﬃcients are:

                       nom                                       nom,F ull
                  β̃         = ν nom β + 1 − ν nom and β̃                    = ν nom β F ull + 1 − ν nom   (43)

where β and β F ull are the coeﬃcients in the Fama regression defined in propositions (4) and (??),
and                                          ³        ´2       ³ ´
                                                  re
                                                         Var    bt
                                                                H
                                               re +φH
                      ν nom = ³       ´2    ³ ´ ³              ´2                              (44)
                                   re         b          re φy
                                re +φ
                                         Var Ht + re +φ           Var (yt ) + Var(it )
                                                 H                       y


                                                    bt.
is the share of variance in the forward rate due to H

    In this simple model with no inflation risk premia, the higher the variance of inflation , the closer
to 1 is β nom . Hence, countries with very variable inflation (typically, those are also countries with
high average inflation) satisfy approximately the uncovered interest rate parity conditions. When
disaster risks are very variable –and the real exchange rate is very variable — then β nom is more
negative.


6.3    A richer model with nominal risk premia
We now develop a richer model with an inflation-specific risk premium. We extend the framework
developed in the previous section by incorporating inflation risk along the lines of Gabaix (2007a).

                                                               26
   The variable part of inflation now follows the process:
                                   ³                                   ³       ´´
                   bit+1 = 1 − i∗ · exp (−φi ) bit + 1{Disaster at t+1} j∗ + b
                                                                             jt + εit+1              (45)
                           1 − it

   In case of a disaster, inflation jumps by an amount jt = j∗ + b      jt . This jump in inflation makes
long term bonds particularly risky. j∗ is the baseline jump in inflation, b       jt is the mean-reverting
deviation from baseline. It follows a twisted auto-regressive process, and, for simplicity, does not
jump during crises:
                                   b      1 − i∗
                                   jt+1 =        · exp (φπ ) b
                                                             jt + εjt+1                               (46)
                                          1 − it
                          −γ
    We define π it ≡ pB1+HF bjt , which is the mean-reverting part of the “risk adjusted” expected
increase in inflation if there is a disaster. We parametrize the typical jump in inflation j∗ in terms
of a number κ ≤ (1 − ρi ) /2:

                                 pB −γ F j∗
                                            = (1 − i∗ )2 κ (1 − ρi − κ) .
                                  1+H

κ represents a risk premium for the risk that inflation increases during disasters. Also, we define
i∗∗ ≡ i∗ + κ and ψ π ≡ φπ − κ. They represent the “risk adjusted” trend and mean-reversion
parameter in the inflation process.
    We denote nominal variables with a tilde. The   h Mprice  of a long
                                                                     i term nominal bond yielding one
                                                        ∗  et+T Qt+T
unit of the currency at time t + T is Zet (T ) = Et    t+T
                                                            ∗
                                                         Mt et Qt
                                                                      .
   The yield at maturity T , Yet (T ), and the forward rates fet (T ) are defined by
                                                          Ã T            !
                                        ³           ´        X
                          Zet (T ) = exp −Yet (T ) T = exp −   fet (T 0 ) .
                                                                    T 0 =1


The forward rates can be derived in closed form.

Proposition 12 (Price of a domestic nominal
                                          ³       bond, with    ´ inflation risk premia) In the continuous
time limit, in up to second order terms in Hb t , yt , it , π it :

                                                                        ¡       ¢
         fet (T ) = re − λ −
                                  re
                                       exp (−φH T ) H b t + re φy exp −φy T yt +                     (47)
                               re + φH                      re + φy
                                                                  exp (−φi T ) − exp (−ψ π T ) i
                      +i∗∗ (1 − exp (−φi T )) + exp (−φi T ) it +                             πt
                                                                           ψ π − φi

    The nominal forward rate in (47) depends on real and nominal factors. The real factors are the
resilience of the economy (the H  b t ) term, the expected growth rate of productivity (−φy yt ). The
nominal factors are inflation it , and the variable component of the the risk premium for inflation
jump risk, π it .
    When a disaster occurs, inflation increases (on average). As very short term bills are essentially


                                                   27
immune to inflation risk, while long term bonds lose value when inflation is higher, long term bonds
are riskier, hence they get a higher risk premium. Hence, the yield curve slope up on average — as
implied by the term i∗∗ (1 − exp (−φi T )) ∼ i∗∗ φi T .
    Each of the three terms is multiplied by a term of the type exp (−φH T ). For small speeds of
mean reversion φ’s, it means that the forward curve is fairly flat. The last term, however, is close
to T for small maturities ( exp(−φi Tψ)−exp(−ψ πT )
                                                    ∼ T ). It creates a variable slope in the forward curve.
                                      π −φi
Hence, we obtain a rich, potentially realistic, forward curve.
    Nominal yield curves contain a lot of potentially information useful to predict exchange rates.
We now explain how to best extract the relevant information to compute exchange rate risk premia.
As above, the expected depreciation of the nominal exchange rate is, up to second order terms, and
conditionally on no disasters:
                                       ∙        ¸                bt
                                           deet              φ H      re φy yt
                                  Et              /dt = gω − H      −          − it                                   (48)
                                           eet              re + φH re + φy

It involves three factors that are also reflected in the nominal forward curve. Note however, that it
does not involve the inflation risk premium π it . So, an optimal combination of forward rates should
predict expected currency returns with more accuracy than the simple Fama regression. It can be
shown that when φy 6= φH , the currency risk premium is a linear combination of the traditional
yield curve factors: level rt , slope ∂T fet (0), and curvature ∂T2 fet (0).


7      Equity premia and exchange-rate risk premia
Our model allows us to think in a tractable way about the joint determination of exchange rate and
equity values.


7.1      Local market price of risk and local maximal Sharpe ratios
A clean way of getting at this question is to characterize the maximal Sharpe ratio and the market
price of risk in local currency. The stochastic discount factor in local currency is mt+1 = Mt+1 et+1
                                                                                             Mt et
                                                                                                      .
                                                              1/2
                                                          Vart (mt+1 )
The maximal Sharpe ratio is given by: St ≡                  Et (mt+1 )
                                                                       .    It is given by the formula18
                                              s
                                                                         1 − pt  Ht2
                                       St =     σ 2e,t + (1 + σ 2e,t )
                                                                           pt (1 + Ht )2
                  h                  i                ¡                ¢
  18
     mt+1 = Et et+1 et | No disaster   e−R (1 + εt+1 ) 1 + Bt−γ Ft Jt+1 , where var (εt+1 ) = σ 2e , and Jt+1 = 0 with prob-
ability 1 − pt , and 1 with probability pt .




                                                               28
                 1/2
where σ e,t = Vart (et+1 |No disaster)/Et (et+1 |No disaster) is the standard deviation of the log
exchange rate in normal times. In the continuous time, limit, we can derive a very simple expression
                              s                                     µ                    ¶
                                         H2                             det
                       St =    σ 2e,t   + t with σ 2e,t = Vart              | No disaster
                                         pt                              et

The only source of time variation in σ 2e,t comes from time variations in the variance and covariance
                                                  y
of the structural shocks to Ht and yt : εHt and εt .
    The maximum Sharpe ratio St is high when resiliency Ht is high. Therefore, countries that
demand low currency risk premia will feature high local Sharpe ratio and high local equity premia.


7.2     Explicit stock values
Another way to proceed is to take a stand on what fraction of present and future endowments is
capitalized in each stock market. A commonly taken route in Lucas-tree economies is to equate
the market to a claim on the entirety of the present and future national endowments of goods.
However, listed stocks only account for a very small and potentially non-representative fraction
of future GDP. Hence, we model stocks without taking a specific stand on the link between the
aggregate dividend of listed stocks and GDP.

7.2.1   Firm producing the international good

Consider first the case of a of domestic firm, that produces the international good. More precisely,
the dividend Dt follows the following process
                                        (
                         Dt+1               egD (1 + εD,t+1 )       in normal times
                              =
                          Dt                egD (1 + εD,t+1 )FD,t   if crisis
where an idiosyncratic shock uncorrelated with the stochastic discount factors.
   Define the resilience HD,t of the stock as
                                   ¡ £ −γ         ¤   ¢
                          HD,t = pt Et Bt+1                    bD,t .
                                            FD,t+1 − 1 = HD∗ + H

                                                                 bD,t is:
It is convenient to define HD∗ = ehD∗ − 1. The law of motion for H

                                                   ¡     ¢
                              b D,t+1 = 1 + HD∗ exp −φH H
                              H                            b Dt + εH
                                                                   t+1 ,
                                                                     D

                                        1 + HD,t       D




where φHD is the speed of mean reversion of the resilience of the stock.

Proposition 13 (Domestic stocks producing international goods). The domestic price of the stock
PD,t is
                                             exp(−rD −hD∗ ) b
                                       1 + 1−exp            H
                                    Dt           (−rD −φHD ) D,t
                            PD,t =
                                    et      1 − exp (−rD )

                                                         29
In the continuous time limit
                                                                    D,t
                                                                         e
                                                                         H
                                                         Dt 1 + rD +φHD
                                                PD,t   =                                                            (49)
                                                         et     rD
    A more resilient stock (high H    bD,t ) has a higher price-dividend and lower future returns. Con-
trolling for this resilience, if the currency is strong (because the country as a whole is safe), then the
stock price in domestic currency is low.19 As et is expected to depreciate, the expected return of the
stock in local currency is high. In this sense, currency risk premia and local currency equity premia
are negatively correlated. Hence, the theory provides an explanation for Hau and Rey (2006)’s
evidence that the home-currency stock price is decreasing in the exchange rate.

7.2.2    Firm producing the domestic good

We now turn to a domestic producer producing Ds quantities of the domestic good. Its stock price,
                                           £P            ¤
in the international currency, is Pt∗ = Et                                                       ∗
                                             s≥t Ms es Ds , so that its domestic price is Pt = Pt /et ,
hence:
                                                              £P                 ¤
                                                         Et        s≥tMs es Ds
                                              Pt /Dt =                                                              (50)
                                                                   et Dt
We postulate the following process for Dt
                                     (
                           Dt+1          exp (g)         if there is no disaster at t + 1
                                =
                            Dt           exp (g) Fti     if there is a disaster at t + 1

Fti is the recovery rate in the dividend of that firm. We postulate the Fti also follows a LG process,
hovering around F∗i , and mean-reverts at a rate φF , with a twist spelled out in Eq. (70).

Proposition 14 (Price of a domestic stock producing non-traded goods). To a first order approxi-
mation, the price of stock producing domestic goods is, in terms of the international currency:
                                         "                          µ i        ¶                      #
                                              1   (H∗ + p∗ ) Fbit    F∗    1       bt
                                                                                   H
                  Pt∗ = Pt et = ω t Dt          +                 +     +                                           (51)
                                             rD rD (rD + φF )        rD re + φH rD + φH

and in the domestic currency,
                                 "                     µ             ¶        #
                            re        (H∗ + p∗ ) Fbit            φH
                                                                         b
                                                                         H t
                       Pt =    Dt 1 +                 + F∗i −                                                       (52)
                            rD          rD + φF               re + φH rD + φH

where rD = R − gD − gω − (H∗ + p∗ ) F∗i .

   To analyze the above expression, we take the polar case where Fbit (the resiliency of the firm’s
                                 b t (the country’s resilience). The international price of the stock
technology) is uncorrelated with H
  19
    Of course, if the resilience of the stocks has a strong covariance with the currency’s resilience, the relationship is
inverted: good news about resilience increases both et and H   b D,t , and increases (49).


                                                              30
(51) increases with H b t , hence with the exchange rate.
    The domestic price (52) of the stock can decrease or decrease with the exchange rate, depending
on the sign of F∗i − reφ+φ H
                               . The price of resilient stock increases with the exchange rate, while the
                             H
price of non-resilient stocks decreases with the exchange rate. The reason for this ambiguous result
can be see in Eq. 50, where an increase in et increases both the numerator and the denominator.
Take a resilient stock, with F∗i close to 1. A increase in the country’s resilience, H  b t , increases the
present value of future dividends (the numerator of Eq. 50), because future resiliences are high, and
the discount rate is lower. Hence, the numerator in (50) increases a lot. The denominator increases
also, but not as much. The net eﬀect is that the domestic stock price increases: The cash flows that
the firm produces are more valuable, and less risky. However, take a stock with F∗i = 0, i.e. a stock
that will be bankrupt after a disaster. Then, there is no “discount rate eﬀect” in the numerator of
(50), as cash-flows always have maximal riskiness (they disappear in a disaster). So, the eﬀect due
to the rise in the denominator is stronger. Hence, the stock falls, when the exchange rate increases.
    All in all, we see that the price of domestic stocks producing nontradables increases with the
exchange rate, when it is expressed in international currency, but, expressed in domestic currency,
it increases only for the most resilient stocks. Again, one might hope to test that prediction.


8     Conclusion
This paper proposes a simple, tractable model of exchange rates and interest rates, and oﬀers a
theory of the forward premium puzzle. Its main modelling contributions are, first, to develop an
“exchange rate as a stock” view of the exchange rate, in a complete market setting (Proposition
1). Second, to work out the exchange rate in a stochastic disaster framework, and to obtain closed
forms for the value of the exchange rate, and the forward premium puzzle coeﬃcients.
    The paper suggests several questions for future research. First, it would be good to examine
new predictions that the model might generate, including the relationships between bonds, options
and exchange rate premia and predictability. Second, it would be interesting to extend the model
to stocks, so as to study the link between exchange rates and stock markets. Third, given that the
model is very simple to state, and to solve (thanks to the modeling “tricks” allowed by linearity-
generating processes), it can serve as a simple framework for various questions. This gives hope that
a solution to more puzzles in international economics (Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ 2001) may be within
reach.




                                                    31
Appendix A. Results for Linearity-Generating processes
The paper repeatedly uses the Linearity-Generating (LG) processes identified and analyzed in
Gabaix (2007a). This Appendix gathers the main results. LG processes are given by Mt Dt , a
pricing kernel Mt times a dividend Dt , and Xt , a n-dimensional vector of factors (that can be
thought as stationary). For instance, for bonds, the dividend is Dt = 1.


        ! time By definition, a process Mt Dt (1, Xt ) is a LG process with generator Ω =
Ã Discrete
      0
  α δ
         if and only if it follows, for all t’s:
  γ Γ
                                              ∙          ¸
                                               Mt+1 Dt+1
                                           Et              = α + δ 0 Xt                    (53)
                                                 Mt Dt
                                         ∙               ¸
                                           Mt+1 Dt+1
                                      Et             Xt+1 = γ + ΓXt                        (54)
                                            Mt Dt

Higher moments need not be specified.
   For instance, the functional form of the noise does not matter, which makes LG processes
parsimonious. Stocks and bonds have simple closed-form expressions.
                                 £P          ¤
   The price of a stock, Pt = Et   s≥t Ms Ds   /Mt , is:

                                                  1 + δ 0 (In − Γ)−1 Xt
                                        Pt = Dt                                            (55)
                                                1 − α − δ 0 (In − Γ)−1 γ

      The price-dividend ratio of a “bond”, Zt (T ) = Et [Mt+T Dt+T ] / (Mt Dt ), is:20
                                                                  Ã        !
                                              ³          ´            1
                                Zt (T ) =         1 0n       ΩT
                                                                      Xt
                                                      αT In − ΓT
                                         = αT + δ 0              Xt when γ = 0
                                                       αIn − Γ

Ã Continuous
      !        time In continuous time, Mt Dt (1, Xt ) is a LG process with generator ω =
  a β
        if and if only it follows:
  b Φ
                                          ∙            ¸
                                            d (Mt Dt )
                                       Et                = − (a + β 0 Xt ) dt              (56)
                                              Mt Dt
                                       ∙               ¸
                                         d (Mt Dt Xt )
                                    Et                   = − (b + ΦXt ) dt                 (57)
                                            Mt Dt
 20
      Here 0n denotes a n−dimensional row of zeros.




                                                         32
                                                   £R ∞             ¤
     The price of a stock, Pt /Dt = Et                 t
                                                            Ms Ds ds / (Mt Dt ) , is:

                                                                     1 − β 0 Φ−1 Xt
                                                       Pt /Dt =
                                                                      a − β 0 Φ−1 b

and the price-dividend ratio of a “bond” is: Zt (T ) = Et [Mt+T Dt+T ] / (Mt Dt )
                                                              " Ã            ! # Ã           !
                                       ³          ´                   a β0              1
                     Zt (T ) =             1 0n       · exp −                  T ·                      (58)
                                                                      b Φ               Xt
                                                             exp (−ΦT ) − exp (−aT ) In
                                   = exp (−aT ) + β 0                                   Xt when b = 0
                                                                     Φ − aIn

   To ensure that the process is well-behaved (hence prevent prices from being negative), the
volatility of the process has to go to zero near some boundary. Gabaix (2007a) details these
conditions.


9         Appendix B. Proofs
For simplicity, we drop the country index i in most proofs.

     Proof of Proposition 2 By Proposition 1, we have
                                                     "∞                            #
                                       et             X
                                                           ∗ exp (−λ(t + s)) ω t+s
                                                = Et      Mt+s                       /Mt∗               (59)
                                  exp (−λt) ω t       s=0
                                                                 exp (−λt) ω t

                               b t . With this notation,
Let Dt = exp (−λt) ωt and Xt = H
     ∙               ¸
          ∗
         Mt+1 Dt+1                           ©                 £ −γ       ¤ª
Et          ∗
                         = exp (−R − λ + gω ) (1 − pt ) + pt Et Bt+t Ft+1
          Mt Dt
                                                                                                            bt
                         = exp (−R − λ + gω ) (1 + Ht ) = exp (−R − λ + gω ) (1 + H∗ ) + exp (−R − λ + gω ) H
                         = exp (−R − λ + gω ) (1 + H∗ ) + exp (−R − λ + gω ) Xt = exp (−re ) + exp(−re − h∗ )Xt ,

using re = R + λ − gω − h∗ . Also:
                              ∙    ∗
                                                   ¸             ∙ ∗
                                                                           ¸
                                  Mt+1 Dt+1                     Mt+1  Dt+1
                         Et          ∗
                                            Xt+1           = Et              Et [Xt+1 ]
                                   Mt Dt                          Mt∗ Dt
                                                                                1 + H∗ −φH b
                                                           = e−R−λ+gω (1 + Ht )         e   Ht
                                                                                1 + Ht
                                                                                    b t = e−re −φH Xt
                                                           = e−R−λ+gω −φH (1 + H∗ ) H

     There are two ways to conclude. The first way uses the notations of Appendix A: The above




                                                                     33
two moment calculations show that Yt = Mt∗ Dt (1, Xt ) is a LG process, with generator Ω:
                                             Ã                                !
                                                 exp (−re ) exp (−re − h∗ )
                                        Ω=
                                                     0      exp (−re − φH )

Using equation 55, we find
                                                    µ                          ¶
                                          ωt              exp (−re − h∗ ) b
                                et =                 1+                     Ht                              (60)
                                     1 − exp (−re )     1 − exp (−re − φH )

which proves the proposition.
    The second way (which is less rigorous, but
                                              ³ does not
                                                      ´ require to know the results on LG processes),
                                                    b
is to look for a solution of the type et = ωt a + bHt , for some constants a and b, which satisfies:
              £ ∗                      ¤
et = ω t + Et Mt+1  exp (−λ) ω t+1 /Mt∗ . Dividing by ω t , this is:
                     ∙ ∗                    ´¸           ∙ ∗        ¸       ∙ ∗          ¸
         b            Mt+1 Dt+1 ³        b                Mt+1 Dt+1          Mt+1 Dt+1 b
    a + bHt = 1 + Et              a + bHt+1 = 1 + aEt                 + bEt           Ht
                       Mt∗ Dt                              Mt∗ Dt             Mt∗ Dt
                   h                   i
                                    b t + be−re −φH H
            = 1 + a e−re + e−re −h∗ H               bt ,

                          bt . Solving for a and b, we get a = 1 + e−ri a, b = e−re −h∗ a + be−ri −φH ,
which should hold for all H
and (60).
    The lower bound for H bt is: exp(−re )Hb t > exp(−φH ) − 1, i.e., in the continuous time limit,
b t > −φH .
H

   A Lemma on the existence of the equilibrium

Lemma 1 (Existence of the Equilibrium) There are (infinitely many) endowment processes that
generate the equilibrium described in the paper.

   Proof. Call η ai,t and η bi,t country i’s endowment of the international good, and domestic good,
respectively. We work out under which conditions they generate the announced equilibrium.
                                                                                                P γ
   Say that
         "     the  equilibrium      is  described    by  a social planner’s  maximization   of   i λi Ui , where
                                      1−γ
                                                 1−γ #
           P∞                  (CtT ) + Ct i  N T

Ui = E0       t=0 exp  (−δt)              1−γ
                                                         is country i’s utility, and λγi the Negishi weight on
                            P
country i. We normalize λi = 1. Calling qt the Arrow-Debreu price of 1 unit of the international
good at date t, and Yta the world production of the international good. Among other things, the
planner optimizes the consumptions of the domestic good, so solves:
                                                ¡ T ¢1−γ ¡ NTi ¢1−γ       Ã             !
                      X         X
                                ∞
                                                 Cit     + Cit        X          X
               max        λγi         exp (−δt)                     +   qt YtT −   CitT
                a
                Cit
                      i         t=0
                                                        1−γ           t          i

                           ¡ ¢−γ                          −1/γ                        P
where so that exp (−δt) λγi CitT − qt = 0, and CitT = λi qt    exp (δt/γ). Using YtT = i CitT , we
get: CitT = λi YtT .

                                                          34
  Let us now study country       1−γ
                                       i’s consumption and investment decisions. Country i at time t, solves
                       1−γ
                (CitT ) + CitN Ti                                                        ¡       ¢−γ      ¡ ¢−γ
maxC T , C N Ti            1−γ
                                        s.t. CitT + eit CitNTi =expenditure at time t, so CitNTi     = eit CitT ,
      it   it
                          −1/γ                                                                                                  −1/γ
hence CitNTi = eit λi YtT . The investment in the capital good is η NT
                                                                    it
                                                                       i
                                                                         −C ³
                                                                              NTi
                                                                              it      = η NT
                                                                                          it
                                                                                             i
                                                                                               − eit λ ´
                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                        i Yt ,
                                                                P                           −1/γ
so that the accumulated quantity of the capital good is Kit = ∞   s=0 e
                                                                        −λs
                                                                             η NT    i               T
                                                                                 i,t−s − ei,t−s λi Yt−s . As
country i produces Kit ωit of the world good, and also has an endowment η Tit of it, the total available
consumption of the world good at time t is:

                                              X               X         X
                                                                        ∞         ³                      ´
                                                                                              −1/γ
                                   YtT =            η Tit +       ωit         e−λs η NT  i
                                                                                     i,t−s − e     λ Y T
                                                                                              i,t−s i t−s .                            (61)
                                               i              i         s=0


The first term is the endowment of the world good, and second is the production of it.
   The equilibrium is described as in the paper, if the endowment processes η Ti,t and η NT
                                                                                         i,t
                                                                                             i
                                                                                               satisfy
             T     T∗
(61), with Yt = Ct . By inspection there is an infinity of such endowment processes.
                                                                                                                           h    ∗ ω
                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                     −h∗   bt . Then, Et       Mt+1  t+1
   Proof of Proposition 3 In this proof, it is useful to define xt = e                            =        H                    Mt∗ ωt
exp (−R + gω ) (1 + Ht ) = exp (−re + λ) (1 + xt ).
                                 xt
   Also, Et [xt+1 ] = exp (−φ) 1+x  t
                                      , and et = ωt A (1 + Bxt ), with A = 1/ (1 − exp (−re )), B =
   exp(−re )
1−exp(−re −φ )
               ,
                H




                         M ∗e            A (1 + Bxt )                      1 + Bxt
   1 + rt =             £ ∗t t ¤ = h ∗                        i= h ∗          i
                      Et Mt+1 et+1    M   ω t+1                    M    ω t+1
                                   Et t+1∗
                                        M ωt
                                                A (1 + Bxt+1 )  Et
                                                                    t+1
                                                                      ∗
                                                                     M ωt
                                                                                Et [1 + Bxt+1 ]
                                                              t                                      t

                                  1 + Bxt                                             1 + Bxt
                =                        ³                  ´ = exp (re − λ)
                  exp (−re + λ) (1 + xt ) 1 + B exp(−φH )xt                  1 + xt (1 + B exp (−φH ))
                                                   1+xt
                                                      exp(−re )
                                            1+                    x
                                                   1−exp(−re −φH ) t
                = exp (re − λ)                            1
                                            1+                    x
                                                   1−exp(−re −φH ) t
                                            "                                                    #
                                                                                    bt
                                                        (1 − exp (−re )) exp (−h∗ ) H
                = exp (re − λ) 1 −                                                                   .
                                                                                     bt
                                                    1 − exp (−re − φH ) + exp (−h∗ ) H

   Proof of Proposition 4 Eq. (17) was derived in the text leading to the Proposition For the
unconditional regression, the reasoning is thus.
   Unconditional Fama regressions. We next turn to the unconditional Fama regression. Using
Eq. 13, we have                                    h ∗ A i
                                                     Mt+1 et+1
                                      1 + rtB    Et M   ∗ A
                                                        t et
                                              =    h           i
                                      1 + rtA    Et M
                                                      ∗
                                                     Mt+1 eB
                                                           t+1
                                                        ∗ eB
                                                                                    t   t


which in the continuous time limit can be expressed as
                                       ∙                         ¸        µ ∗                         ¶
                                           eA      A
                                            t+1 − et   eB      B
                                                        t+1 − et           Mt+1 eA      A
                                                                                 t+1 − et   eB      B
                                                                                             t+1 − et
                rtB   −   rtA   = Et                 −             + Covt      ,          −
                                               eA
                                                t          eB
                                                            t              Mt∗      eA
                                                                                     t         eBt



                                                                              35
i.e.              ∙                         ¸                  µ ∗                         ¶
                      eA      A
                       t+1 − et   eB      B
                                   t+1 − et      B    A         Mt+1 eA      A
                                                                      t+1 − et   eB      B
                                                                                  t+1 − et
             Et                 −             = rt − rt − Covt      ,          −
                          eA
                           t         eBt                        Mt∗      eA
                                                                          t          eB
                                                                                      t

This expression highlights the role of the risk premium π A,B
                                                          t   :
                                                                 µ    ∗
                                                                                                    ¶
                                                                     Mt+1   eA      A
                                                                             t+1 − et   eB      B
                                                                                         t+1 − et
                                       π A,B
                                         t     = − Covt                   ,           −
                                                                     Mt∗       eAt          eB
                                                                                             t


   Consider now the Fama (1984) regression of the changes in the exchange rate between countries
A and B regressed on the diﬀerence in interest rates in a full sample:
                                                     ∙                         ¸
                                                         eA      A
                                                          t+1 − et   eB      B
                                                                      t+1 − et
                      Fama regression: Et                          −             = αF ull − β F ull (rtA − rtB )   (62)
                                                            eAt          eB
                                                                          t


       The coeﬃcient β F ull is now given by

                                                        F ull       Cov(π A,B
                                                                          t   , rtA − rtB )
                                                    β           =1−
                                                                      Var (rtA − rtB )

Therefore, we can have β F ull < 0 if and only if the risk premium covaries positively enough with
the interest rate diﬀerential. It is easy to compute
                                                                           £ A          ¤
                                        π A,B
                                          t   = (1 − β)(rtA − rtB ) + pt Et Ft+1     B
                                                                                 − Ft+1

which leads to
                                                  ¡     £ A       B
                                                                      ¤ A            ¢
                                              Cov pt Et Ft+1  − Ft+1     , rt − rtB
                             β F ull    = β−
                                                        Var (rtA − rtB )
                                                         ³      £ A              ¤ A          ´
                                                      Cov pt Et Ft+1    − Ft+1B
                                                                                   ,H     btB
                                                                                     bt − H
                             β F ull    = β + (1 − β)               ³                ´                             (63)
                                                                Var H  b tA − H b tB

                                                                             £ A         ¤ ³ A       ´
       In the case where Bt+1                                                          B    b    b
                                        is constant and equal to B, and pt Et Ft+1 − Ft+1 = Ht − Ht B γ ,
                                                                                                   B

so:                                                                     µ      ¶
                                           F ull                     φ    γ φ
                                       β           = β + (1 − β)B = − + 1 +      Bγ
                                                                     re     re

   Proof of ³
            Proposition ´    5 Derivation of the exchange rate. Call mt = Mt∗ exp (−λt) ω t . We
                b t , yt is a LG process. As in the Proof of Proposition 2:
show that mt 1, H
                        ∙          ¸     ³                  ´
                            mt+1                         b t = exp (−re − h∗ ) (1 + Ht )
                  Et         = exp (−re ) 1 + exp (−h∗ ) H
                             mt
                  ∙        ¸
                    mt+1 b                     bt
               Et       Ht = exp (−re − φH ) H
                     mt


                                                                          36
The new moment is:
         ∙          ¸     ∙      ¸
           mt+1             mt+1
      Et        yt+1 = Et          Et [yt+1 ]
            mt               mt
                                                        1 + H∗    ¡   ¢        ¡        ¢
                          = exp (−re − h∗ ) (1 + Ht )          exp −φy yt = exp −re − φy yt
                                                        1 + Ht
     ³          ´
         b
So mt 1, Ht , yt is a LG process, with generator:

                                            ⎛                       ⎞
                                             1 exp (−h∗ )     0
                                            ⎜                       ⎟
                             Ω = exp (−re ) ⎝0 exp (−φH )     0     ⎠.                        (64)
                                                             ¡    ¢
                                             0      0     exp −φy

The exchange rate follows:
                                                             ⎛ ⎞0              ⎛ ⎞
                        "∞                                 #  1                  1
            et           X Mt+s
                            ∗
                                                             ⎜ ⎟            −1 ⎜ b ⎟
                 = Et         ∗
                                 exp (−λs) ω t+s (1 + gt ) = ⎝0⎠ · (I3 − Ω) · ⎝Ht ⎠
            ωt         s=0
                            Mt
                                                              1                  yt
                                  µ                           ¶
                         1               exp (−re − h∗ ) b                 1
                 =                 1+                       Ht +          ¡         ¢ yt
                   1 − exp (−re )      1 − exp (−re − φH )        1 − exp −re − φy

The last equation comes from the fact that I3 − Ω is bloc-diagonal. This yields the announced
expression.
   Derivation of the interest rate. In the continuous time limit,
                                     h     i     ³        ´
                                   Et dHb t = − φH + H  bt Hbt dt                             (65)
                                                 ³        ´
                                                       b t yt dt
                                    Et [dyt ] = − φy + H                                      (66)

so the interest rate satisfies:




                                                  37
                            ∙    ¸             ∙                            ¸       ∙                  ¸
                     d (Mt∗ et )                 dMt∗                                 det
          −rt   = Et               /dt = Et                    | no disaster + Et         | no disaster
                       Mt∗ et                      Mt∗                                et
                     µ ∙                                         ¸¶
                            Mt+ et+
                  +pt Et                 − 1 | disaster
                              Mt et
                                    e t ]/dt
                               Et [dH
                                 re +φH
                                             + re Erte[dy
                                                       +φy
                                                           t ]/dt
                                                                        ¡ −γ       ¢
                = −R + gω +                et
                                                                  +  pt  Bt  Ft − 1
                                 1 + re +φH
                                               + rer+φ  e yt
                                                        H              y

                                           −(φH +H e t )H
                                                        et       −re (φy +He t )yt
                                              re +φH
                                                             +        re +φy
                = −R + gω +                                                                 bt
                                                                                     + H∗ + H
                                                         et
                                                         H             re yt
                                                1+    re +φH
                                                                 +    re +φy
                                             re b           re φy
                                                H
                                          re +φH t
                                                     −            y
                                                           re +φy t
                = −re + λ +                       et          re yt
                                                                      .
                                                  H
                                          1+   re +φH
                                                        +    re +φy


   Proof of Proposition 6 We start by the case of the regression in a sample that does not
contain disasters. As in the proof of Proposition 5,

                                                          −(φH +H      et
                                                                  e t )H    −re (φy +H e t )yt
                                     ∙       ¸                            +
                                         det                 re +φH              re +φy
                                Et             /dt = gω +               et
                                         et                   1 + re +φ H
                                                                            + rer+φ
                                                                                  e yt
                                                                                     H      y



                                bt and yt ,
So, up to second order terms in H
                     ∙       ¸                  b t −re φy yt
                         det               −φH H                  b t + byt + c
                Et             /dt = gω +          +           ≡ aH
                          et              re + φH     re + φy

                                rt = re − λ −
                                                 re
                                                      Hbt + re φy yt ≡ AH   b t + Byt + C
                                              re + φH       re + φy

so
                                    ³ h i            ´                          ³ ´
                                 Cov Et de t
                                             /dt, rt
                                                                                 b t + bB Var (yt )
                                                                          aA Var H
                                         et
                     β0 = −                                            =−       ³ ´
                                               Var (rt )                         b t + B 2 Var (yt )
                                                                          A2 Var H
                                     a          b
                           = −ν        − (1 − ν) = νβ + 1 − ν
                                     A          B
                      et )
               A2 Var(H
where ν = A2 Var He +B2 Var(y ) .
                ( t)         t
   The case of the full sample regression is proved similarly.




                                                                     38
       Proof of Proposition 7 We start with the call price.
                                "         µ     ¶ #
                                              A +
                                    eB
                                    M1∗
                                     1       e
           V Call (K) = E0             − K 1A
                                    M0∗
                                    eB
                                     0       e0
                                       "     µ B           ¶ #          "     µ B          ¶ #
                                           ∗             A +                ∗            A +
                                         M 1    e1     e                  M     e       e
                      = (1 − p0 ) END
                                   0               − K 1A      + p0 ED0
                                                                           1      1
                                                                                    − K 1A
                                         M0∗ eB  0     e 0                M0
                                                                            ∗
                                                                                e B
                                                                                  0     e0
                                           "µ              ¶ #             "       µ B         ¶ #
                                                B       A +                                  A +
                                               e      e                             e       e
                      = (1 − p0 ) e−R EN
                                       0
                                         D      1
                                                   − K 1A      + p0 e−R ED
                                                                         0   B1−γ    1
                                                                                       − K 1A
                                               eB
                                                0     e 0                           eB
                                                                                     0      e0

where ND and D superscript denote expectation conditional, respectively, on no disaster and
disaster. The next calculation uses the following Lemma, which is standard.21

Lemma 2 (Discrete time Girsanov) Suppose that (x, y) are jointly Gaussian distributed under P .
Consider the measure dQ/dP = exp (x − E [x] − Var (x) /2). Then, under Q, y is Gaussian, with
distribution
                            y ∼Q N (E [y] + Cov (x, y) , Var (y))                         (67)

where E [y] , Cov (x, y) , Var (y) are calculated under P .

                                              eB,N D
   To do the calculation, write                1
                                                 B
                                                e0
                                                       = exp (μB + εB − σ 2B /2), and the analogue for A. We call
η = εB − εA , and calculate:
                  "Ã                          !+ #
                       eB,ND        eA,N D                       h¡      ¡                        ¡                ¢¢¢+ i
                        1            1
V1 =        END
             0                 −   K A                 =   END
                                                            0
                                                                                      2                        2
                                                                      exp μB + εB − σ B /2 − K exp μA + εA − σ A /2
                         eB
                          0           e0
                            h   ¡           ¢¡  ¡                             ¢    ¢+ i
       =    exp (μA ) END
                       0
                                        2                    2        2
                             exp εA − σ A /2 exp μB − μA − σ B /2 + σ A /2 + η − K

    We define dQ/dP = exp (εA − σ 2A /2), and use Lemma 2. Under Q, y = μB −μA −σ 2B /2+σ 2A /2+η
is a Gaussian variable with variance σ 2η and mean:

                    EQ [y] = μB − μA − σ 2B /2 + σ 2A /2 + Cov (εB − εA , εA )
                               = μB − μA − σ 2B /2 − σ 2A /2 + σ A,B = μB − μA − Var (η) /2

Hence,
                          £         ¤             £                                      ¤
        V1 = exp (μA ) EQ (ey − K)+ = exp (μA ) EQ (exp (μB − μA − Var (η) /2 + η) − K)+
                            ¡                  ¢
           = exp (μB ) C BS K, μB − μA , σ A/B
  21
   To verify it, we calculate that the characteristic function of y is the characteristic function of distribution (67):
                                             Ã                              !      "                                  #
      £ ky ¤      h                   i                k2 σ 2y                                               k 2 σ 2y
    Q               x−E[x]−σ 2x /2 ky
   E e       =E e                 e     = exp kE [y] +         + kcov (x, y) = exp k (E [y] + cov (x, y)) +             .
                                                         2                                                      2




                                                                  39
                                                                 h                                    i
                                                                                                    +
where σ A|B = (Var (εB − εA ))1/2 , and C BS (K exp (−r) , σ) = E (exp (σu − σ 2 /2) − exp (−r) K)
(with u a standard Gaussian) is the Black-Scholes calls value when the interest rate is 0, the maturity
1, the strike K, the spot price 1, and the volatility σ.
    Next, we observe that:
                       "         µ               ¶+ #
                                     eB     eA               £ −γ                               +¤
                ED
                 0 B1−γ               1
                                        − K  1
                                                        = ED
                                                           0 B1 (exp (μB ) FB − K exp (μA ) FA )
                                     eB
                                      0     eA
                                             0


   We conclude that the value of the call is (26).
  hPut∗ Aprice.
          i     We use put-call parity. Using the identity x+ = x + (−x)+ , and the fact that
   M e
E0 M1∗ e1A = exp (−rA ),
      0   0

                           "         µ A       ¶+ #      ∙ ∗µ A         ¶¸      "     µ B        ¶ #
                                                                                               A +
                               M1∗     e1  eB             M    e    e B
                                                                                  M ∗
                                                                                       e     e
 V P ut (K) = E0                      K A − 1B      = E0   1
                                                              K 1A − 1B    + E0    1    1
                                                                                          − K 1A
                               M0∗     e0  e0             M0∗  e0   e0            M0∗ eB0    e0
                         K       1
               =             −       + V Call (K) .
                       1 + rA 1 + rB

   The following analogue of (26) also holds:
                                                         ¡                        ¢
              V P ut (K) = exp (−R + μB ) (1 − p0 ) CPBS
                                                       ut K exp (μA − μB ) , σ A|B +
                                                   £ −γ                              +¤
                           + exp (−R + μB ) p0 ED
                                                0 B1 (−F1,B + K exp (μA − μB ) F1,A )

                                                                                      ³          ´
    Proof of Proposition 8 The proof of Proposition 5 showed that Mt∗ exp (−λt) ω t 1, Hb t , yt
                                                              ³             ´
                                                                    b
is a LG process, with generator given by (64). Writing et = ωt a + bHt + cyt , we have

                                                             ⎡                              ³                ´⎤
                   ∙    ∗             ¸                        M ∗
                                                                    exp (−λ (t + T )) ω      a + bHb   + cy
                       Mt+T et+T             exp (λT )          t+T                     t+T          t     t
    Zt = Et                            =                  Et ⎣                                                ⎦
                           ∗
                        Mt et                   b t + cyt
                                           a + bH
                                                                               ∗
                                                                            Mt exp (−λt) ω t
                                      ⎛ ⎞0      ⎛ ⎞
                                       a            1
                 exp (λT )            ⎜ ⎟ T ⎜b ⎟
          =                           ⎝ b ⎠ Ω ⎝Ht ⎠ by the rules on LG processes
                    bt + cyt
               a + bH
                             c         yt
                           ⎛ ⎞0               ⎛                                               ⎞⎛ ⎞
                             a                  1 exp (−h∗ ) 1−exp(−φ      HT)
                                                                  1−exp(−φH )
                                                                                         0       1
              exp (λT ) ⎜ ⎟                   ⎜                                               ⎟⎜ b ⎟
          =                ⎝ b ⎠ exp (−re T ) ⎝0          exp (−φH T )                   0    ⎠ ⎝Ht ⎠
            a + bHbt + cyt                                                             ¡     ¢
                             c                  0                0               exp −φy T       yt
                                   ³                                 ´                ¡    ¢
                                a + a exp (−h∗ ) 1−exp(−φ    HT)
                                                                  +b H  b t + c exp −φy T yt
                                                    1−exp(−φH )
          = exp (− (re − λ) T )
                                                       a + bH b t + cyt
                                   ³                                 ´               ¡     ¢
                                                   1−exp(−φH T )
                                1 + a exp (−h∗ ) 1−exp(−φ ) + b H       bt + c exp −φy T yt
                                                             H
          = exp (− (re − λ) T )                exp(−re −h∗ ) b        1−exp(−re )
                                                                                               ,
                                        1 + 1−exp(−re −φ ) Ht + 1−exp                yt
                                                           H              (−re −φy )


                                                               40
   So the zero-coupon price is:
                                                                                           ¡   ¢ 1−exp(−re )
                       1+   1−exp(−re −φH )−(1−exp(−re )) exp(−φH T )          b t + exp −φy T
                                                                    exp (−h∗ ) H                               y
                                   (1−e−φH )(1−e−re −φH )                                       1−exp(−re −φy ) t
Zt (T ) = e−(re −λ)T                                  exp(−re −h∗ ) b        1−exp(−re )
                                                 1 + 1−exp(−r         Ht + 1−exp           y
                                                              e −φH )            (−re −φy ) t



   Taking Taylor expansions,
                        "               ¡           ¢                          ¡            ¢ #
                             (1 − e−re ) 1 − e−φH T                (1 − e−re
                                                                             )   1 − e−φy T         ³          ´
                                                         −h∗ b                                        b t , yt
 Zt (T ) = e−(re −λ)T    1+                             e   H  t −                           yt + o  H
                            (1 − e−φH ) (1 − e−re −φH )                 1 − e−re −φy
                                  ¡            ¢                          ¡          ¢        ³        ´
                       (1 − e−re ) 1 − e−φH T       −h∗ b     (1 − e−re ) 1 − e−φy T            b
 Yt (T ) = re − λ −                                e   H  t +     ¡             ¢      yt + o  H   ,
                                                                                                  t ty   (68)
                     T (1 − e−φH ) (1 − e−re −φH )                  1 − e−re −φy T
                                                                 ¡          ¢                 ³        ´
                    (1 − e−re ) e−φH (T −1) −h∗ b    (1 − e−re ) 1 − e−φy e−φy (T −1)           b
 ft (T ) = re − λ −                        e Ht +              ¡              ¢        yt + o Ht , yt (69)
                        1 − e−re −φH                            1 − e−re −φy
and in the continuous time limit,
                                                                                  ³         ´
                   ft (T ) = re − λ −
                                              re          bt + re φy e−φy T yt + o H
                                                   e−φH T H                         bt , yt
                                           re + φH            re + φy

   Proof of Proposition 12 The real part of the forward rate was calculated in Eq. 32. The
nominal part is calculated in Gabaix (2007b). The two expressions add up, because we do a Taylor
expansion.
                                       hP          ³                                   ´i
                                                                                es
                                                                                H
   Proof of Proposition 14 Pt = Et       s≥t Ms s s 1+
                                               ω D                             Re +φ
                                                                                            / (et Dt ). We calculate the
corresponding LG moments. We start with:
                                                             (
          Mt+1 ωt+1 Dt+1                                         1        if there is no disaster at t + 1
                         = exp (−R + gω + gD ) ×
            Mt ω t Dt                                            Ft Fti   if there is a disaster at t + 1

where as before Ft is the reduction in the country productivity in producing the international good.
We postulate that the process for Fti allows the decomposition:

                                                                        bt + (H∗ + p∗ ) Fbti
                        pt Bt−γ Ft Fti − pt = (H∗ + p∗ ) F∗i − p∗ + F∗i H

This decomposition is the natural one, as the central value of pt Bt−γ Ft is H∗ + p∗ , and the central
value of Fti is called F∗i . The process for Fit is a LG-twisted autoregressive process:
                                h     i       ³                               ´
                                                         b t + (H∗ + p∗ ) Fbti Fbit
                              Et dFbit /dt = − φFi + F∗i H                                                         (70)




                                                            41
We define rD = R − gD − gω − (H∗ + p∗ ) F∗i + p∗ The LG moments are (normalizing gD = gω = 0
in the derivations):
                ∙            ¸
                    d (MωD)t                ¡               ¢
           Et                                                            b t + (H∗ + p∗ ) Fbti
                               /dt = −R + pt Bt−γ Ft Fti − 1 = −rD + F∗i H
                     (MωD)t


      ⎡ ³            ´⎤
        d MωD · Fbit                   ³                       ´        ³                         ´
   Et ⎣               t⎦                          b t + H∗ Fbti Fbit + p B −γ Ft Fti · Fti − Fbit
                         /dt = −RFbit − φFi + F∗i H
          (MωD)t

                                   = − (rD + φF ) Fbit
   ⎡ ³        ´⎤
     d MωDHbt          ³                              ´     ³      ´
Et ⎣           t⎦                 bt + (H∗ + p∗ ) Fbti H
                  /dt = −rD + F∗i H                     bt − φ + H
                                                                 bt Hbt = − (rD + φ) H
                                                                                     bt +h.o.t.
       (MωD)t
                                                                                      ³           ´
                                                                                          b    b
   Hence the last expression involves a linearization. So, to a first order, Mt ω t Dt 1, Ht , Fit is a
                                ⎛                             ⎞
                                  rD     −F∗i     − (H∗ + p∗ )
                                ⎜                             ⎟
LG process, with generator ω = ⎝ 0 rD + φH             0      ⎠. So (50) gives, in virtue of the rule
                                   0       0        rD + φF
on LG processes (Gabaix 2007a, Theorem 4 and Proposition 4):
                                          ⎛             ⎞0   ⎛ ⎞
                                                 1             1
                                          ⎜             ⎟ −1 ⎜ b ⎟
                                  Pt et = ⎝1/ (re + φH )⎠ ω ⎝Ht ⎠ Dt ,
                                                 0            Fbit

which yields (51). Eq. 52 comes from a Taylor expansion.


Appendix C. Variance processes
Suppose an LG process centered at 0, dXt = − (φ + Xt ) Xt dt + σ (Xt ) dWt , where Wt is a standard
Brownian motion. Because of economic considerations, the support of the Xt needs to be some
(Xmin , Xmax ), with −φ < Xmin < 0 < Xmax . The following variance process makes that possible:

                                σ 2 (X) = 2K (1 − X/Xmin )2 (1 − X/Xmax )2                        (71)

with K > 0. K is in units of [Time]−3 . The average variance of X is σ 2X = E [σ 2 (Xt )] =
R Xmax
 Xmin
       σ (X)2 p (X) dX, where p (X) is the steady state distribution of Xt . It can be calculated
via the Forward Kolmogorov equation, which yields

                          d ln p (X) /dX = 2X (φ + X) /σ 2 (X) − d ln σ 2 (X) /dX.



                                                     42
    Numerical simulations shows that the process volatility is fairly well-approximated by: σ X '
  1/2
K ξ, with ξ = 1.3. Also, the standard deviation of X’s steady state distribution is well-
approximated by (K/φ)1/2 .
    Asset prices often require to analyze the standard deviation of expressions like ln (1 + aXt ).
Numerical analysis shows that the Taylor expansion approximation is a good one: Average volatility
of: ln (1 + aXt ) ' aK 1/2 ξ, which numerical simulations prove to be a good approximation too.
    For the steady-state distribution to have a “nice” shape (e.g., be unimodal), the following
restrictions appear to be useful: K ≤ 0.2 · φ |Xmin | Xmax .
    When the process is not centered at 0, one simply centers the values. For instance, in our cali-
bration, the recovery rate of the country productivity, Ft , has support [Fmin , Fmax ], centered around
F∗ . The probability and intensity of disasters (p and B) are constant. Define Ht = p (B −γ Ft − 1),
and the associated Hmin , Hmax , H∗ . The associated centered process is Xt = H     bt = Ht −H∗ . We take
the volatility parameter to be: K = v · φH |Xmin | Xmax , with
                                                             ¯    the¯ volatility   parameter v ∈ [0, 0.2].
                                                     ³                      ´0.5
This yields a volatility of H  b t equal to σ e = ξ v · φH ¯¯H bmin ¯¯ H
                                                                       bmax      , a volatility of Ft equal
                                             Ht
                    −γ
to σ F = σ He t / (pB ), and a volatility of the bilateral exchange rate (between two uncorrelated
                     √
countries) equal to 2σ He t / (re + φH ).


References
Abel, Andrew 1990. “Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses,” American
Economic Review 80, 38—42
   Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Money, Interest Rates, and Exchange
Rates with Endogenously Segmented Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 110 (2002), 73—112.
   Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Time-Varying Risk, Interest Rates, and
Exchange Rates in General Equilibrium ,” Working Paper (2006).
   Bacchetta, P. and E. van Wincoop, “Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange Rate De-
termination Puzzle?” American Economic Review 96 (2006), 552-76.
   Backus, David K.., Silverio. Foresi, and Chris.I. Telmer, “Aﬃne Term Structure Models and the
Forward Premium Anomaly,” Journal of Finance, 56 (1), (2001), 279—304.
   Backus, David K., and Gregor W. Smith, “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Dynamic
Economies with Non-Traded Goods,” Journal of International Economics, 35 (1993), 297-316.
   Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59 (2004), 1481-1509.
   Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, “Risk and Return in Bond, Currency and Equity Markets,”
Working Paper, Duke University, (2007).
   Barro, Robert, “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 121 (2006), 823-866.
   Barro, Robert, and José Ursua, “Consumption Disasters in the 20th Century,” Working Paper, Harvard
University, 2008.


                                                    43
      Bekaert, Geert, “The Time Variation of Risk and Return in Foreign Exchange Markets: a General
Equilibrium Perspective,” Review of Financial Studies, 9 (1996), 427-470
      Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick and David Marshall, September 1997, “The Implications of First
Order Risk Aversion for Asset Market Risk Premiums,” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 3-39.
      Berk, Jonathan B, Richard C Green, and Vasant Naik (1999), “Optimal Investment, Growth Options,
and Security Returns,” The Journal of Finance 54 (5), 1553—1607.
      Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw, “The Information in Long-Maturity
Forward Rates: Implications for Exchange Rates and the Forward Premium Anomaly,” Working Paper,
New York University, 2006.
      Brandt, Michael W., John H. Cochrane, and Pedro Santa-Clara, “International Risk Sharing is Better
Than You Think, or Exchange Rates are Too Smooth,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 2006, 671-698
      Brunnermeier, Markus, Stefan Nagel and Lasse Pedersen, “Carry Trades and Currency Crashes,”
Working Paper, Princeton, 2008.
      Burnside, Craig, “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth Risk:
A Comment,” NBER Working Paper 13129, 2007.
      Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo, “The Returns to Currency
Speculation,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12489, 2006.
      Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Understanding the Forward Premium Puz-
zle: A Microstructure Approach,”. NBER Working Paper 13278, 2007.
      Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo, “Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange
Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005.
      Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo, “The Importance of Nontradables Goods’
Prices in Cyclical Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations,” Japan and the World Economy, 2006.
      Campa, Jose M, P.H. Kevin Chang and Robert L. Reider, “Implied Exchange Rate Distributions:
Evidence from OTC Option Markets”. Journal Of International Money And Finance, 17(1), (1998), 117-
160
      Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107 (1999), 205-251.
      Campbell, John Y. and Motohiro Yogo, “Eﬃcient tests of stock return predictability,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 81(1), 2006, 27-60.
      Carr, Peter and Liuren Wu, “Stochastic Skew in Currency Options,” Journal of Financial Economics,
2007, 86(1), 213—247.
      Colacito, R, “Six Anomalies Looking for a Model. A Consumption Based Explanation of International
Finance Puzzles”, working paper UNC Chapel Hill, 2006.
      Colacito, R. and M.M. Croce, “Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange rate,” Working Paper
UNC Chapel Hill, 2006.
      Cox, John C., J. E. Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross (1985), “A Theory of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates,” Econometrica, 53, 385-407.




                                                    44
   Engel, Charles, “The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey of Recent Evi-
dence,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 3 (1996), 123—192.
   Engel, Charles, “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange-rate Changes,” Journal of Political Economy, 107:
507-538, 1999.
   Engel, Charles, and James D. Hamilton “Long Swings in the Dollar: Are They in the Data and Do
Markets Know It?” American Economic Review, 80(4), (1990), pp. 689-713.
   Engel, Charles, and Kenneth West, “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals,” Journal of Political Economy
113(2) (2005), 485-517
   Evans, Martin D.D and Karen Lewis, “Do Long Term Swings in the Dollar aﬀect Estimates of the Risk
Premia”, Review of Financial Studies, 8 (3), (1995), 709-742.
   Farhi, Emmanuel, Xavier Gabaix, Romain Ranciere, Adrien Verdelhan, “Currency movements and
options prices,” in preparation, 2008.
   Fama, Eugene F., “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 14 (1984),
319—338.
   Fama, Eugene F. & Schwert, G. William, 1977, “Asset Returns and Inflation” Journal of Financial
Economics, 5(2), 115-146.
   Frachot, Antoine, “A Reexamination of the Uncovered Interest Rate Parity Hypothesis,” Journal of
International Money and Finance, 15(3), 1996, 419-437.
   Frankel, Jeﬀrey, “Getting Carried Away: How the Carry Trade and Its Potential Unwinding Can
Explain Movements in International Financial Markets”, The Milken Institute Review, 2007.
   Frankel, Jeﬀrey, and Charles Engel, “Do Asset Demand Functions Optimize over the Mean and Variance
of Real Returns? A Six Currency Test”, Journal of International Economics 17, (1984),309—323.
   Frankel, Jeﬀrey, and Kenneth Froot, “Forward Discount Bias: Is it An Exchange Rate Risk Premium”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(1), (1989), 309—323.
   Froot, Kenneth.A, and Richard Thaler , “Anomalies: Foreign Exchange”, Journal of Economic Per-
spectives, 4, (1990), 179—192.
   Gabaix, Xavier, “Linearity-Generating Processes: A Modelling Tool Yielding Closed Forms for Asset
Prices,” NBER Working Paper 13430, 2007a.
   Gabaix, Xavier, “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in Macro-
Finance,” NBER Working Paper 13724, 2007b.
   Guo, Kai, “Exchange Rates and Asset Prices in An Open Economy with Rare Disasters,” Working
Paper, Harvard (2007).
   Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey, “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: The
US External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege,” in Richard Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account
Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment (Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press, 2007).
   Hansen, Lars P. and Robert J. Hodrick, “Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors of Future
Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 1980, 88, 829-53.
   Hau, Harald and Helene Rey, “Exchange Rates, Equity Prices and Capital Flows,” Review of Financial
Studies, 19 (2006), 273-317.


                                                   45
   Hollifield, B., and A. Yaron, “The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium: Real and Nominal Factors,”
Working paper The Wharton School, (2003).
   Hollifield, B., and R. Uppal, “An Examination of Uncovered Interest Rate Parity in Segmented Inter-
national Commodity Markets,” Journal of Finance, 52(5), (1997), 2145—2170.
   Kaminsky, Graciela, “Is There a Peso Problem? Evidence from the Dollar/Pound Exchange Rate,
1976-1987 ”, American Economic Review 83 (1993), 552-76.
   Lewis, Karen K., “Puzzles in International Financial Markets,” in Gene Grossman and Kenneth Rogoﬀ,
eds., Handbook of International Economics, Volume 3 (Amsterdam; New York and Oxford: Elsevier, North-
Holland, 1995).
   Lewis, Karen K., “Peso Problem”, The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics 2nd Edition, (McMillan
2008).
   Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and US
Consumption Growth Risk,” American Economics Review, 97(1), (2007a), 89-117.
   Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, “Note on The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia
and Consumption Growth Risk,” Working Paper, Boston University and UCLA, 2007b.
   Lyons, Richard, 2001, “The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
   Maynard, Alex and Peter Phillips, “Rethinking an Old Empirical Puzzle: Econometric Evidence on
the Forward Discount Anomaly”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16(6), (2001), 671-708.
   Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do They
Fit Out of Sample?,” Journal of International Economics, 14 (1983), 3-24.
   Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux”, The Journal of Political
Economy, 103, No. 3. (1995), 624-660.
   Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is
There a Common Cause?,” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual
Year 2000 (Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 2001).
   Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon, 2007, “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Review of Financial
Studies, 20, pp. 1139-1181.
   Rietz, Thomas A., “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22
(1988), 117-131.
   Rogoﬀ, Kenneth S, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle.” Journal of Economic Literature, 34, (1996),
647-68.
   Verdelhan, Adrien, “A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium,” Mimeo, Boston
University, 2007.
   Weitzman, Martin, “Subjective Expectations and Asset-Return Puzzles,” American Economic Review,
97, (2007), 1102-30.




                                                  46
