                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 COUNTERFACTUALS, FORECASTS, AND
              CHOICE—THEORETIC MODELLING OF POLICY




                       Herschel I. Grossman



                     Working Paper No. 1381




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 198)4




This paper evolved from a paper that I presented at the Conference
on Stabilization Policy in an Interdependent World at the
University of Western Ontario, March 198)4. Conference participants
and members of the Brown Workshop in Macroeconomics and Related
Topics gave me useful comments. The National Science Foundation
has supported this research. The research reported here is part of
the NEER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1381
                                                   June 198)4



                        Counterfactuals, Forecasts, and
                      Choice—Theoretic Modelling of Policy


                                   ABSTRACT

        This   paper focuses on the problem of formulating an analysis of

economic policy that is consistent with rational expectations. Cooley, LeRoy,

and Ray-mon show that the Lucas and Sargent strategy for econometric policy

evaluation is itself vulnerable to the logic of the Lucas critique. The

present discussion develops the distinction between counterfactuals and

forecasts to clarify the nature of the inconsistencies in the Lucas and

Sargent strategy. The paper goes on to propose and to illustrate a strategy

for positive economic analysis that incorporates choice—theoretical

modelling of policy. Such modelling can allow better forecasting, but it

also shifts attention away from policy actions and their effects and towards

the more fundamental relation between the policymaker's constraints and

targets and economic outcomes. The forecasting problem in a choice—

theoretic model of policy concerns the effects of hypothetical realizations

of variables that determine the policymaker's constraints and targets. The

analysis of counterfactuals in this context recognizes that the parameters

of the policy process are not invariant with respect to the processes that

generate these exogenous variables. A program of positive economics that

includes choice—theoretic modelling of policy also preserves a distinct role

for policy advice as part of the process being modelled.


                                                   Herschel I. Grossman
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Brown University
                                                   Providence, RI 02912
     If economic agents in forming the expectations that influence
their behavior take account of the processes that actually
generate the realizations of these expectational variables, then
the parameters of these processes enter into the decision rules
that relate individual choice variables to individual information
sets. The neglect of this proposition in traditional models of
the effects of economic policy produced the famous Lucas (1976)
critique of econometric policy evaluation. This proposition also
provides the basis for the development of rational—expectations
modelling strategies for analyzing and estimating relations
between the economy's endogenous and exogenous variables.

     Lucas   and Sargent——henceforth L&S——describe one such
strategy, which they claim provides a correct way to do
econometric policy evaluation. See L&S (1981) for a concise
description and Sargent (1981) for a fuller discussion. An
essential element in the L&S approach is the explicit
specification of the policy regime, implicitly defined as a
persistent relation that proximately describes the generation of
policy variables. This specification permits the derivation of
private agents' rational expectations about policy, conditional on
assumptions about relevant information. In the econometric
implementation of such a model, L&S emphasize estimation of
underlying behavioral parameters of private agents that are
independent of the existing policy regime. Policy evaluation for
L&S involves using these estimated behavioral parameters to
simulate the consequences of alternative policy regimes.

     In an important criticism of this procedure, Cooley, LeRoy,
and Raymon (1982)——henceforth CL&R——show that the L&S strategy,
which developed out of the Lucas critique, is itself vulnerable to
the logic of the Lucas critique. CL&R point out that, although
L&S are interested in the effects of changes in policy regimes,
the L&S analysis implicitly assumes that private agents ignore the
process that generates policy regimes. In other words, L&S take
careful account of the effect of the parameters of the existing
                              —2--


policy regime on the behavior of private agents, but L&S fail to
allow for the relation between the parameters that govern regime
changes and the behavior of private agents. To exemplify an
analytical strategy that they claim to be fully consistent with
rational expectations, CL&R present a model in which the
expectations of private agents are based on knowledge of the
possible policy regimes as well as the transition probabilities
that govern regime changes.
     Sargent (1984) acknowledges that the L&S strategy contains
the "internal contradiction" identified by CL&R. Indeed, Sargent
and Wallace (1976) already recognized this problem, and they
pointed out that an analysis fully consistent with rational
expectations would require an extended analytical framework along
the lines subsequently suggested by CL&R. Sargent, however,
defends the continued use of the L&S strategy on the grounds that
such extended models "subvert normative economics", by which he
means the activity of prescribing economic policy. As Sargent and
Wallace earlier put it, "If rational agents live in a world in
which rules can he and are changed, their behavior should take
into account such possibilities and should depend on the process
generating the rule changes. But invoking this kind of complete
rationality seems to rule out normative economics completely by,
in effect, ruling out freedom for the policymaker."

     The present paper contributes to the ongoing search for
correct and useful strategies for studying economic policy and its
effects within a rational expectations context. Section 1
develops a simple framework that illustrates the distinction
between two modes of positive economic analyses——counterfactuals
and forecasts——and attributes the inadequacy of the L&S analysis
to their neglect of this distinction. Section 2 extends this
framework to show how to forecast correctly if the policy regime
is subject to change. Section 3 motivates the formulation of an
underlying choice—theoretic model of policy and uses this model to
analyze the evolution of policy actions and policy regimes as
responses to shifts in the policymaker's constraints. Section 4
                                —3—

explores the important implications, both for forecasting and for
the analysis of counterfactuals, of knowing the underlying choice—
theoretic model. Section 5 discusses the place of policy advice
within a positive analysis that treats policy as the solution to a
choice problem. Section 6 summarizes the main conclusions.

1.    Counterfactuals versus Forecasts

     A careful reading of the papers by L&S (1981) and Sargent
(1981) indicates that the essential oversight, which leaves them
vulnerable to the CL&R criticism, is that these papers do not
distinguish between counterfactuals and forecasts. (Sargent
(1984, esp. fn. 15) seems to recognize this critical distinction
as an afterthought to acknowledging the contradiction identified
by CL&R.) The essential point is that, within a rational
expectations context, an analytical framework and strategy for
determining what would be happening under a different fixed policy
regime is in general not relevant for determining what will happen
if the policy regime changes.
     Formalizing this distinction requires a model that specifies
both the effects of current and expected future policy as well as
the process generating policy. Suppose that the true structural
relation between the economic outcome and current and expected
future policy variables has the following form:


(1)       t+l =   a   + a1Ex÷1 — a2x + 6t+l'    a2 > a1 > 0,

where t+l describes a result of private action taken
          in period t,
       Xt is a policy action taken in period t,
       Etxt+i is the rational expectation of x1
          formed in period t,
             is a normally distributed exogenous random variable
          that has zero mean and is uncorrelated serially,
and a0, a1, and a2 are constant positive parameters that are
          invariant with respect to the process generating xt.
                                —4—

Equation (1) derives from a choice—theoretic problem that private
agents behave as if they solve. This underlying choice model,
which need not be specified explicitly here, is the basis for
treating the parameters of equation (1) as policy invariant as
well as for imposing functional relations among these

parameters. Economists observe t+l1 and jxt}1, but, as
L&S stress, because they do not directly observe Etxt+i,
calculating estimates of the parameters of equation (1) is not a
routine econometric exercise. As we shall see, the need for such
parameter estimates depends on the question being addressed.

       To tell a specific story about equation (1) , imagine that
        is the number of engineers who graduate in period t+l,
that        is the net cost of studying engineering in period t,
and that          is the random deviation from the normal survival
rate of engineering students. In this story, equation (1) says
that the number who enroll in period t, adjusted for the normal
survival rate, responds negatively to the current cost and,
because the timing of this investment is flexible, responds
positively, but less strongly, to the expected future cost. The
number who graduate in period t+l depends also on
       To complete the model, suppose that the true process
generating xt is

(2)         xt=b+ut, b *0,
where b is a constant parameter
and   ut is a normally distributed exogenous random variable
           that has zero mean and is uncorrelated both serially and
           with
In terms of the story, b is the normal cost of studying
engineering. To make the idea of rational expectations
operational, assume that in forming Etxt+i private agents behave
as if they know equation (2), the value of b, and the
distribution of Ut. Economists can calculate an estimate of b
                              —5—

equal to the mean of {x}1. Complicating this setup by
assuming that xt also depends in a fixed way on current or past
values of Yt would not affect the present argument. The
essential elements that the model given by equations (1) and (2)
shares with the models considered by L&S are that the actions of
private agents depend on their rational expectations of future
policy and that the policy regime, described by the constant
parameter b and the process governing ut,     is fixed.

     (In earlier work, Neftci and Sargent (1978) look for regime
breaks to use in testing the hypothesis that certain reducedform
coefficents depend on parameters of the policy regime. Their
analysis, nevertheless, uses the framework of equations (1) and
(2). Specifically, they assume that rational private agents
regard the prevailing regime to be fixed and they treat each
historical regime as an independent segment of history. This
work, thus, is equally subject to the CL&R criticism.)

     As stated by L&S, their objective, in terms of equation(l)
and (2), is to determine how the behavior of t+l over time
depends on the parameter b of the process generating Xt. The
difficulty, as suggested above, is that this loose statement
encompasses two radically different problems. These problems are
(i) simulating the behavior of t+l under hypothetically
different constant values of the parameter b and (ii)
forecasting the effects on t+l of hypothetical changes in the
parameter b. The first problem involves the counterfact of an
alternative fixed policy regime. The second problem, in contrast,
involves a changing policy regime. The inconsistency in the L&S
strategy for policy evaluation reflects their failure to recognize
that analysis of a changing policy regime is not meaningful,
because it asks about the effects of an event that cannot occur,
if the true process generating policy actions has fixed
parameters.

     Given that equations (1) and (2) are the true model, the
problem of forecasting the effects of policy actions consists only
of predicting the future time path of        conditional on
                                    —6—

hypothetical future realizations of ut or, equivalently, of
xt. (Because point realizations of continuously distributed
random variables have zero probability, a careful description of
the forecasting problem would specify the hypothetical
realizations to be within intervals that have finite
probability.) Observe that equation (2) implies


(3)       Etxt+1 =   b,

and that substituting equation (3) into equation (1) gives

                = A —           +         where   A =
                          a2x                           a0+ a1b.

Using equation (4), a regression of t+l on x yields
estimates of A and a2.
      To forecast, set b in equation (2) equal to its estimated
value and simulate {xt}T+1 for any hypothetical realization of
{ut}T+1. Then, set A and a2 in equation (4) equal to their
estimated values, set Ct+l equal to its zero mean, and simulate
               for the implied realization of Xt}tT+1.
t÷l1t=T+1
      This forecasting exercise does not require use of the L&S
strategy of estimating underlying private behavioral parameters,
but, because it concerns realizations within a given policy
regime, it is also not an example of the type of problem that L&S
have in mind. As suggested above, however, within the context of
equations (1) and (2) as the true model, the only admissible
question about the effects of different policy regimes involves
counterfact. Specifically, how would the historical pattern of
       be different if the constant parameter b of the process
generating xt were different? Answering this question requires
estimating underlying behavioral parameters.
      In the present example, the essential underlying parameter
that remains to be estimated is a1. If, however, a0, a1, and
a2 are independent parameters, a1 is not identified. This lack
                                 —7

of identification presented no problem for forecasting, but it
inhibits analysis of counterfactuals. To facilitate such
analysis, suppose that a known function relates a0, a1, and
a2. In that case the parameters are just identified, and the
estimates of b, A, and a2 imply an estimate of a1. (If the
underlying parameters were overidentified, efficient estimation
would incorporate these restrictions.)
     To determine the hypothetical differences in the past and
future history of t+l associated with hypothetically different
policy regimes, rewrite equation (4) as


          t+l =   a   —                       +
                          (a2— a1)b —   a2u
Then, set a1 and a2 equal to their estimated values, set
{ut}i and                 equal to their estimated realizations,

set {ut}T+1 and {ct}tT+1 equal either to their zero means
or to any other hypothetical sequence of realizations, and

simulate {t+l l for counterfactuals involving constant values
of b other than the estimated value of b.

2.   Regime Changes
     The model given by equations (1) and (2) implies that the
relation between the realization of Y+ and the parameter b
of the process generating xt involves both the parameter a1
associated with the rational expectation of x.÷1 as well as the
parameter a2 associated with the realization of xt.
Specifically, as equation (5) indicates, if, as a counterfact,
b were one unit larger, then, for all t = 1, ...,
Etxt÷1 each would be one unit larger, and
                                                       ,x
                                                  would be
                                                            and


a2— a1 units smaller. The mistake made by L&S is to propose
using the coefficient a2— a1 to forecast the effects of changes
in the parameter b, even though b is a constant in the model
that implies that this coefficient relates y÷ and b. If the
parameter b of the process generating xt is truly a variable
                                          —8—

rather than a constant, then equation (2) is not part of the true
model. In this case, pretending, as L&S implicitly do, that
equations (1) and (2) are the true model generally produces wrong
forecasts. Specifically, if b is truly variable, using the
relation between y and b given by equation (5) to forecast
the effects of changes in b is not consistent with rational
expectations.
     To illustrate these points, assume that equation (2) is
false, and that the true model includes instead


(6)          Xt= bt+ Ut             and


(7)          bt =       + pbti + ,          b   =         and   0 < p < 1,


where        and    p are constant parameters,
          bt is now a variable parameter,
and           is a normally distributed random variable that has
             zero mean and is uncorrelated serially and with both
                        and u.

To make the idea of rational expectations operational in this
context, assume that private agents behave as if they know
equations (6) and (7) , the values of    and  P,  and
distributions of      as well as Ut, and as if they observe
bt. Note for future reference that equations (6) and (7) imply an
expression for current policy in terms of current and past
disturbances in the policy process as


                              t—l
(8)          xt =         +                + u, t    1.
                              1=0



If economists observe {b}1, using equation (7) , a regression
of bt          bti yields estimates of              and    p.

        The model given by equations (6) and (7) explicitly treats
                                  —9—

the policy regime as variable. Specifically, the parameter bt
of the policy regime evolves from an autoregressive process.
Because the autoregressive parameter p is positive, disturbances
to the policy regime, generated by the random variable ' are
persistent. As the parameter p approaches unity, the policy
regime approaches a random walk. In contrast, for a given policy
regime, disturbances to the policy variable, generated by the
random variable ut, are transitory. Complicating this setup by
making the evolution of the policy regime depend also on current
or past private actions, as in the model of policy analyzed by
Flood and Garber (1983), would not change the present argument.

     Given that equations (1) , (6) , and (7) are the true model,
the problem of forecasting the effects of policy now involves
consideration of regime changes. The future path of
                                                          t+l
depends on the future path of bt——or, equivalently, on future
realizations of 5__as well as future realizations of Ut.
Specifically, observe that equations (6) and (7) imply

(9)        Etxt+1 =    Etbt+i     + Pbt


and that substituting equation (9) into equation (1) gives

(10)       t+l =   B   + Blbt —
                                  a2x + 6t+l' where B =   a     + a1

                and B1 = a1p.

Using equation (10) , a    regression of t+l on bt and x
yields estimates of B0, B1, and a2.
       (In contrast to the present setup, a relevant model for some
practical applications would assume that private agents behave as
if they do not know bt and, hence, cannot distinguish directly
between the persistent disturbances to      that stem from
and the transitory disturbances to xt that stem from Ut. Under
this restricted information structure, the rational expectation of
x1 would be a weighted average of        and all current and past
                                    — 10 —



realizations of Xt. Rational expectations of future policy have
this form in the model developed by CL&R, as well as in models of
policy analyzed by Gertler (1982) and by Brunner, Cukierman, and
Meltzer (1983) . Similarly, when implementing equation (10)
econometrically, an economist who did not have observations on
bt would include instead observed past values of Xt. These
complications would not change the essential conclusions of this
section.)

     Although equation (10) , which relates        to both bt
and xt, is the correct regression equation, it is possible, by
substituting equation (6) into equation (10) , to write the true
relation

                 =
                     B   —
                             (a2— a1p)xt —   a1Pu   +


This equation relating       to x looks superficially like
equation (4). Except in the special case of p = 0, however, a
regression of t+l on xt alone would involve an error term
containing Ut and, hence, correlated with Xt. If bt is truly
variable, as in equations (6) and (7), pretending that bt is
constant as in equation (2) would produce a biased estimate of the
relation between realizations of t+l and x.
     To forecast using equations (6), (7), and (10), set
   and p in equation (7) equal to their estimated values and
simulate {bt}T+l for any hypothetical realization of
               Next, add this implied realization of {bt}T+l to
any hypothetical realization of {ut}T+l to simulate
{xt}T+l. Finally, set B0, B1, and a2 in equation (10) equal
to their estimated values, set                equal to its zero mean, and

simulate {t=T÷l for the implied realizations of {bt}T+l
and {xt}T÷l. This model implies that a realization of
equal to Unity adds one unit to bt and to xt, which in turn
adds    units to Etxt+1i and, as a result, reduces t+l by
                              — 11 —


   —
a2   a1p units. Thus, except in the special case of p = 1, the
decrease in       associated with a one unit increment to bt
does not equal a2 — a1 units, which is the effect suggested by
the pretense that bt is constant.
     The main lesson from this analysis is that correct forecasts,
whether of the effects of realizations within a given policy
regime or of the effects of changes in the parameters of the
policy regime, require specification, estimation, and simulation
of a model that incorporates the true process generating the
policy regime. In the present example, equation (2) is a good
approximation to equations (6) and (7) for estimation only if p
is close to zero, but it is a good approximation for forecasting
only if p is close to unity. Another important lesson is that,
given knowledge of the form of the true model, forecasts of the
effects of hypothetical regime changes, like forecasts of the
effects of hypothetical policy actions, do not involve the L&S
strategy of estimating underlying private behavioral parameters.
Specifically, in the present model, forecasts of the effects of
realizations of either      or u do not require calculating an
estimate of a1.
     It is also possible, in the context of the model given by
equations (1), (6), and (7), to consider questions of counterfact
about differences in the process generating policy regimes. Such
analysis, involving different values of the constants     and p,
like the analysis of counterfactuals involving b in the model
given by equations (1) and (2) , would require calculating an
estimate of the underlying parameter a1. The discussion below
considers in greater depth the problem of analyzing
counterfactuals concerned with different processes generating
policy regimes.

3.   A Choice—Theoretic Model of Policy

     The model given by equations (1), (6), and (7) fully
specifies both the economic structure that determines the effects
of current and expected future policy actions as well as the
                              — 12 —



process that generates policy actions. Given that this model is
true, it provides a consistent framework for forecasting the
effects of exogenous disturbances to the policy process. This
model, however, does not include a deep analysis of policy. It
treats the evolution of policy actions as an exogenous process,
like the processes that generate natural phenomena, and it
provides no criteria for modelling policy beyond historical
experience.

     In modelling the actions of private agents, knowing that they
behave as if they solve a well—defined choice—theoretic problem is
important. As noted above, such knowledge is the basis for
treating the parameters of equation (1) as invariant with respect
to the policy process as well as for imposing functional relations
among these parameters. An analogous analytical strategy would
hypothesize that the policyraaker is also an agent that behaves as
if it has consistent preferences over the outcomes that it can
influence and as if it solves a well defined choice—theoretic
problem. In such a model, policy actions, whether classified as
occurring within a policy regime or as involving changes in the
policy regime, evolve as the rational and, hence, predictable
responses to shifts in the constraints that the policymaker faces.

     A choice—theoretic model of policymaking has important
implications both for forecasting and for the analysis of
counterfact. Admittedly, such a model does not attempt to portray
either the conscious behavior of policymakers or the political
process that proximately generates policy actions. Indeed,
according to Grossman (1980) , "experience suggests that the
political process has limited ability to specify consistent goals,
establish priorities, and choose between competing objectives
about economic matters, especially when these decisions require
comprehension of complex technical issues and constant processing
of complex information." The important issue in the present
context, however, is whether the assumption that policymakers,
like other economic agents, behave as if they solve choice—
theoretic problems yields true probabilistic models that relate
                                      — 13 —



the behavior of private agents, the behavior of policymakers, and
the economy's exogenous variables. Some recent literature——see,
for example, Barro and Gordon (1983)——suggests that this research
strategy can illuminate complex problems in positive economics.
     To exemplify a choice—theoretic model of policy that can
underlie equations (6) and (7) , suppose that the policy action
       results from the policymaker's attempt to minimize the loss
L, given by

            L =           -
(11)
                  E(y÷1       zt)2,
subject to the structure of private behavior given by equation
(1). In this formulation, zt is an exogenous stochastic
variable that represents the policymaker's target value for
       In the terms of the story about equation (1), Zt is the
target number of engineering graduates in period t+l. Equation
(11) represents a partial, indirect loss function, with zt
deriving from the solution of the policymaker's complete choice
problem involving fixed preferences and changing constraints.
     In the present context, the natural extension of the idea of
rational expectations is that the policymaker behaves as if it
knows the parameters of equation (1) , the distribution of
Et+ll and the private agents' expectation of future policy,
Etxt+i. For private agents, an operational specification of
rational expectations in this context is that they behave as if
they understand the choice problem that the policymaker solves,
including the process, to be specified below, that generates
realizations of Zt.

       The solution to the problem given by equation (11) is for the
policymaker to select xt such that Etyt+1 =
equivalently, such that
                                                  z,   or,



            xt = -—- (a   + a1Ex+1 —
(12)
                                           zt).
Equation (12) says that current policy is a linear function of the
                                       — 14 —



policymaker's target and of the private agents' expectation of
policy next period, with coefficients that depend on the
parameters that govern private behavior. This specification of
policy implies, from substituting equation (12) into equation (1)
that


(13)         y÷ =      z    +


Equation (13) says that rational policy actions induce private
actions such that the economic outcome,         equals the sum of
the realizations of the truly exogenous variables, Zt and
ct+1.
        A complete analysis of the evolution of policy actions
implied by equation (12) requires deriving a solution for
Etxt+i in terms of exogenous variables. The specification of
rational expectations implies that in forming Etx+i private
agents behave as if they know that equation (12) will hold in all
future periods. Accordingly, leading equation (12)   i periods,
i      1, and applying the operator Et gives a partial difference
equation in expected future policy,



(14)         EtXt+I=            Et(Et+xt++i) —   E(z— a0)

                       =±Exa,
                        a2 t t+i+l      ———E(z
                                         a2 t t+i.—a).
                                                    o



     To solve equation (14) for Etxt+., fix t and treat
equation (14) as an ordinary difference equation in i. Given
that a1/a2 is less than unity, as long as Etzt+1 grows
with i at a rate less than a2/a1, the forward—looking
particular solution to this equation converges. Using the forward
operator, F, this solution is, for i = 1,
                                                 — 15 —




(15)        Etxt+1 —                  E[(l       —
                                                          F)'(zt+i_ a)]


                      =   —
                              a
                                      E
                                          t          (—-)(z
                                                      a
                                                                    .—   ao ).
                                  2                   2       t+1+:J
                                              :1=0




Equation (15) expresses the private agents' expectation about
policy next period as an average, with exponentially declining
weights, of all expected future values of the policymaker's
target. The weights depend on parameters that govern private
behavior, which the policyrnaker takes into account in determining
policy actions. Substituting equation (15) into equation (12)
gives an expression for current policy as



(16)        xt =              —                                  l)J+l
                                      a       [zt + Et
                   a2—a1                                   j=O


        The general solutions for Etxt+1 and, hence, for Xt can
also contain either deterministic or stochastic homogeneous
components. The literature often refers to such components as
rational self—confirming bubbles——see, for example, Diba and
Grossman (1983) . For simplicity, the present discussion abstracts
from policy bubbles.

     To complete the model, suppose that the policymaker's target
evolves according to


(17)        Zt =   act + v.                and


(18)        Ct = y    + Ac1 + r, c0 =                              and     0 < A < 1,

where     a, y, and       A are constant parameters,
and Vt and          are normally distributed exogenous random
            variables that have zero mean and are uncorrelated
            serially and with both t+l and each other.
                                        — 16 —



In terms of the above story, in which zt is the target number of
engineering graduates in period t+1, c might be a measure of
planned future development and construction of weapons systems and
other military hardware. The specification of rational
expectations implies that private agents behave as if they know
equations (17) and (18) , the values of a, y, and   A,  and the
distributions of vt and r1, and as if they observe ct.
       Equations (17) and (18) imply


                           .1-.    1


(19)        Zt       + a                 t—i   + v.
                           iO

Leading equation (19)      1+j periods,            j   0, and applying the
operator Et gives


                                        t+j
(20)                              + a
            Etzt+i+=


                       =          +



Substituting equations (19) and (20) into equation (16) yields an
expression for current policy in terms of current and past
disturbances in the process that generates zt,


                  a— ay/(l—A)                  a            i•   — 1
(21)       Xt =
                    a2— a1              a2— a1A i0
                                                        A
                                                                       vt.

       Compare the solution for xt given by equation (21) with the
solution for xt given by equation (8) in the preceding
section. This comparison shown that the descriptive model of
policy regimes and policy actions, given by equations (6) and (7)
and the choice—theoretic model of policy, given by equations (11),
                                      — 17 —



(17), and (18), have fully consistent implications. Specifically,
if this choice—theoretic model actually underlies the descriptive
model, then the alternative expressions of the solutions for Xt
mean that the parameters and exogenous variables that appear in
equations (6) and (7) are functions of the parameters and
exogenous variables that appear in equations (1) , (17) , and (18)
Consistency of the solutions implies that these functions are


                     (1—A)a— ay
                      a2—a1
(22)       p   = A,

                 =
                     a2—    a1A
                                  '   and



(23)      Ut =         vt.

     Equations (22) and (23) imply that the persistent component
of policy, denoted as the policy regime in the descriptive model,
is a linear function of the persistent component of the
policyrnaker's target, with slope and intercept that depend on the
parameters of the process that generates the target and on the
parameters that govern private behavior. Specifically, either
combining equation (22) , equations (6) and (8) , and equations (17)
and (19), or combining equation (23), equation (10), and equations
(13) and (17) yields


(24)      ac =             — (a2— Bi)bt.


(Equation (24) implies that observing Ct and knowing the model's
structural parameters is equivalent to knowing bt, an
implication that clarifies the consistency of assuming that
private agents behave as if they observe bt.) Equation (23) also
shows that the transitory component of policy is proportional to
                                  — 18 —



the transitory component of the policymaker's target, with the
factor of proportionality being the response parameter of private
behavior to current policy. In sum, the choice—theoretic model
implies that the evolution of policy, including both changes in
the policy regime and transitory policy actions as described in
equations (6) and (7) ,     reflects
                               the policymaker's purposeful
response to the evolution of his target. Moreover, although
equation (10) correctly implies that y1 depends on bt and on
Xt, this dependence reflects the more basic phenomenon, reflected
in equation (13) ,   that   policy is purposely inducing changes in
t+l in response to changes in zt.

4.   Importance of Knowing the Choice—Theoretic Model

     The implications derived from a true underlying choice—
theoretic model of policy are important both for forecasting and
for the analysis of counterfact. As described in the preceding
section, forecasting the effects of hypothetical disturbances to
the policy process, as described by equations (6) and (7),
requires estimates of the three coefficients, B0, B1, and a2, in
equation (10), which relates the economic outcome to the policy
regime and the policy action. If economists either observe the
policy target or observe variables that influence the policy
target, knowing the underlying model makes possible more efficient
estimation of these coefficients.

     As the most dramatic example of this advantage, suppose that

economists observe {zt}i. This knowledge permits combining
equations (10) and (13) into a relation among observed variables,


          Zt = B0 + Bibt —      a2x,
which allows an exact calculation of true values of B0, B1, and
a2, leaving nothing to be estimated. Alternatively, suppose that
economists do not observe zt, but that they observe
and know the value of       a. In this case, equation (24) permits an
                                  — 19 —



 exact calculation of B0 and the difference       a2 — B1,
                                                       leaving
only one coefficient to be estimated. Finally, suppose that

economists observe {ct}1, but do not know a. In this case,
equation (24) permits an exact calculation of the ratio of      B0 to
a2 — B1, leaving only two coefficients to be estimated.

     Thus far, forecasting has concerned the effects of
hypothetical realizations of the variables      and u,       which
are components of the descriptive model of policy. A basic
insight associated with formulation of the underlying choice—
theoretic model is that a more fundamental forecasting problem
involves the effects of hypothetical disturbances to the
policymaker's constraints and derived targets, which, in this
framework, are the phenomena that underlie the policy process.
Such forecasts concern hypothetical realizations of the variables,
     and v, and require estimates of parameters         a, y, and    A.
This problem focuses on the policymaker's goals and achievements,
rather than on how it manipulates policy instruments, and
                                                          probably
corresponds more closely to the actual forecasting strategy of
practical people.

         Using equation (18) , a regression of ct on    c_1 yields
estimates of y and A. If     zt is observed, using equation
(17) ,    a regression of Zt
                          on ct yields an estimate of a.
(If zt is not observed, using equations (13) and (17), a
regression of t+l on ct yields an alternative, less
efficient, estimate of a.) To forecast, set y and A equal to
their estimated values and simulate {ct}T+l for any

hypothetical realization of tt=T+l• Then, substitute equation
(17) into equation (13) ,   set   a equal to its estimated value and
set 6t+l equal to its zero mean, and simulate
                                                       t+l 1tT+l for
the implied realization of {ct}T+l and any hypothetical
realization of {vt}Tl.
     This forecasting exercise, importantly, does not involve
                             — 20 —



estimation of the coefficients of equations (6), (7), and (10).
More basically, because the underlying choice—theoretic model
directly relates the economic outcome to the evolution of the
policymaker's target, it sidesteps entirely the problem of
modelling the evolution of the policy variable. In other words,
given knowledge of the underlying model represented by equations
(13), (17), and (18), forecasting economic outcomes does not
require either observing or inferring the policy regime, or even
observing policy actions. In this context, forecasting requires
only observing the variables that determine the evolution of the
policymaker1s target.
     The underlying choice—theoretic model of policy also has
fundamental implications for the analysis of counterfactuals
involving the evolution of policy. Equations (22) show that the
parameters and exogenous variables that appear in equations (6)
and (7) and describe the evolution of the policy regime are not
mutually independent. For example, the parameter p, which
determines the persistence of the effect of the disturbance
to the policy regime, is equivalent to the parameter A, which
determines the persistence of the effect of the disturbance
to the policy target, while the parameter     of the process
generating the policy regime and the realizations of      also
depend on A. Consequently, if the choice—theoretic model
actually underlies the descriptive model, in order to determine
how the historical pattern of the economic outcome        would be
different if p were different, it is necessary to take into
account that, if p were different,       and      would also be
different. In general, this analysis shows that, if policy
corresponds to the solution of a choice problem, analyses of
counterfact that treat the parameters of the descriptive policy
process as independently fixed are vulnerable to the logic of the
Lucas critique. Note that ,    6,   and Ut also depend on the
parameters that govern private behavior. Another, and possibly
more important observation, is that, analogously to the
reformulation of the problem of forecasting, the underlying
choice—theoretic model directs analysis of counterfactuals to
                              — 21 —



differences  in the underlying parameters that generate the
policyniaker's constraints and derived targets.


5.   The Place of Policy Advice
     As mentioned above, Sargent (1984) ,   following
                                                   the earlier
argument of Sargent and Wallace (1976), contends that models that
include a specification of the evolution of policy for all time
leave no place for prescriptive policy analysis. Sargent and
Wallace made this point in the context of a framework that treats
the evolution of policy regimes as an exogenous process. In
reiterating this position, however, Sargent explicitly refers to a
framework that views policy as resulting from a rational choice
process.

     This section discusses a view of the distinction between
descriptive and prescriptive analysis that derives from choice—
theoretic modelling of policy and that, in contrast to Sargent's
view, preserves a distinct and meaningful role for policy advice
in a rational—expectations context. Note, however, that even if
we were to accept Sargent's interpretation of policy advice, his
desire to prescribe policy would not justify his employing the
logically inconsistent L&S analytical framework.

     CL&R respond to the argument of Sargent and Wallace by
denoting policy analysis to be the exercise of forecasting
endogenous variables conditional on realizations of the exogenous
stochastic variables that influence the policy process. The
problem with this response is that, as CL&R recognize, the
assumption that policy evolves according to the fixed process
specified in their model leaves no independent role for these
forecasts in influencing policy. In other words, given the
assumptions of the CL&R model, policy advice based on what CL&R
denote as policy analysis seems pointless.

     Viewing policy as the solution to a choice problem allows for
a quite different conception of the scope for policy advice, one
that neither Sargent nor CL&R consider. Given a choice—theoretic
model of policy, we can view policy analysis as concerned with
                               — 22 —



formulating   and solving the actual choice problems faced by
policymakers, while viewing positive analysis as concerned with
modelling the consequences of these choices in probabilistic
terms. From this perspective, the policy advisor is part of the
action, whereas the positive economist is part of the audience.
In other words, economists who advise government officials and the
electorate, like other economists who play a prescriptive role——
for example, business economist advising firms or home economists
advising households——are a component, at least implicitly, of the
interaction between policy and private behavior that the positive
analysis attempts to model. In this context, if a fully specified
positive model is true, even in a probabilistic sense, the actual
activities of all economists who advise economic agents are
helping to confirm the predictions that the positive economist
derives from the model.

     Nevertheless, from the standpoint of the decision—making
economic agent or its advisor, the choice problem remains
meaningful, even if positive analysis is successful in predicting
its outcome on average. The essential point is that the
formulation of positive models of the choice processes of private
agents and policymakers that fit the data, and thus seem to be
true at least in an as—if sense, do not vitiate these choice
processes. In particular, the development of a positive model
that includes a choice—theoretic analysis of policymaking does not
supercede policy advice. Rather, this development clarifies the
distinction between the positive economist as a spectator and the
policy advisor as a player, and it points to the importance of
keeping straight these different activities in which an economist
can engage.
     A program of positive economic analysis that yields
probabilistic relations between economic outcomes and exogenous
variables does not directly address either the problem of how to
give good policy advice or the related positive problem, which
traditionally lies in the domains of behavioral psychology and
political science, of literally describing the conscious
                              — 23 —



 behavioral processes of private agents and policymakers. Both of
 these problems involve further considerations such as
understanding the technologies available for decision making and
analyzing how decision makers use and should use the results of
positive economic analysis.

6.   Conclusions

     To be consistent with the logic of rational expectations, a
model for forecasting economic outcomes that are influenced by
policy must include a complete specification of the process that
generates policy actions, ifl particular, forecasts of the effects
of changes in the policy regime require knowledge of the true
model of the evolution of policy regimes. The CL&R criticism of
the L&S strategy for econometric policy evaluation reflects the
failure of L&S to specify an adequate forecasting model. The L&S
strategy, emphasizing estimation of policy invariant behavioral
parameters, actually addresses the distinct problem of analyzing
counterfactuals, rather than the problem of forecasting.

     An especially attractive strategy for modelling the process
that generates policy is to hypothesize that the policymaker, like
private agents, behaves as if it solves a well—defined choice—
theoretic problem. Knowledge of a true choice—theoretic model of
policy permits more efficient estimation of the effects of policy
on economic outcomes and, thereby, allows better forecasting of
the effects of disturbances to the policy process. The more
radical result of choice—theoretic modelling of policy, however,
is to shift attention towards a more basic forecasting problem
that concerns the effects of hypothetical realizations of the
exogenous variables that determine the policymaker's constraints
and targets. A choice—theoretic model of policy also implies that
the parameters of the policy process are not invariant with
respect to the processes that generate these exogenous variables.
The basic problem for analysis of counterfact in this context
concerns differences in the parameters of these underlying
processes.
                             — 24 —



                           REFERENCES
R.J. Barro and D.B. Gordon, "Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in
     a Model of Monetary Policy," journal of Monetary Economics,
     12, july 1983.
R.J. Barro and D.B. Gordon, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy
     in a Natural Rate Model," journal of Political Economy, 91,
     August 1983.
K. Brunner, A. Cukierman, and A.H. Meltzer, "Money and Economic
     Activity, Inventories, and Business Cycles," journal of
     Monetary Economics, 11, May 1983.
T.F. Cooley, S.F. LeRoy and N. Raymon, "Modelling Policy Inter-
     ventions," unpublished manuscript, February 1983.
B.T. Diba and H.I. Grossman, "Rtiona1 Asset Price Bubbles," NBER
     Working Paper No. 1059, january 1983.
R.F. Flood and P.M. Gather, "A Model of Stochastic Process
     Switching," Econometrica, 51, May 1983.
M.L. Gertler, "Imperfect Information and Wage Inertia in the
     Business Cycle," journal of Political Economy, 90, October,
     1982.
H.I. Grossman, "Rational Expectations, Business Cycles, and
     Government Behavior," in Rational Expectations and Economic
     Policy, S. Fischer, ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press, 1980).
R.E. Lucas, jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in
     Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
     Volume 1, K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds. (New York: North-
     Holland, 1976); reprinted in R.E. Lucas, Jr., Studies in
     Business Cycle Theory (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1981).
R.E. Lucas, Jr. and T.j. Sargent, "Introduction," in Rational
     Expectations and Econometric Practice, R.E. Lucas, Jr. and
     T.J. Sargent, eds. (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
     Press, 1981).
S. Neftci and T.j. Sargent, "A Little Bit of Evidence on the
     Natural Rate Hypothesis from the U.S.," Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 4, April 1978.
                                — 25 —



T.J. Sargent, "Interpreting Economic Time Series," Journal of
     Political Economy, 89, April 1981.
T.J. Sargent, "Autoregressions, Expectations, and Advice,"
     American Economic Review, 74, May 1984.
T.J. Sargent and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations and the Theory
     of Economic Policy," Journal of Ionetary Economics, 2, April
     1976; reprinted in Rational Expectations and Econometric
       Practice, R.E. Lucas, Jr. and T.J. Sargent, eds.
       (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981).
