NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE GED AN EFFECTIVE ROUTE TO POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION FOR
SCHOOL DROPOUTS?
John H. Tyler
Magnus Lofstrom
Working Paper 13816
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13816

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

The authors wish to thank Thomas Dee, Brian Jacob, Martin West, Richard Murnane, and Heather
Rose for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by John H. Tyler and Magnus Lofstrom. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Is the GED an Effective Route to Postsecondary Education for School Dropouts?
John H. Tyler and Magnus Lofstrom
NBER Working Paper No. 13816
February 2008
JEL No. I2,J18
ABSTRACT
We use data from the Texas Schools Microdata Panel (TSMP) to examine the extent to which dropouts
use the GED as a route to post-secondary education. The paper develops a model pointing out the
potential biases in estimating the effects of taking the "GED path" to postsecondary education. Lacking
suitable instruments that would allow us to directly address potential biases, our approach is to base
our estimates on a set of academically "at risk" students who are very similar in the 8th grade. We
observe that the eventual high school graduates in this group have much better postsecondary education
outcomes than do the similar at-risk 8th graders who dropped out and obtained a GED. Our model
explains the observed differences, and allows for a discussion of the policy challenges inherent in
improving the postsecondary outcomes of dropouts.

John H. Tyler
Box 1938
21 Manning Walk
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
john_tyler@brown.edu
Magnus Lofstrom
Public Policy Institute of California (PPIC)
500 Washington Street, Suite 600
San Francisco, CA 94111
lofstrom@ppic.org

Introduction
Every year approximately a million students leave high school without receiving a
diploma. Based on any indicator, these school dropouts face a bleak prospect in today’s
economy. One potentially ameliorating option for dropouts is the acquisition of the
General Educational Development (GED) credential. The use of the GED has grown over
the years and currently about three quarters of a million people per year try obtain this
“second chance” credential. A logical question is: a “second chance” for what? While
recent research indicates that acquisition of a GED is associated with increased earnings
for some dropouts,1 this same research points out that acquiring a GED is no ticket out of
poverty for those lacking a traditional high school diploma. At least to the extent that the
GED is an education endpoint, this is not a surprising result given what we know about
the labor market disadvantages faced by those who lack any postsecondary education.
Thus, any serious economic role the GED might play likely lies in the extent to which
this credential helps school dropouts move into postsecondary education programs. As it
turns out, however, GED acquisition as a route into postsecondary education is a
woefully understudied area, especially given the confluence of the rising importance of
postsecondary education, increasing concerns over the nation’s “dropout problem,” and
the large numbers of dropouts who obtain a GED each year.
This paper addresses this knowledge gap using a unique data set constructed from
the Texas Schools Microdata Panel (TSMP) to compare the postsecondary education
enrollment outcomes of students who dropped out and obtained a GED and students who
remained in school and obtained a high school diploma. Our aim is to provide
information on the extent to which pursuing the “GED path” versus the “high school
1

See for example Tyler, Murnane, and Willett (2000) and Tyler (2004).

1

graduation path” affects postsecondary education (PSE) enrollment. It is important to
think about “pathways” to PSE since it is probably not the education credential—GED or
high school diploma—per se that affects PSE, but rather factors associated with the
journey required to earn these credentials that are important.
Our focus in this paper is on a comparison of the PSE enrollment outcomes of
GED holders versus high school graduates rather GED holders versus uncredentialed
dropouts. We are less interested in the GED-uncredentialed dropout comparison because
the enrollment policies of most two-year and four-year colleges and universities require
applicants to have some school leaving credential, particularly in degree-granting
programs.2 Given higher education enrollment policies, comparing GED holders to
uncredentialed dropouts may simply be an examination of the effectiveness of the gate
keeping mechanisms of postsecondary education admission and enrollment policies.
A second reason for focusing on the GED-high school graduate comparison has to
do with the counterfactual most people may have in mind when they think about the
GED-PSE relationship. While there is no empirical evidence, our sense is that many
observers wonder what would have happened to GED holders had they somehow been
compelled to stay in high school until graduation. Of course, the relevant comparison to
answer that question is one between acceptably similar GED holders and high school
graduates.
Given our focus, the thought experiment that lies behind our research is the
following: if one individual is “assigned” to the dropout/GED route and another identical
individual is “assigned” to the high school completion route, would they be equally likely
2

For example, a 1988 National Center for Education Statistics study of a nationally representative sample
of postsecondary education institutions indicated that 90 percent of all postsecondary education institutions
require some type of “certification” for admission (Hexter and Anderson 1986).

2

to participate in PSE? Our working hypothesis is that relative to remaining on a path to
high school graduation, there is likely no systematic “GED advantage” in terms of PSE
participation, and in fact, the GED route may confer disadvantages that inhibit PSE.
Thus, for our two hypothetical individuals, we would expect to see either no difference in
the probability of PSE enrollment or a lower probability for the individual relegated to
the GED path. Determining the extent to which this is the case is the empirical question
we pursue in this paper.
Of course, the very tough challenge is constructing suitably comparable groups of
GED holders and high school graduates, as there are fierce selection issues at hand. The
selection problem potentially starts with the fact that those observed with a GED have
first dropped out of school. Subsequent to the dropout decision, a second selection
process takes place when individuals in the pool of dropouts make decisions regarding
acquisition of a GED. Finally, among those who have the requisite credentials for college
enrollment—that is, within the pool of GED holders and high school graduates—
individuals make selection decisions regarding PSE.
To bring structure to the problem, we model this process. Our model makes
explicit the sources of potential bias in Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates and with
plausible assumptions allows us to sign the overall bias. Lacking suitable instruments, our
approach to addressing bias is to base our estimates on a subsample of students who were
academically “at risk” in the 8th grade. While we will not argue that this approach
eliminates all bias, we do believe that our estimates have more information content than
estimates in past empirical work that has utilized more heterogeneous samples.

3

This paper proceeds as follows. After discussing the prior research on the
postsecondary outcomes of GED holders, we present our decision model. We then
describe the data used in this paper, present our results, and close with a discussion of the
possibilities and challenges these results present to policy formulation aimed at using the
GED program to improve the postsecondary education attainment of dropouts.
To preview our findings, our results show that GED holders have substantially
worse PSE outcomes than do observationally similar high school graduates. As our
model will illustrate, however, these negative results could be the result of either
unobserved heterogeneity or the persistent effects of random negative shocks that caused
students to leave school in the first place. Thus, we urge caution in drawing the inference
that, relative to high school completion, the “GED route” is a decidedly inferior route to
PSE.

Prior Research
One of the most robust areas of study in labor economics during the 1990s was
the attention given to the rising return to a college degree. One strand in this research area
provides evidence that postsecondary education appears to be important even when it
does not result in a degree. Kane and Rouse (1995) find that a year of college credit,
regardless of degree status, is associated with a 4-7 percent increase in hourly wages and
annual earnings. They are unable to reject the hypothesis that credits earned at two-year
and four-year colleges are equivalent. This is a particularly important finding for GED
holders who go on to postsecondary education since they are much more likely to enroll

4

in a two-year institution and much less likely to obtain a degree conditional upon entering
college.3
NLSY-based evidence in Murnane, Willet, and Boudett (1999) confirm that GED
holders do receive an economic benefit from postsecondary education that is equal to the
returns experienced by high school graduates. Their estimates of the return on an
additional year of college range from 5.2 percent in a random effects specification to 10.8
percent in a fixed effects specification. These estimates are similar to the returns that
Kane and Rouse estimated across all enrollees. Taken together, the lessons from these
two studies are that postsecondary education is economically beneficial to GED holders
even if they are less likely to complete degrees and, if enrolled, more likely to be enrolled
in two-year colleges.
Given the estimated benefits that GED holders derive from postsecondary
education, what does the literature have to say about how much postsecondary education
they get? Basic descriptive analyses across several studies all indicate that dropouts who
obtain a GED tend to acquire more postsecondary education than do uncredentialed
dropouts, but less than observationally similar regular high school graduates. Berktold et
al (1998) use the 1994 National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS 88)
follow-up to observe the educational attainment two years after high school graduation of
individuals who never dropped out of school, individuals who dropped out but received a
credential, and dropouts who remain uncredentialed. They find that credentialed
3

For example, using High School and Beyond data, Murnane, Willett, and Tyler (2000) find that eight
years after their expected high school graduation date, only 6 percent of GED holders had earned at least
one credit in a four-year college versus 24 percent with at least one credit from a two-year college. The
same figures for high school graduates were 48 percent and 32 percent at four- and two-year colleges
respectively. In the Texas data we use in this paper, we find that as of 2003, individuals who obtained a
GED in the middle to late-1990s had four-year and two-year college enrollment rates of 2 percent and 19
percent respectively.

5

dropouts, relative to uncredentialed dropouts, are much more likely to have
postsecondary education. Forty percent of GED holders have some postsecondary
education compared to 14 percent of uncredentialed dropouts. Among those with some
postsecondary attendance, half of credentialed dropouts enrolled in degree programs
(either AA or BA) whereas almost all uncredentialed dropouts enrolled in certificate or
other non-credentialed programs. While credentialed dropouts have higher postsecondary
attendance rates than uncredentialed dropouts, Berktold et al find their postsecondary
attendance lags behind that of traditional high school graduates. Seventy-eight percent of
traditional high school graduates had completed some postsecondary education and
around three-quarters of this group were enrolled in a degree program. Credentialed
dropouts were less likely to be enrolled and, conditional on enrollment, less likely to be
in a degree program than high school graduates were.
The descriptive patterns reported by Berktold et al have been confirmed using
other survey data. Murnane, Willet, and Tyler (2000) use High School and Beyond to
examine the postsecondary attendance of male GED holders. They also find that the
postsecondary attendance of credentialed dropouts falls between uncredentialed dropouts
and traditional high school graduates. This paper highlights two other important
characteristics of the postsecondary experience of GED recipients. GED recipients are
much more likely to be enrolled in 2-year community colleges, as opposed to 4 -year
colleges (6 percent had attended a four-year institution and 24 percent had attended a
two-year institution eight years after their expected high school graduation year). They
also accumulate very few credits (an average of 12.3 credits earned within eight years

6

after their expected high school graduation year). Tyler, Murnane, and Willet (2003)
report similar findings for the females in High School and Beyond.
Murnane, Willett, and Boudett (1997) use data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth to test whether the acquisition of a GED increases the probability that
dropouts will obtain postsecondary education. The authors estimate random effects probit
models using longitudinal data on all high school dropouts, and they find that obtaining
the GED does increase the probability of college attendance and that the postsecondary
gap between uncredentialed and credentialed dropouts grows over time. While it is
interesting to compare credentialed and uncredentialed dropouts, this study is most
informative about certificate or other non-degree-granting programs since, as reported
earlier in this paper, over 90 percent of all postsecondary education institutions require a
credential for matriculation.
The most recent work on the topic is an update of the postsecondary outcomes in
the NELS 88 data. At the time of their paper, Berktold at al (1998) could look at
postsecondary education outcomes approximately two years after the expected 1992 high
school graduation date of the 1988 8th grade cohort in the study. Using the year 2000
follow up survey, Adelman (2006) is able to look an additional six years beyond the 1994
data available to Berktold at al. In his report Adelman finds that eight years after their
expected high school graduation date, approximately 85 percent of the regular high
school graduates had enrolled at some time in some postsecondary institution, and that
about 35 percent had obtained at least a bachelor’s degree by that time. Meanwhile, 52
percent of the GED holders in the sample showed postsecondary education enrollment by
2000, with only one percent of the GED holders holding a bachelor’s degree by that time.

7

Table 1 gives the complete distribution of education status for high school graduates and
GED holders based on the Adelman work. That table shows that six percent of the regular
high school graduates had achieved an associate’s degree as the highest earned degree,
compared to two percent for GED holders. Meanwhile, a slightly higher percentage of
GED holders had a certificate as their highest level of postsecondary education relative to
the percentage of high school graduates with a certificate as the highest level of
postsecondary education (4.9 percent for GED holders versus about 4 percent for high
school graduates).
<Table 1 about here>
While informative, the raw comparisons in Table 1 raise as many questions as
they answer since we know that GED holders and regular high school graduates differ on
many dimensions before students make decisions to leave school or engage in
postsecondary education. In this paper, we will first show that these same differences are
present among the 8th graders in the Texas Schools Microdata Panel (TSMP) that we will
use in our analysis. We will then demonstrate that students designated as being
academically “at risk” are very similar in the 8th grade on many dimensions, regardless of
whether they will later drop out and obtain a GED, or whether they will eventually
graduate from high school. This similarity at 8th grade “baseline” makes the at-risk group
a particular advantageous group to study from a research design standpoint. From a
policy standpoint, students found to be academically “at risk” in the 8th grade are also a
particular interesting and relevant group for studying how individuals on the academic
margin use GED attainment and high school graduation as separate paths into
postsecondary education.

8

A Sequential Decision Model
We model the route from the pre-high school years to PSE as a sequential three
step process that begins with a pool of students who are all in the 8th grade at time t = 0.
In what follows:
•

time period t = 1 is some time period after the 8th grade but before high school
graduation or GED attainment when the dropout decision is being made,

•

period t = 2 is a post-8th grade period where individuals who decided to drop out
in period 1 are making decisions about whether or not to pursue a GED
credential, and

•

period t = 3 is a post high school graduation and post GED-attainment period in
which high school graduates and GED holders are making post-secondary
enrollment decisions.

At t = 1 following the 8th grade, student i in high school and community j is making the
decision of whether to dropout (Dropout = 1) or stay in school (Dropout = 0) based on
the following equation:

Dropoutij = X ijt π ′ + wi + zit + τ i1 + ν ij

Equation 1| t = 1

In this equation:

•

X is a vector of observable characteristics of the individual, school, and
community,

•

w is an unobserved, time-invariant individual fixed effect,

•

z is a unobservable, time-varying personal characteristic of the individual,

•

τ1 is a one-time, exogenous drop-out-influencing shock that occurs at t = 1, and

9

•

υ is a well behaved error term.
Given the exogenous nature of τ, we have τ ⊥ w and τ ⊥ z, and we assume that w

and z are orthogonal. In this formulation, examples of w associated with dropping out
would be permanent low tastes or high psychic costs associated with academic activities,
low motivation, persistent time preferences that overvalue the present relative to the
future, permanent misunderstanding about the individual returns to schooling, etc.
Examples ofτ, the one-time shock that might influence the drop out decision would be an
unexpected pregnancy, the sudden unemployment of a parent, parental divorce, or death
in the family. Examples of z that might influence a Dropout = 1 decision would be an
evolving dislike of and disengagement from academic endeavors such as school, a
growing preference for work relative to academic endeavors as a student becomes old
enough for full-time work, or an evolving network of friends who implicitly or explicitly
discourage academic endeavors.
Among the individuals who decide to drop out rather than stay in school, a second
decision regarding whether or not to obtain a GED (GED = 1) or not (GED = 0) is made
at time t = 2:
~
~
GEDij | (Dropout = 1) = X ijt π~ + γ~wi + θ zit + λ τ i1 + ξ ij

Equation 2| t = 2

In Equation 2 the unobserved w, z, andτ terms have coefficients that allow for
relationships between these factors and GED that are different in size and sign than might
be the case in Equation 1.
In Equation 2 we also allow for the influence of the exogenous “drop out” shock

τ1 that occurred at time t = 1. As an example, if τ1 at the earlier t = 1 period was an
unexpected pregnancy, then at t = 2 individual i might still be pregnant or might have a

10

young child. If the decision to obtain a GED at t = 2 is an investment decision that
requires the expenditure of time, effort, monetary resources, or opportunity costs, then
any persistent effects of a negative shock may negatively influence the decision to invest
in obtaining a GED.
At time t = 3, the focus shifts to the subset of individuals from the original 8th
grade population who have either a GED or a high school diploma. In this time period the
sub-sample of GED holders and high school graduates (i.e., the sample conditional upon
[(Dropout = 1 & GED = 1) | Dropout = 0]) decide whether or not to enroll in
postsecondary education based on:

PSEij = βGEDij + X ijt π + γwi + θzit + λτ i1 + ε ij

Equation 3| t = 3

Again, potential persistence of the t = 1 drop out shock is allowed to influence
postsecondary education decisions in this third period, and the unobserved w, z, and τ are
allowed to have different relationships to the postsecondary education decision than were
their relationships to the drop out and GED decisions in Equations 1 and 2.
The parameter of ultimate interest is β in Equation 3, and we would like to
interpret estimates of β as estimates of the causal effect on PSE enrollment of going
through the GED path as opposed to the high school graduation path. As discussed in the
introduction, our prior is that β is either zero or negative. We begin our discussion of the
threats to this interpretation by pointing out that given the unobserved nature of w, z, and

τ1 the typical equation estimated in the existing GED-PSE literature is given by Equation
3′ below (where, as in Equation 3, the estimation is over a sample of GED holders and
high school graduates):

PSEij = β GEDij + X ijπ + ε ij

Equation 3′| t = 3

11

Given Equation 3 and our earlier assumptions regarding the orthogonality of w, τ, and z,
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates of β based on Equation 3′ will yield:

[

]

σ ,w
σ ,z
σ ,τ 1
E βˆOLS | X = β + γ GED
+ θ GED
+ λ GED
2
2
2
σ GED

σ GED

σ GED

That is, failure to account for the role of time invariant w, time-varying z, and the
persistent effects of τ1 will potentially bias estimates of the GED path to PSE relative to
the high school graduation path. In what follows we explore the direction of the overall
bias from these three bias terms. In this discussion it will be important to keep in mind
the four different time periods, t = 0, 1, 2, and 3, and the fact that in the different time
periods we are dealing with different samples of individuals who are making different
decisions, and hence the relevant covariances are being considered over different pools of
individuals. For simplicity we will call the time periods t0, t1, t2, and t3. The samples and
relevant decisions across these time periods are:

•

t0: all students are in the 8th grade,

•

t1: in this post-8th grade period all students are deciding whether to drop
out or stay in school,

•

t2: in this period all students who dropped out in t1 are deciding whether
to obtain a GED or remain an uncredentialed dropout, and

•

t3: the students who did not drop out in t1 and the dropouts who obtained
a GED in t2 are deciding whether to enroll in PSE.

Bias attributable to the time-invariant individual effect wi:

12

Assume, without loss of generality, that w is negatively correlated with
educational investments. Given the time-invariant nature of w, this means that γ < 0 in
Equation 3 when individuals are deciding whether to invest in PSE. Furthermore, since
eventual GED holders had to first make the dropout decision at t1, it follows that among
the pool of GED holders and high school graduates at t3, σGED,w ≥ 0. Thus, the bias
attributable to w is either negative or zero.4

Bias attributable to the time-varying individual heterogeneity zit:
Assume that z is a time-varying trait that is negatively correlated with educational
investments, and notice that this means that θ < 0 in Equation 3. At t1, eventual GED
holders made the decision to dropout when eventual high school graduates did not,
suggesting that σGED,z ≥ 0 at t1. At t2, within the pool of dropouts, some make the
~
decision to invest in a GED suggesting that θ ≤ 0 in Equation 2. At t3, GED holders and

high school graduates are making the PSE enrollment decision, and the sign on σGED,z at
this time is not obvious. It could be that the elements of z correlated with the dropout
decision at t1 are still present during the time to make PSE enrollment decisions and thus

σGED,z ≥ 0 at t3.
On the other hand, the GED holders at t3 are those dropouts who decided to invest
in the GED at t2. Thus, it could be that, all else equal, GED holders at t3 have less of the
trait z that is negatively related to PSE-investment than do high school graduates yielding

σGED,z ≤ 0 at t3. While it is plausible that σGED,z = 0 at t3, we find it unlikely that GED

Notice that if we had assumed that w was positively correlated with education investments the signs of the
two factors in the w bias term would be switched and the bias attributable to this term would still be
negative or zero.

4

13

holders have less z that do high school graduates (i.e., σGED,z < 0). Therefore, given the
expected negative sign on θ in Equation 3, we find the most likely bias attributable to z
to be either negative or zero.

Bias attributable to persistent effects from the negative drop out shock τ1:
If students left school in t1 because of a negative shock, it could be that the effects
of that shock are still present and affecting PSE decisions in t3. If these shocks are
persistent then σGED,τ1 ≥ 0 and λ < 0 in Equation 3, and the bias attributable to τ1 is either
zero or negative.
In summary, it is likely that the overall OLS bias is negative. Given our
hypothesis that true β is either negative or zero, this means that negative estimates of the
“GED effect” on PSE should be interpreted as lower bounds on a negative effect.
Therefore, the estimates that we, and previous research, present may well overstate any
negative effects of taking the “GED route” to PSE, and without eliminating the OLS bias,
one could not rule out an inference that there is no negative “GED effect” on PSE.
Lacking any suitable instrumental variables that might allow us to address the
potential bias, one way to reduce the bias is to define a sub-sample of GED holders and
high school graduates who tend to be more homogeneous than is the case in the general
population of GED holders and high school graduates. Seizing on this opportunity, we
will use a subsample of students who are academically “at risk” just prior to high school
entry in the 8th grade. For narrative simplicity, we will call this subsample of 8th grade atrisk students the AR8 sample, and we will show that in the 8th grade, eventual GED

14

holders and eventual high school graduates in this sample were very much alike on key
dimensions, including test scores.
Aside from their similarity to eventual high school graduates, a particular
advantage of using the AR8 sample for our purposes has to do with the potential
heterogeneity within the GED population, and the implications of this heterogeneity for
some key assumptions in our model. In particular, Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) find
that the average student who drops out and obtains a GED is close to the average high
school graduate in terms of academic ability, but that the average GED holder has
substantially worse non-cognitive traits than the individuals who complete high school. In
the terms of Heckman and Rubinstein, these GED holders are the “wise guys” in class
who could make it academically, but who are unable to function in a school environment
because of their poor non-cognitive skills. A concern for us is that these academically
able “wise guys” who end up with a GED do not view the decisions we have modeled at
times t2 and t3 as education investment decisions. In terms of the model, our concern is
wise guy
AR 8
wise guy
AR*
that σ GED
< σ GED
, w < σ GED , w < 0 and σ GED , z
, z < 0 at t3, and that any negative OLS bias

is worse with these academically strong but non-cognitively weak individuals than
without them. Thus, by using the AR8 group we potentially reduce the negative bias in
the OLS estimator and we have a group of individuals for whom our modeling
assumptions regarding education investment decisions are more likely to hold.

Data and Samples
Our study uses TSMP data to examine the postsecondary outcomes of students
who, by age, were in the cohort that should have been in the 8th grade in the spring of

15

1994, and thus scheduled to graduate in the spring of 1998. In particular, we will examine
the AR8 subset of this cohort. The “at risk” indicator in our data used to construct the
AR8 sample is a variable in the TSMP data based on a designation generated by the
Texas Education Agency (TEA). When our sample was in the 8th grade, Texas school
districts were required to report a student as academically “at risk” of dropping out or
failing if any of the following criteria were met.5 The student…
1. was not advanced from one grade level to the next for two or more school
years;
2. is at least two years below grade level in reading or mathematics;
3. has failed at least two courses and is not expected to graduate within four
years of entering ninth grade;
4. has failed at least one section of the most recent state assessment exam; or
5. is pregnant or is a parent.
Relative to other potential data, the TSMP data present several advantages in a
study of the GED-PSE relationship. First, all of the K-12 information in the TSMP is
from administrative records collected by schools and school districts rather than from self
reports of students, teachers, or parents. Likewise, the postsecondary education
information we will use for our dependent variables is from state higher education
administrative records. Second, the TSMP data contain information from the state
assessment program, the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS), a high stakes
test for public school students in Texas. Third, schools in the TSMP can be linked to the
U.S. Department of Education’s Common Core of Data data files. We use this feature of

5

According to the “1996-97 Report on High School Completion Rates” (Texas Education Agency) the
source for this definition is Texas Education Code §29.081.

16

the TSMP to control for school-level variables of both the school of attendance in the 8th
grade and the last school of attendance before a student drops out or graduates from high
school. Fourth, the “at risk” designation in the TSMP for our 8th grade students is based
upon an objective, state-level definition that utilizes information from a student’s entire
prior educational experience. Finally, the sample size available is substantially larger than
is available in, for example, NELS 88. In that data set there are approximately 11,000
high school graduates and 800 GED holders available for study. In the 1994 8th grade
cohort of the TSMP data that we use there are over 142,000 high school graduates and
6,000 GED holders. The analytic data set constructed for this paper uses all of the GED
holders in the TSMP data and a random twenty percent (one in five) of the high school
graduates. All standard errors are adjusted accordingly.
We focus our study on the 1994 8th grade cohort of the TSMP because this group
best capitalizes on two features of the TSMP data that are important to this study: good
8th grade data and data on postsecondary education outcomes after these students have
graduated from high school or obtained a GED. While the TSMP has data on Texas
schoolchildren from 1990 to the present, the state TAAS examinations were first given to
8th graders in Texas in 1994, hence our focus on the group that was age appropriate for
the 8th grade in 1994. The postsecondary education files in the TSMP data contain
information on all enrollments and number of “enrolled credits” at public postsecondary
education institutions in Texas through 2002 and information on awarded postsecondary
degrees and certificates at these institutions through 2003.6 Our method in using these
data will be to allow a three-year window for examining enrollments and credits, and a
6

By “enrolled credits,” we mean that we have information on the number of credits in which a student was
enrolled in a given year, but we do not have information on the number of those credits that were
completed and received a passing grade.

17

four-year window for examining earned degrees and certificates. The window for each
student in the sample will begin after either high school graduation or after GED
acquisition. Thus, one sample selection criterion is that a member of the 1998 graduation
cohort had to have graduated from high school or obtained their GED no later than 1999
to be included in our analysis. Within the AR8 sample in the TSMP, 69 percent graduated
from high school, 7 percent had dropped out and obtained a GED by 1999, and 20.5
percent had dropped out and had no GED as of 1999. An additional 2.5 percent got their
high school diploma between 1999 and 2001, and additional 0.9 percent obtained a GED
in this post-1999 period. The comparable figures for members of the 1994 8th grade
cohort who were not labeled as “at risk” are 86 percent high school graduates, 6 percent
GED holders, and 7 percent uncredentialed dropouts as of 1999, with 0.9 and 0.6 percent
receiving a high school diploma or GED post-1999, respectively.
Appendix Table A1 shows the results of this and other sample selection decisions
we made in forming our AR8 analytic sample. As this table shows, there were 12,358
eligible eventual GED holders, of whom 6,520 were in the at-risk category in the 8th
grade, and 28,538 eventual high school graduates, of whom 11,937 were designated as atrisk 8th graders.
As row seven in Table A1 shows, the decision to use only those who graduated or
received their GED by 1999 affects the GED sample more than the high school graduate
sample, as the GED sample drops by 10 percent and the high school graduate sample
drops by only three percent on this decision. To examine the potential impact of this
sample selection decision, we used the middle years of the available TSMP data
(expected graduation cohorts of 1994, 1995, and 1996) to study the distribution of GED

18

acquisition dates relative to expected graduation date. We use these middle cohorts since
they have the most opportunity in the TSMP data for either early or late GED acquisition
dates relative to their expected high school graduation year. Depending on the cohort, we
find that between two-thirds and three-quarters of the GED holders in the 1994, 1995,
and 1996 expected-graduation cohorts obtained a GED before, on, or within one year
after their expected high school graduation date. We then use these data to examine the
TAAS scores of individuals who obtained their GED more than one year after their
expected graduation date. This examination shows that these “late GED” individuals had
8th grade TAAS math scores that were a third of a standard deviation lower than the GED
holders who acquired this credential before, on, or one year after their expected
graduation year. Thus, by not using these “late GED” individuals our sample will tend to
be composed of the most academically able GED holders in the AR8 sample, conditional
on being at-risk in the 8th grade. Since these individuals are more likely to engage in
postsecondary education, we expect that our estimates will be upwardly biased relative to
what we would find if we were able to include the “late GED” individuals in our study.
Before turning to our AR8 sample, we use Appendix Table A2 to illustrate the
comparability of the TSMP to data that has been used in prior work. We first point out
that individuals who will drop out and obtain a GED have 8th grade math scores that are
about a third of a standard deviation lower than those of 8th graders who will go on to
become high school graduates, and 8th grade reading scores that are a quarter of a
standard deviation lower. A higher percentage of the eventual GED holders are male,
white, and “economically disadvantaged,”7 and they tended to go to school in urban areas
more than was the case for eventual high school graduates. The GED holders were more
7

Students who are eligible for free or reduced price lunch are defined to be economically disadvantaged.

19

likely to have started first grade late or to have been held back prior to the 8th grade, and a
higher percentage of them were in the “at risk” category in the 8th grade.8 On the other
hand, the eventual GED holders and eventual high school graduates tended to go to 8th
grade schools that had similar characteristics.
Not surprisingly, some of the biggest differences in the two groups appear in their
postsecondary education outcomes. Within the three-year window that we allow for
postsecondary education, high school graduates were much more likely to have ever
enrolled in a public Texas postsecondary education institution (58.5 percent versus 22.4
percent for GED holders), more likely to have earned a postsecondary certificate or
associate’s degree, and they had enrolled for more credits in the three years after
graduation than the GED holders.9 We note that the patterns of postsecondary education
attainment in Table A2 are similar to those using NELS data in Table 1. The higher
attainment figures in Table 1 for all groups reflect the fact that those data allow for a sixyear window for the high school graduates and longer for GED holders who obtained
their GED prior to 1994.
In summary, the patterns in the TSMP data are similar to those consistently found
in the literature across time and across different data sets. Namely, GED holders have
worse postsecondary education outcomes than regular high school graduates, but GED
holders are also systematically different from high school graduates on observable factors
8

Our examination of 8th graders in the NELS data set yields some similarities and differences to what is
seen in the TSMP data. Importantly, 8th grade test score differences between eventual GED holders and
high school graduates are very similar across the different data sets. Not surprisingly, in the Texas data a
higher percentage of both GED holders and high school graduates are Hispanic than is the case in the
NELS data. The NELS data are more balanced on gender across the two education groups than in the
TSMP, and there is a greater discrepancy in the percent who are at-risk in the 8th grade in NELS, 66 percent
of the eventual GED holders versus 37 percent of the eventual high school graduates.
9
Because of the low enrollment rates of GED holders in four-year colleges versus two-year colleges
referenced earlier in this paper, we will focus our study on enrollment and credits in either a two-year or a
four-year college.

20

that tend to correlate with postsecondary education attainment. In particular, like other
researchers, we find substantial differences in the underlying academic achievement of
eventual GED holders and eventual high school graduates.10
Given the importance of early academic achievement on later postsecondary
education attainment, we want to examine more closely the 8th grade TAAS test scores in
the TSMP data. To do this we first account for the fact that delayed first grade entry or
being held back a grade at some point means that not all students take the 8th grade TAAS
exams in the same year and hence at the same age. In the 1994 8th grade cohort about 73
percent of the eventual GED holders took the 8th grade TAAS tests in 1994, 25 percent
took these exams in 1995, and 2 percent took the exams in 1996. Meanwhile, 83 percent
of the eventual high school graduates took the exams in 1994, 16 percent in 1995, and
one percent 1996. To account for any age effects on the TAAS scores we use the
residuals from a regression of the TAAS scores on year-of-test dummies and then
standardize the residuals to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.11
Relative to non-age-corrected mean test scores reported in Appendix Table A2, the
differences between GED holders and high school graduates are slightly smaller when
using these age-corrected scores. Nevertheless, the age-corrected math scores of eventual
high school graduates are still about one-fifth of a standard deviation higher than are
those of eventual GED holders, and the high school graduate reading scores are about
one-eighth of a standard deviation higher.

10

An exception to this pattern is that Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) find that in then NLSY79 the ageadjusted AFQT scores of GED holders and high school graduates are similar.
11
Of course, in correcting for the age at which an individual took the 8th grade TAAS tests, we are also
correcting for anything else that is related to why an individual may have taken the TAAS scores in a later
year than expected given their age.

21

Of course, mean comparisons only present a partial picture of the comparability
of groups on a measure such as test scores. Figures 1 and 2 provide more information on
these age-corrected and standardized 8th grade test scores, as these figures present the
entire distributions of the math (Figure 1) and reading (Figure 2) scores for GED holders
and high school graduates. Figures 1 and 2 also present the test score distributions of two
other groups not yet discussed: 8th graders who eventually dropped out of high school and
never attempted the GED through 2003, and 8th graders who dropped out and attempted,
but failed the GED exams sometime before 2003. These test-score distributions make it
clear that in the 8th grade there are already underlying academic differences between
students who will later sort themselves or be sorted into different educational credential
groups. Figures 1 and 2 also make it clear that comparing the later outcomes of GED
holders and regular high school graduates may be a tenuous proposition because these
groups are already substantially different academically in the 8th grade.
<Figures 1 and 2 about here>
We turn next to the AR8 sample that we will use in the empirical work. As
discussed early, to the extent that this group is more homogeneous in w and z, estimates
based on the AR8 sample should reduce any negative bias in the OLS estimator of
Equation 3′. We also note that “at risk” students are an especially policy relevant group
when it comes to questions of how dropouts use the GED to access postsecondary
education. Not only are at-risk students often a focus of policy interest, but these are
students for whom it is more likely that a negative life or school event will prove be the
proverbial “straw that broke the camel’s back,” leading to a decision to drop out of
school. In terms of our model, it may be that within the AR8 sample it is more likely that

22

σ GED ,τ 1 > σ GED ,w

and

σ GED ,τ 1 > σ GED , z ,

and thus more likely that the primary source of any bias in the OLS estimator comes from
the persistent negative effects of the random t1 shock rather than from unobserved
heterogeneity. Of course, we cannot bring direct evidence on the extent to which GED
holders and high school graduates are more similar in w and z in the AR8 sample than in
the general population. We can show, however, that on observable dimensions including
test scores, GED holders and high school graduates in the AR8 sample were very similar
in the 8th grade.
Figures 3 and 4 give the same test score distributions as Figures 1 and 2 except
that only at-risk 8th graders are used to generate the distributions. While the dropouts who
never attempt or attempt and fail the GED still look very different from the eventual GED
and high school graduate groups, these latter two groups now have virtually identical 8th
grade test score distributions in both math and reading. There are statistically significant,
though substantively small, differences in the means of the GED and high school
graduate distributions, but interestingly, they favor the eventual GED holders. Among
these at-risk students, eventual GED holders have mean 8th grade math scores that are
0.03 of a standard deviation higher than eventual high school graduates (p-value = 0.03)
and reading scores that are 0.08 of a standard deviation higher (p-value < 0.00).
<Figures 3 and 4 about here>
Of course, at-risk students are a relatively more homogenous subset of all 8th
grade students and so it is not overly surprising that test score distributions of eventual
GED holders and eventual high school graduates in the AR8 sample would be more
similar than in the pool of all 8th graders. Figures 5 and 6 illustrate that stratification

23

along at-risk status is not in and of itself the driving force behind the similar GED-high
school graduate test score distributions. These figures display GED and high school
graduate test score distributions by at-risk status and illustrate that among future GED
holders and high school graduates, the distributions in the AR8 sample are much more
similar than those based on a sub-sample of “not-at-risk” students.12
<Figures 5 and 6 about here>

Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics of the AR8 sample are in Table 2. While most GED-high
school graduate differences are statistically significant because of our large sample size,
there are few mean differences between these groups that are large enough to be of
substantive importance. The most substantial differences are that the eventual GED
holders are more likely to be male, white, and to have been “late” arriving at the 8th grade
relative to their cohort. Meanwhile, they are less likely to be black, in special education in
the 8th grade, and enrolled in an English Second Language (ESL) program than are the
eventual high school graduates. There are some statistically significant differences in the
schools attended by the two at-risk groups when they were 8th graders, but again, these
differences are all substantively small. Nevertheless, one would want to control for the
observable differences in the two groups when making comparisons of postsecondary
education outcomes.
12

Turning to NELS data again, we see very similar patterns. Within the at-risk pool in NELS, eventual
GED holders have math scores that are only 0.05 of a standard deviation lower than high school graduates
and this difference is not statistically significant (p-value = 0.40). Meanwhile, in the not-at-risk pool in
NELS, the math score difference between the two groups is 0.42 of a standard deviation in favor of the high
school graduates and significant at the 0.001 level. These general patterns are the same for reading scores in
NELS. Reproducing the graphs in Figures 5 and 6 based on NELS data shows the same convergence of the
GED and high school graduate test score distributions in the at-risk pool, though the convergence is not as
complete as in the TSMP data.

24

<Table 2>
We now turn to these comparisons. Table 3 gives the means of the postsecondary
education outcomes that we will examine. This table not only provides postsecondary
education information for the AR8 sample, but for the sake of comparison, it also
presents information for the eventual GED holders and high school graduates who were
not categorized as “at risk” in the 8th grade.
Panel A in Table 3 provides statistics based on everyone in each group. The
postsecondary education statistics in Panel B are all conditional on having been enrolled
in postsecondary education at some point. The first column of Table 3 gives us a first
look at how eventual GED holders in the AR8 sample use the GED credential to access
postsecondary education. Three years after obtaining a GED, only 18 percent had ever
enrolled in a public postsecondary institution in Texas, and less than one percent had
earned either a postsecondary education certificate or an associate’s degree. Furthermore,
these at-risk GED holders had enrolled for only 5.5 total credits on average during the
first three years after obtaining a GED. The companion statistics in Panel B are a bit more
encouraging. Individuals who had ever enrolled in postsecondary education enrolled in an
average of about 30 credits within the first three years of receipt of the GED. That is, the
average enrollee had enrolled for about a year’s worth of credits in the three years
following receipt of the GED. These enrolled credits rarely translated into either a
certificate or an associate’s degree, however, as only 1.8 and 1.2 percent of the students
who had been enrolled had earned a certificate or associates degree, respectively, within
the first four post-GED years.
<Table 3 about here>

25

The figures in the first column of Table 3 can be put in some context by
comparing them to the outcomes of eventual high school graduates in the AR8 sample.
Almost half of these students (46 percent) had enrolled in some form of postsecondary
education three years after graduation, and the mean number of enrolled credits was
about 22, four times as many as for the AR8 GED holders. Meanwhile, about four
percent of these high school graduates had earned either a certificate or an associate’s
degree. Conditional on having ever been enrolled, high school graduates had more
enrolled credits, were more likely to earn a certificate, and were much more likely to
have earned an associate’s degree.
Not surprisingly, within education credential group all of the outcomes for the
not-at-risk students in the last two columns are better than those for the AR8 students in
the first two columns. It is striking, however, that the at-risk high school graduates,
represented in the second column, have substantially better postsecondary education
outcomes than do GED holders who were not at-risk 8th graders (third column). In
particular, the high school graduates are much more likely to have ever been enrolled (46
percent to 27 percent). Even among those who had positive enrollment figures, the at-risk
graduates have substantially better postsecondary education outcomes than GED holders
who were not “at risk” in the 8th grade.

Conditional Estimates of Postsecondary Education Outcomes
We have shown that in the 8th grade, at-risk students have very similar test score
distributions regardless of whether they will later drop out and get a GED or graduate
with a high school diploma. Thus, if 8th grade academic achievement explains most of the

26

variation in later postsecondary education outcomes, the unconditional estimates of the
at-risk groups in Panel A of Table 3 should be good estimates of the mean postsecondary
education outcomes of the two at-risk groups. On the other hand, Table 2 indicates some
small differences between eventual GED holders and high school graduates, and one
would want to account for these factors when contrasting the postsecondary education
outcomes of these two groups. To this end, we will estimate conditional mean differences
based on models that control for:

•

gender and race/ethnicity,

•

8th grade variables at the individual level that include age at 8th grade,
whether or not economically disadvantaged, and whether or not in special
education, an ESL program, or a gifted and talented program,

•

8th grade school-level variables from the Common Core of Data that
include total number of students in the school, urbanicity of school
location, average pupil teacher ratio in the school, separate variables for
the percentage of white, black, Hispanic, and students on free or reduced
lunch in the school,

•

Common Core of Data information from the last school that the student
attended before graduating or dropping out that is parallel to the variables
we use for the 8th grade school of attendance, and

•

district fixed effects.

Table 4 shows our estimates from a series of nested models using the groups of
control variables detailed above. Each column gives three different estimates of the
“GED effect” on PSE outcomes, where each of the three regressions in each column has

27

the same set of control variables but a different dependent variable. For example, the
estimates in the first row are from regressions where the dependent variable is an
indicator of whether an individual ever enrolled in a two- or four-year public
postsecondary institution in Texas within the first three years of receiving a GED or high
school diploma. The second dependent variable (second row) is the total number of
credits in which the individual had enrolled in the first three post-credential years.
Because of the low percentage of at-risk students who garner either a postsecondary
certificate or an associate’s degree, we create the third dependent variable (third row) by
combining these two outcomes into a single dependent variable: whether or not an
individual received either a certificate or an associate’s degree within the first four postcredential years.
<Table 4 about here>
All estimates are from models fit with Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) with robust
standard errors clustered at the district level reported.13 Model 1 in Table 4 controls only
for 8th grade school district fixed effects. The similarity of the estimated high school
graduate-GED differences in postsecondary education outcomes from Model 1 relative to
the unconditional estimates in Table 3 suggest that it is not going to be very important to
control for 8th grade district fixed effects. In addition, the estimates in the three
regressions change very little when controls for gender and ethnicity are added in Model
2.
When individual level 8th grade variables are added, the “GED disadvantage” in
ever being enrolled drops by about 15 percent, and the disadvantage in terms of

13

We obtain essentially identical results when using probit instead of OLS linear probability models to fit
the data when the two dichotomous variables are dependent variables in the model.

28

accumulated credits drops by about five percent. In analysis not shown here, examination
of these individual-level 8th grade controls shows that by far the most important variable
in explaining the GED-high school graduate differences is the age at which an individual
enters the 8th grade. Entering the 8th grade late, either from being held back prior to the 8th
grade or because first grade was entered late, is negatively correlated with postsecondary
enrollment, and a higher percentage of GED holders tend to enter the 8th grade late (28
percent of the at-risk GED holders compared to 22 percent of the eventual high school
graduates who were at-risk in the 8th grade).
There are few changes in the estimates as we add 8th grade school-of-attendance
and last-school-of-attendance controls in Models 4 and 5. In Model 6 we add a control for
whether or not a student was held back at some point between grades 9 through 12. There
are 334 students for whom we lack the data required to construct this variable; hence, the
reduction in sample size between Models 1-5 and Model 6.14 When this indicator of
being held back in high school is included in Model 6, the point estimates of the
postsecondary education “GED disadvantage” all fall to between two-thirds to threequarters of the Model 5 estimates. This result is being driven by the fact that students
who are retained in high school are much less likely to participate in later postsecondary
education, and GED holders are held back at higher rates in high school than are eventual
high school graduates.15 Our examination of the data show that 53 percent of the at-risk
GED holders were held back at some point in high school before they dropped out, while
only 14 percent of the at-risk high school graduates were held back at some point in
14

We note that the estimates based on the Models 1-5 specifications are essentially unchanged if fit on the
same sample as used in Model 6.
15
For example, the coefficient estimate on the “held back in high school” dummy variable in Model 6 is 0.20 and highly statistically significant when the dependent variable is “ever enrolled in postsecondary
education.”

29

grades 9-12. Given the impact on the estimates of including this indicator of high school
retention, a closer look at this phenomenon is warranted.
Table 5 provides the distribution of retained grades for those ever retained in a
grade while in high school. We note two facts in Table 5. First, in keeping with the
literature on grade retention, the largest percent of students ever retained repeat the 9th
grade. Second, we have to remember that the lower percentages of GED holders who are
retained in the later grades relative to high school graduates reflects, at least in part, the
fact that fewer numbers of these students make it to these latter grades because they have
already dropped out.
<Table 5 about here>
Table 6 provides an interesting look at the unconditional relationships between
education credential status (GED or high school graduate), being retained in high school,
and later postsecondary education. First, students who were held back for at least one
grade while in high school had worse postsecondary education outcomes than students
who were never held back, regardless of education credential status. It is worth noting,
however, that the retention-postsecondary education relationships are substantially
different for GED holders than for high school graduates. Relative to those who were
never held back a grade in high school, ever-retained high school graduates were half as
likely to have enrolled in postsecondary education (23.6 percent versus 49.9 percent),
about a fifth as likely to have earned a certificate or associate’s degree (1.4 percent versus
4.9), and they had enrolled in a third as many credits (7.4 mean credits versus 24.3).
Meanwhile, retained GED holders did have worse postsecondary education outcomes

30

than never-retained GED holders, but the differences are not nearly as large as is the case
for the high school graduates.
<Table 6 about here>
One way to summarize the relationships between education credential status and
high school retention status is to refit Model 6 from Table 4 and include a GED by high
school retention interaction. Table 7 gives the results from such a regression for each of
the three different postsecondary education outcomes we study. Using the estimates in
the first column of Table 7 as an example, there are three comparisons of interest. First,
the coefficient estimate on the “retained in high school” variable indicates that eventual
high school graduates who were held back at some point while in high school have a 23
percentage point lower enrollment rate in postsecondary education than do high school
graduates who were never held back. Meanwhile, the estimated coefficient on the “GED”
indicator suggests that GED holders who were never held back have a 24 percentage
point lower enrollment rate than high school graduates who were never retained. In the
comparison between GED holders who were retained and eventual high school graduates
who were retained, the GED disadvantage is much smaller, an enrollment rate that is 8.5
percentage points lower (-0.243 + 0.158). This general pattern holds across the other two
dependent variables in Table 7. In summary, the lessons of Table 7 are:
1. Students retained while in high school have worse postsecondary
education outcomes than students never retained regardless of education
credential status.

31

2. GED holders consistently obtain less postsecondary education than do
high school graduates whether looking within the retained-in-high-school
category or in the not-retained group.
3. GED holders and high school graduates who were held back at some point
in high school tend to look more like each other than do GED holders and
high school graduates who were never retained.
4. However, the groups with the most similar outcomes are GED holders
who were never held back and high school graduates who were retained at
some point between the 9th and 12th grades.
<Table 7 about here>
Observation 4 above brings up an interesting point. It could be that the relevant
decision facing students who are about to be held back while in high school is whether to
repeat the grade and persist to graduation or “cut one’s losses” and drop out now and get
a GED. If one thought that most of the GED holders in the not-retained-in-high-school
group actually faced grade retention but opted to drop out instead, then the comparisons
with the high school graduates who were held back at some point between the 9th and 12th
grades is compelling evidence that the dropout-GED decision was not so bad. On the
other hand, it may be that few of the never-retained GED holders ever faced high school
retention and therefore the retained high school graduates are not a particularly good
comparison group. An examination suggests this is the case. In the 8th grade eventual
GED holders who were never retained in high school had math and reading scores that
were both about two-thirds of a standard deviation higher than the scores of eventual high
school graduates who were retained in high school.

32

Special GED Subsamples
As a final exercise, we look at four subsamples of the at-risk GED group, where
each group is comprised of GED holders for whom the GED-postsecondary education
relationship might be substantively different than for the random GED holder in the atrisk group. The first group of dropouts for whom the GED might be particularly
important are those students who have made it most of the way through high school, but
who, for whatever reason, drop out in their last years of high school without graduating
and receiving a diploma. These students ostensibly have most of the benefits of the high
school experience that might be important for positive postsecondary education outcomes
since they almost finished high school. Perhaps the GED is a more important “gateway”
to postsecondary education for these “late dropouts” who may have garnered most of the
human and social capital associated with the high school experience than for those who
leave school earlier.
The second group we consider is composed of GED holders from the at-risk
group who obtained their GED within one year of dropping out of school. It might be that
dropouts who obtain their GED quickly are more prone to use the credential for accessing
postsecondary education than it typically the case. For example, this group might contain
a disproportionate number of students who either left high school because they felt they
were already prepared for postsecondary education or because they felt the quality of
their high school education was very low and would not further prepare them for
postsecondary education. Or, even among students who left high school for reasons
unrelated to any ex ante desire for postsecondary education, obtaining a GED quickly

33

after dropping out may reflect a desire to “stay on track” toward postsecondary education
as might have occurred had the student not dropped out.
The third group we consider is composed of those at-risk GED holders who
scored in the upper quartile of the GED exams. It may be that the most academically able
GED holders disproportionately use the credential to access postsecondary education. To
explore this possibility, we form this “high scoring” subsample by using individuals who
scored in the upper quartile in terms of their average score over the five tests that make
up the GED exams: reading, writing, science, social studies, and mathematics.
The final group we consider is composed of GED holders whose last school of
attendance before dropping out was a large urban high school. If these schools are
disproportionately of poor quality, then some dropouts in these schools may
systematically reason that they are better off to leave a low quality high school before
graduation, obtain a GED and then move directly on to postsecondary education rather
than spend more time in high school. The sample used to explore this question is
comprised of those individuals who attended a large high school in a large central city.
We define a “large” school to be one with a student body larger than 2,004 students, the
median student body size for a large central city high school in our data. For this analysis
only we limit not only the GED sample, but we also limit the comparison group to only
those high school graduates who graduated from large high schools in large central cities.
The estimates based on these four different samples are in Table 8. The first
column of Table 8 is the examination of “late dropouts,” those GED holders who
attended at least the 11th grade before dropping out. Out of the 6,520 total at-risk GED
holders, 2,220 attended at least the 11th grade before they dropped out. However, in spite

34

of the advantage of the extra years of high school relative to earlier dropouts, the “late
dropouts” did not have better postsecondary education outcomes than the full sample of
GED holders that we have seen in earlier estimates.
The second column of Table 8 presents the estimates for GED holders who
obtained their GED within one year of dropping out. Again, these estimates are little
different from the estimates of Model 5 in Table 4. In fact, looking across the other
columns, we see no real differences in the estimates for these special GED subsamples
relative to the fully specified model (Model 5) that uses the entire GED sample.
Separate regressions using only white, black, Hispanic, male, and female samples
were also fit using the fully specified model that employs the full set of controls. As with
the results using the special GED subsamples, the estimates based on these racial/ethnic
and gender subgroups were very similar to the estimates in Table 4. Finally, and of no
surprise given Figures 3 and 4, none of our estimates change if we include math and
reading scores as controls in any of the regressions.

Summary and Conclusions
This study focuses attention on a sample of academically “at risk” students who
were enrolled in the 8th grade in Texas public schools in the mid-1990s. After showing
that the eventual high school graduates and the eventual GED holders in this group were
very similar in the 8th grade, this study contrasts the postsecondary education outcomes of
these two groups as a way of examining the extent to which school dropouts use the GED
program as a route to postsecondary education relative to high school graduates.

35

Our study confirms some well known facts about academically at-risk students
and the education they attain beyond high school. Namely, students who are on the
academic margins in the year before high school are more prone to dropout, more likely
to be held back a grade in high school, and they tend to have lower levels of
postsecondary education enrollment rates than students with a more solid 8th grade
foundation. We also found, however, that at-risk 8th graders who graduate with a high
school diploma participate in postsecondary education at non-trivial rates. Almost half
(46 percent) of the school graduates in our sample who were labeled as “at risk” in the 8th
grade had enrolled in some postsecondary education within three years of graduating, and
they had enrolled for about two-thirds of a year worth of credits (21 credits). While these
are lower rates than high school graduates not designated as at-risk 8th graders (67
percent enrollment rates and 40 mean credits), they indicate that many academically
marginal students who persist through high school and graduate with a diploma go on to
garner some postsecondary education.
We present a less bright story for the 8th grade at-risk students who do not finish
high school but drop out and obtain a GED. The unconditional probability of these
students enrolling in postsecondary education within three years of obtaining a GED is 29
percentage points lower than the probability for the at-risk high school graduates. A wide
array of individual and school level controls (both 8th grade school and last school of
attendance), along with school district fixed effects, can only explain about 5 percentage
points of this disadvantage. Since the GED holders enroll at lower rates, they also have
enrolled for fewer credits, about 40 percent less. However, this difference in enrolled
credits is not completely driven by the relatively high percentage of never-enrolled GED

36

holders. Even among those who with positive postsecondary education enrollment rates,
GED holders have enrolled for substantially fewer credits than the at-risk high school
graduates.
While the relatively worse PSE outcomes of the GED holders are consistent with
what one would find in the literature on the GED-PSE relationship, this study makes two
important contributions to this literature. First, prior to this paper, the question at hand
has been “answered” via simple mean comparisons or by OLS regression estimates that
have lacked any underlying model that would help us understand and interpret the results.
By explicating the sequential decision process from dropping out, to obtaining a GED, to
making PSE decisions, the model developed in this paper brings structure to this problem
and illuminates the potential biases that could cause us to potentially overstate the
negative PSE effects of taking a “GED path” to PSE.
Second, while we do not argue that our estimates are free of bias, we do believe
that estimates based on the AR8 sample contain less negative bias than results typically
found in the literature. At least on cognitive skill measures that are closely linked to later
PSE outcomes, our AR8 sample is very well matched in the year prior to high school
entry.
Given the similarities of these two groups when they were in the 8th grade, how
can we explain the results in this paper? We examine in turn four different possible
explanations.

The Post-GED Horizon in the TSMP Data is Too Short

37

As explained earlier, the TSMP data do not provide any postsecondary education
information beyond a three year post-GED or post-high-school-diploma window. It could
be that given more time, we might see GED holders substantially close the postsecondary
educational attainment gap. We can use NELS 88 data to examine this proposition. We
first note that if we limit postsecondary education enrollment in a public institution in the
NELS 88 data to the same three-year window used in this paper, we get very similar
results. In a regression using NELS 88 students who were at-risk in the 8th grade and
controlling for gender, race/ethnicity, family structure, parental education level, primary
home language, and socioeconomic status (all measured in the 8th grade year), we find
that GED holders in the NELS 88 data had a 23.2 percentage point lower probability (pvalue < 0.0001) of having ever enrolled in a public postsecondary education institution
within three-years than did high school graduates. Recall that estimates using TSMP data
point to a 23.9 percentage point GED disadvantage (Model 5 of Table 4). Thus, results
using a three-year window are virtually identical using either NELS 88 or TSMP data
though the specifications are slightly different across the two data sets owing to the
available control variables in each.
In an identical specification using NELS 88 data that allows for a six-year
window, GED holders do close the postsecondary education gap somewhat. If GED
holders and high school graduates are allowed six years after graduation or credentialing
to garner postsecondary education, the GED disadvantage drops to an 18 percentage
point lower probability of having ever enrolled in a public postsecondary education

38

institution.16 Thus, a longer horizon for observing postsecondary outcomes could explain
away some, but not very much, of the GED disadvantage that we observe in the first three
post-credential years using TSMP data.17

Selection on Unobserved Heterogeneity
It could be the case that even though our two groups are very similar on
observables at “baseline” in the 8th grade, they are either already dissimilar on
unobservable dimensions related to postsecondary education outcomes or heterogeneity
related to these outcomes emerges over time. In the terms of our model, estimates of the
causal effect of taking the “GED path” to PSE suffer from negative bias due to either

σGED,w > 0 or σGED,z > 0
or both.
While this gives us the econometric solution, there are also implications for policy
and practice since this scenario suggests that within the at-risk pool of 8th graders,
individuals with low unobserved potential for going on to college systematically select
into the “GED path” that includes as a first step, dropping out of school. What are the
policy implications of this explanation for our negative GED results?

16

The raw enrollment percentages in NELS after six years are 0.60 for high school graduates and 0.41 for
GED holders. This compares to 0.56 for high school graduates and 0.31 for GED holders after three years
in the NELS data.
17
Note that neither can we explain the GED disadvantage by the fact that the TSMP data limits us to public
postsecondary education attainment. If we fit the three-year and six-year NELS regressions using
enrollment in any postsecondary institution, public or private, the GED-high school gap widens in both
cases (-0.28 in the three-year regression and -0.22 in the six year regression). This is because while at-risk
GED holders do tend to go to either private, for-profit institutions or private less-than-4-year colleges at
slightly higher rates than do at-risk high school graduates (10.9 percent versus 7.9 percent), at-risk high
school graduates tend to go to private four-year colleges at much higher rates than do at-risk GED holders
(9.2 percent versus 1.6 percent).

39

To the extent that low college-going potential is largely driven by behavioralbased barriers such as attitudes toward or beliefs about postsecondary education, policies
aimed at increasing the postsecondary education attainment of GED holders would have
to focus on changing behavior and beliefs rather than improving skills or removing
institutional barriers to postsecondary education participation. Difficulties in designing
such public policies are easy to imagine, beginning with the fact that barriers connected
to individual beliefs and attitudes do not appear in any administrative data in ways that
could be used ex ante to determine the optimal mix or targeting of GED-related programs
that might improve postsecondary education attainment. Thus, this explanation for the
worse PSE outcomes of GED holders suggests a limited, or at the least, not-well-defined
role that public policy might play in ameliorating the situation.

The Persistence of the Drop Out “Shock”
As our model demonstrated, we would expect estimates of the causal effect of the
“GED path” to be negatively biased if the period t1 exogenous shock had a persistent
negative effect on education investment decisions. Thus, even if our use of the AR8
sample meant that

σGED,w = 0 and σGED,z = 0,
any persistent effects of a teenage pregnancy, parental divorce, or family economic
hardship that dampened the PSE decisions of GED holders would lend a negative bias to
the causal effect of the GED on PSE outcomes. Again the question is, what is the
information content here for policy and practice?

40

To the extent that these random shocks with persistent effects are responsible for
the results we see, rather than unobserved heterogeneity, policies aimed at improving the
postsecondary education outcomes of GED holders may be in a somewhat better situation
to have a positive impact. At least we would not be expecting adult education policy to
change beliefs and attitudes about postsecondary education. On the other hand, it is not
clear how to go about designing coordinated and systematic programming that could
address the different personal circumstances that would result from the wide variety of
negative shocks that could be influencing both the school-leaving and the postsecondary
education decisions. Nevertheless, there is potentially more promise in assessing and
addressing barriers to postsecondary education participation around tangible issues such
as child care, financial aid, or transportation than in trying to alter behavioral-related
barriers to further education.

The GED Program Is a Weak Route into Postsecondary Education
A fourth explanation is that our estimates are free of bias and represent the true,
negative causal effect of “assignment” the GED path relative to the high school
graduation path. That is, this explanation assumes that

σGED,w = 0, σGED,z = 0, and λ = 0.
If these strong assumptions hold, then otherwise identical individuals who find
themselves in either the GED or the high school graduation path have very different
probabilities of going on to postsecondary education. What happened to the dropout who
obtained a GED that shifted the college-going probability? What is there about going

41

through the GED process relative to finishing the last years of high school that lower
GED holders’ probability of obtaining some postsecondary education.
To the extent that our estimates are unbiased and reflect problems within the GED
program, then changes in policies and practices of the GED program hold some promise
for increasing the postsecondary education outcomes of GED holders. Under this
scenario, we would not have to develop programs designed to alter attitudes or beliefs of
individuals, nor would we have to address programmatically the great variety of life
circumstances that cause a person to drop out and then persist to affect the postsecondary
education calculus. In this case, we “only” need to figure out how to redesign or
supplement the GED process so that the very fact of using this route to “school
completion” as opposed to finishing high school does not negatively alter postsecondary
education probabilities.
Of course, this may be a difficult task. For example, it might be that the actual
time spent in the last years of high school matriculation positively influence
postsecondary education attainment. Perhaps it is the additional human or social capital,
or maybe the college guidance one receives in the last years of high school that matter.
Perhaps it is the interaction between these and other factors that affects the postsecondary
education decisions of students and their families. The issue is that there may be
something about “the high school experience” that is difficult, if not impossible, to
replicate in the GED setting.
On the other hand, improving the postsecondary education outcomes associated
with receipt of a GED might be a relatively straightforward task. Perhaps a substantial
difference could be made by de-emphasizing the role of the GED is a “terminal”

42

education credential, and shifting the emphasis to using the GED as a route to
postsecondary education. Moving to this model would potentially require changes in the
perceptions and attitudes of GED administrators, teachers, and students, as well as
changes in the formal and informal linkages between GED preparation and testing
programs and local postsecondary education institutions. There is evidence that the adult
education field has been moving in this direction in recent years as research emphasizing
both the relatively weak economic benefits of the GED and the growing economic
importance of postsecondary education have become widely disseminated and accepted
in the field. We note that the extent to which this “programmatic reform” approach might
increase the postsecondary attainment of GED holders depends on both the efficacy of
any changes in the GED program as well as the extent to which this last explanation is
responsible for the results we see. That is, if the “programmatic” explanation explains
only a small part of the results we see, then only small improvements in college-going
rates would result from even substantial and effective changes in the GED program.
This study has shown that among at-risk students who look very similar in the 8th
grade, individuals who subsequently drop out and obtain a GED acquire substantially less
postsecondary education in the first post-credential years than do the high school
graduates. Given the importance of postsecondary education in today’s economy and
society, this is a fact that should attract public attention. Our closing discussion points to
the importance of trying to understand the underlying causes of the discrepancy in
outcomes between GED holders and high school graduates. The reason is that both the
policy prescriptions and the potential for the success of such prescriptions are very
different depending upon whether the observed differences in outcomes are the result of

43

behavioral factors related to GED acquisition, persistent negative effects associated with
drop-out-inducing shocks, or practices and policies of the GED program itself. Research
that could help sort out these explanations could inform public policy, lead to the more
efficient use of public monies, and potentially increase the postsecondary education
levels of students who are currently at the mercy of an economy that offers few routes to
economic stability and self-sufficiency for those lacking any postsecondary education.

44

References

Adelman, Clifford. "The Toolbox Revisited: Paths to Degree Completion from High
School through College," Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education,
2006, 192.
Berktold, Jennifer; Geis, Sonya and Kaufman, Phillip. "Subsequent Educational
Attainment of High School Dropouts," Washington, D.C.: National Center for
Education Statistics, 1998.
Boesel, David; Alsalam, Nabeel and Smith, Thomas M. "Educational and Labor Market
Performance of Ged Recipients," Washington, D.C.: Office of Educational
Research and Improvement, Dept. of Education, 1998.
Heckman, James J. and Rubinstein, Yona. "The Importance of Noncognitive Skills:
Lessons from the Ged Testing Program." American Economic Review, 2001,
91(2), pp. 145-49.
Hexter, Holly and Andersen, Charles J. "Admission and Credit Policies for Adult
Learners," Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education, 1986, 25.
Kane, Thomas J. and Rouse, Cecilia. "Labor Market Returns to Two-Year and Four-Year
College." American Economic Review, 1995, 85(3), pp. 600-14.
McMillen, Marilyn M. and Kaufman, Phillip. "Dropout Rates in the United States: 1994,"
Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Education, 1996, 146.
Murnane, Richard J., Willett, John B., and Tyler, John H. "Who Benefits from a Ged?
Evidence from High School and Beyond." The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 2000, 82(1), pp. 23-37.
Murnane, Richard J.; Willett, John B. and Boudett, Kathryn Parker. "Do Male Dropouts
Benefit from Obtaining a Ged, Postsecondary Education, and Training?"
Evaluation Review, 1999, 22(5), pp. 475-502.
Murnane, Richard J., Willett, John B., and Boudett, Katherine P. "Does Acquisition of a
GED Lead to More Training, Post-Secondary Education, and Military Service for
School Dropouts?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1997, 51(1), pp. 10016.
Orr, Larry L. Social Experiments: Evaluating Public Programs with Experimental
Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., 1999.

45

Texas Education Agency. "1996-97 Report on High School Completion Rates," Austin,
Texas, 1999.
Tyler, John. "Does the Ged Improve Earnings? Estimates from a Sample of Both
Successful and Unsuccessful Ged Candidates." Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 2004, 57(4), pp. 579-98.
Tyler, John H., Murnane, Richard J., and Willett, John B. "Who Benefits from a Ged?
Evidence for Females from High School and Beyond." Economics of Education
Review, 2003, 22(3), pp. 237-47.
Tyler, John H.; Murnane, Richard J. and Willett, John B. "Estimating the Labor Market
Signaling Value of the Ged." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115(2), pp.
431-68.

46

Table 1. Distributions of education outcomes of 1988 8th graders as of December 2000 by
type and timing of high school completion status.
Percent
BA

Percent
AA

Percent
certificate

Percent
no
degree,
still
enrolled

Percent
once
enrolled,
not now

Percent
never
enrolled

Row
total

On time high
school
graduates*

37.4

6.0

3.6

5.9

30.3

16.8

1.0

Late high
school
graduates

4.3

6.5

4.3

8.7

41.3

34.8

1.0

GED holders

1.2

2.4

4.9

9.8

34.1

47.6

1.0

Percent
ever
enrolled

Percent
never
enrolled

Uncredentialed
1.0
13.0
87.0
dropouts**
* A student in the 1988 8th grade cohort graduated “on time” if they graduated by July 1992.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Table L-12, page 175 of Adelman (2006).
**
The authors’ examination of the roughly 13 percent of uncredentialed dropouts who ever enrolled in a
postsecondary institution indicates that about 4 percent had enrolled in private, for-profit institutions and
the bulk of the rest had enrolled in 2-year or less than 2-year public institutions.

Table 2. Descriptive statistics of at-risk 8th graders (AR8 sample) from the 1994 8th grade
cohort who will eventually earn a GED or a high school diploma (standard deviations of
continuous variables in parentheses).

Individual level information
Mean age at first day of 8th grade
Mean 8th grade standardized TAAS math scorea
Mean 8th grade standardized TAAS reading scoreb
Percent…
Male
White
Black
Hispanic
other race/ethnicity
economically disadvantaged
special education
English-Second-Language
in gifted and talented program
attended 8th grade in large central city
attended 8th grade in mid-size central city
attended 8th grade in urban fringe of large central city
attended 8th grade in urban fringe of mid-size central city
attended 8th grade in large town
attended 8th grade in small town
attended 8th grade in rural locale
started late or held back a grade before 8th grade
8th grade school informationc
Total students in the school
Pupil teacher ratio
School percent…
White
Black
Hispanic
on free or reduced lunch

Eventual
GED
holders

Eventual
high school
graduates

13.4
-0.233
(0.010)
-0.184
(0.012)

13.2*
-0.260*
(0.008)
-0.266 *
(0.009)

58.9
52.7
11.1
34.6
1.5
43.6
6.9
1.5
2.3
26.6
22.4
17.8
3.4
2.1
17.6
10.1
28.1

49.4*
42.1*
20.1*
35.7
2.1*
42.8
13.1*
4.5*
3.5*
26.4
20.7*
13.6*
3.9
1.8
21.1*
12.5*
22.3*

851.5
16.8

824.8*
16.7

49.6
14.6
33.4
35.9

47.0*
15.4*
35.4*
38.3*

N
6,520
11,937
* = GED and high school graduate means are different at the 0.05 level.
a. This statistic is based on the standardized residuals of a regression of the TAAS 8th grade math test score
on year-of-attempt dummies using the 4,754 eventual GED holders and the 9,611 eventual high school
graduates who have non-missing 8th grade TAAS math scores and who were designated as “at risk” in the
8th grade.
b. This statistic is based on the standardized residuals of a regression of the TAAS 8th grade reading test
score on year-of-attempt dummies using the 4,675 eventual GED holders and the 9,600 eventual high
school graduates who have non-missing 8th grade TAAS reading scores and who were designated as “at
risk” in the 8th grade.
c. All school level information was obtained by merging data from the U.S. Department of Education’s
Common Core of Data.

Table 3. Postsecondary education outcomes by education credential and 8th grade at-risk
status (standard deviations in parentheses).
At risk in the 8th grade
(AR8 sample)
Eventual
Eventual
GED
high
holders
school
graduates

Postsecondary education outcomes

Panel A: Full sample
Percent who…
ever enrolled in a postsecondary
education institution
ever earned a postsecondary certificate
ever earned an associates degree
Mean enrolled credits
N

Not at risk in the 8th grade
Eventual
GED
holders

Eventual
high
school
graduates

18.2

46.1*

27.1

67.4*

0.7
0.3
5.5
(17.2)
6,520

1.8*
2.6*
21.9*
(32.1)
59,685

0.6
0.5
10.9
(26.8)
5,838

1.4*
4.0*
40.5*
(40.2)
83,005

Panel B: Conditional on having ever enrolled
Percent who…
ever earned a postsecondary certificate
ever earned an associate’s degree
Mean enrolled credits

1.6
2.7
1.3
1.2
5.4
1.7
30.5
47.5*
40.2
(29.4)
(31.9)
(38.4)
N
1,184
5,505
1,583
* = within at-risk group GED and high school graduate means are different at the 0.05 level.

1.6*
5.7*
60.1*
(35.0)
11,183

Table 4. Estimated postsecondary education outcomes of GED holders relative to the
outcomes of high school graduates in a sample of at-risk 8th graders (AR8 sample with
standard errors in parentheses).
Dependent variables:
1. Ever enrolled in postsecondary
education
2. Accumulated credits enrolled
3. Awarded a certificate or AA
Degree
Control variables:
Gender and race/ethnicity
Individual level 8th grade
variables
School level 8th grade variables
School level variables of last
school attended
Retained in high school
District fixed effects
R-squared with dependent variable 1
R-squared with dependent variable 2
R-squared with dependent variable 3
N

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

-0.290
(0.009)
-17.2
(0.608)
-0.032
(0.003)

-0.283
(0.009)
-16.5
(0.588)
-0.033
(0.003)

-0.244
(0.008)
-14.4
(0.525)
-0.032
(0.003)

-0.244
(0.008)
-14.4
(0.525)
-0.032
(0.003)

-0.239
(0.008)
-13.9
(0.509)
-0.032
(0.003)

-0.169
(0.008)
-9.5
(0.491)
-0.024
(0.003)

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

0.11
0.10
0.08

0.12
0.12
0.08

0.22
0.20
0.08

0.22
0.21
0.09

0.23
0.21
0.09

0.25
0.23
0.09

18,457

18,457

18,457

18,457

18,457

18,164

Table 5. Distribution of retained grades in high school for students who were “at risk” in
the 8th grade (AR8 sample) by education credential.a
GED holders

High school
graduates

Percent held back in…
9th grade
69.7
56.8
10th grade
26.2
23.3
11th grade
9.7
16.1
12th grade
1.6
10.3
a. Columns sum to more than 100 percent since some students were held back in multiple grades.

Table 6. Postsecondary outcomes by high school retention status and education credential
for students who were “at risk” in the 8th grade (AR8 sample).
Postsecondary education outcome
Percent who…
ever enrolled in a postsecondary
education institution
ever earned a postsecondary
certificate or AA degree
Mean credits earned

GED holders
Not retained
Retained
in HS
in HS

High school graduates
Not retained
Retained
in HS
in HS

20.2

16.4

49.9

23.6

1.1

0.8

4.7

1.4

6.9

4.2

24.3

7.4

Table 7. Conditional estimates of postsecondary education outcomes by education
credential and high school retention status for students who were “at risk” in the 8th grade
(AR8 sample and standard errors in parentheses).
Ever enrolled in
postsecondary
education

GED
GED*Retained in high school
Control variables:
Gender and race/ethnicity
Individual level 8th grade
variables
School level 8th grade variables
School level variables of last
school attended
Retained in high school
District fixed effects
R-squared
N

Accumulated
enrollment
credits

-0.243
(0.010)
0.158
(0.017)

Earned a
postsecondary
certificate or
associate’s
degree
-0.036
(0.004)
0.026
(0.005)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

-0.231
(0.013)
Yes

-0.029
(0.004)
Yes

-14.6
(0.790)
Yes

0.25

0.09

0.23

18,164

18,164

18,164

-14.3
(0.636)
10.1
(0.921)

Table 8. Estimated postsecondary education outcomes of selected groups of GED holders
relative to the outcomes of high school graduates in a sample of at-risk 8th graders (AR8
sample and standard errors in parentheses).
Sample uses GED holders…

Dependent variables:
1. Ever enrolled in postsecondary
education
2. Accumulated credits enrolled
3. Awarded a certificate or AA
Degree
Control variables:
Gender and race/ethnicity
Individual level 8th grade
variables
School level 8th grade variables
School level variables of last
school attended
District fixed effects
R-squared with dependent variable 1
R-squared with dependent variable 2
R-squared with dependent variable 3
Number GED holders
Total N

whose last
grade was at
least 11th
grade

whose time
from drop out
to GED was
one year or
less

who scored in
upper quartile
of GED scores

whose last
school
attended was
large, urban
school

-0.290
(0.011)
-16.7
(0.708)
-0.033
(0.004)

-0.214
(0.009)
-13.0
(0.557)
-0.033
(0.003)

-0.243
(0.011)
-14.4
(0.665)
-0.030
(0.004)

-0.291
(0.025)
-19.4
(1.38)
-0.026
(0.007)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.23
0.21
0.09

0.23
0.22
0.09

0.23
0.21
0.09

0.22
0.23
0.04

2,220
14,157

4,184
16,121

2,429
14,366

945
2,809

Figure 1. Age-corrected 8th grade math score distributions by later education status.

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Math Score Distributions by Education Group

-4

-2
0
Standardized 8th Grade Math Score
Non-attempters
GEDs

2

GED failers
HS grads

Figure 2. Age-corrected 8th grade reading score distributions by later education status

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Reading Score Distributions by Education Group

-4

-2
0
Standardized 8th Grade Reading Score
Non-attempters
GEDs

GED failers
HS grads

2

Figure 3. Age-corrected 8th grade math score distributions of at-risk students (AR8
sample) by later education status.

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Math Score Distributions by Education Group
of At-Risk Students

-4

-2
0
Standardized 8th Grade Math Score
Non-attempters
GEDs

2

GED failers
HS grads

Figure 4. Age-corrected 8th grade reading score distributions of at-risk students (AR8
sample) by later education status.

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Reading Score Distributions by Education Group
of At-Risk Students

-4

-2
0
Standardized 8th Grade Reading Score
Non-attempters
GEDs

GED failers
HS grads

2

Figure 5. Age-corrected 8th grade math score distributions by later education status and
8th grade at-risk status.

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Math Score Distributions by Education Group
and At-Risk Status

-4

-2
0
Standardized 8th Grade Math Score
Not at risk GEDs
At risk GEDs

2

Not at risk HS grads
At risk HS grads

Figure 6. Age-corrected 8th grade reading score distributions by later education status and
8th grade at-risk status.

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Reading Score Distributions by Education Group
and At-Risk Status

-4

-2
0
Standardized 8th Grade Math Score
Not at risk GEDs
At risk GEDs

Not at risk HS grads
At risk HS grads

2

Table A1. Sequential sample selection results for the 1994 8th grade cohort in the TSMP
sample.
Row
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

9

GED holders
Total in 1998 graduation cohort
Everyone with a valid high school
graduation or GED receipt date
Keep only those GED holders who did not
obtain their GED while in prison
Keep only those GED holders with valid
school leaving date given GED receipt date
Everyone who has valid 8th grade
information
Drop individuals who appear as the only
person in a district in the data
Everyone who received a GED or high
school diploma between 1994 and 1999
Everyone with school-level information on
both their 8th grade school and their school
of last attendance before graduating or
dropping out
Students designated as “at risk” in the 8th
grade

20,758
20,757

Regular high school
graduates
36,945
36,767

19,467

36,767

18,423

36,767

15,419

32,418

15,409

32,385

13,859

31,550

12,358

28,538

6,520

11,937

Table A2. Descriptive statistics of GED holders and high school graduates in the 1994 8th
grade cohort (standard deviations of continuous variables in parentheses).

Individual level information
Mean age at first day of 8th grade
Mean 8th grade TAAS math scorea
Mean 8th grade TAAS reading scoreb
Percent…
male
white
black
Hispanic
other race/ethnicity
economically disadvantaged
special education
English-Second-Language
in gifted and talented program
attended 8th grade in large central city
attended 8th grade in mid-size central city
attended 8th grade in urban fringe of large central city
attended 8th grade in urban fringe of mid-size central city
attended 8th grade in large town
attended 8th grade in small town
attended 8th grade in rural locale
started late or held back a grade before 8th grade
designated as academically “at risk”
8th grade school informationc
Total students in the school
Pupil teacher ratio
School percent…
white
black
Hispanic
on free or reduced lunch
Postsecondary education outcomes within 3 years of diploma or
certificate
Percent who…
ever enrolled in a postsecondary education institution
ever earned a postsecondary certificate
ever earned an associates degree
Mean enrolled credits

Eventual
GED
holders

Eventual
high school
graduates

13.3
(0.54)
42.8
(9.6)
36.3
(7.4)

13.1*
(0.43)
46.0*
(10.2)
38.0*
(7.5)

56.1
61.3
8.8
28.3
1.6
37.0
6.6
1.2
5.4
23.4
22.5
19.3
4.0
2.0
17.2
11.7
25.1
52.7

47.9*
57.1*
13.8*
26.1*
3.1*
29.4*
9.1*
2.5*
14.1*
22.3*
20.9*
16.6*
4.1
1.8
21.0*
13.3*
16.3*
41.8*

847.2
17.8

838.7*
19.8

54.1
13.8
29.6
32.6

54.2
13.6
29.6
32.4

22.4
0.6
0.4
8.1
(22.5)

58.5*
1.6*
3.4*
32.7*
(38.1)

N
12,358
28,538
* = GED and high school graduate means are different at the 0.05 level.
a. This statistic is calculated over the 9,040 eventual GED holders and the 23,138 eventual high school
graduates with non-missing 8th grade TAAS math scores.

b. This statistic is calculated over the 8,895 eventual GED holders and 23,141 eventual high school
graduates with non-missing 8th grade TAAS reading scores.
c. All school level information was obtained by merging data from the U.S. Department of Education’s
Common Core of Data.

