                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO SMALL BUSINESSES CREATE MORE JOBS? NEW EVIDENCE FROM THE
                 NATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT TIME SERIES

                                           David Neumark
                                            Brandon Wall
                                            Junfu Zhang

                                        Working Paper 13818
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13818


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




Neumark is a Professor of Economics at UCI, Senior Fellow at the Public Policy Institute of California,
Research Associate at the NBER, and Research Fellow at IZA. Wall is a Ph.D. candidate in economics
at Stanford University. Zhang is an Assistant Professor of Economics at Clark University. Neumark's
and Wall's research was supported by the Kauffman Foundation. All views expressed are our own,
and do not represent those of the Kauffman Foundation, the Public Policy Institute of California, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David Neumark, Brandon Wall, and Junfu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Small Businesses Create More Jobs? New Evidence from the National Establishment Time
Series
David Neumark, Brandon Wall, and Junfu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 13818
February 2008
JEL No. J20,L25,L53

                                              ABSTRACT

We use a new database, the National Establishment Time Series (NETS), to revisit the debate about
the role of small businesses in job creation. Birch (e.g., 1987) argued that small firms are the most
important source of job creation in the U.S. economy, but Davis et al. (1996a) argued that this conclusion
was flawed, and based on improved methods and using data for the manufacturing sector they concluded
that there was no relationship between establishment size and net job creation. Using the NETS data,
we examine evidence for the overall economy, as well as for different sectors. The results indicate
that small establishments and small firms create more jobs, on net, although the difference is much
smaller than what is suggested by Birch's methods. However, the negative relationship between establishment
size and job creation is much less clear for the manufacturing sector, which may explain some of the
earlier findings contradicting Birch's conclusions.


David Neumark                                        Junfu Zhang
Department of Economics                              Deparment of Economics
University of California, Irvine                     Clark University
3151 Social Science Plaza                            Worcester, MA 01610
Irvine, CA 92697-5100                                juzhang@clarku.edu
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Brandon Wall
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
brandon.wall@gmail.com
1. Introduction

         Ever since the provocative work of David Birch (1979, 1981, and 1987), researchers have paid

considerable attention to the role of small businesses in job creation.1 The central thesis of Birch’s

research was that small firms are the most important source of job creation in the U.S. economy. Birch

(1979, 1981) provided the first evidence in support of the argument that small businesses are the primary

engines of job growth, claiming that 66% of all net new jobs in the United States during 1969-1976 were

created by firms with 20 or fewer employees and 81.5% were created by firms with 100 or fewer

employees. Later, Birch (1987) argued that during the period 1981-1985, firms with fewer than 20

employees accounted for 82% of employment growth via expansion and contraction of existing firms

(Figure 1-3, p. 14), and 88.1% of overall employment growth (Figure 1-5, p. 16).

         Birch’s argument about the important role of small business in job creation captured the

imagination of both the popular press and politicians because it fit perfectly into the historical context.

The U.S. federal government had a long tradition of supporting small businesses. As early as 1953, the

U.S. Congress passed the Small Business Act with the intention to aid, counsel, assist, and protect the

interests of small businesses. Under this act, the federal government established the Small Business

Administration to ensure that a fair proportion of government contracts went to small businesses. The

Small Business Administration also makes direct loans and guarantees bank loans to small businesses,

based on the perspective that assisting small businesses is important to preserve free competitive

enterprise and to maintain and strengthen the U.S. economy.2 Birch’s findings fed into this thinking and

quickly became conventional wisdom.3 Since then, his findings have often been cited as justification for

favorable government regulations, tax incentives, and support programs for small businesses.4 Birch’s


1
  See, for example, Baldwin and Picot (1995), Barnes and Haskel (2002), Broersma and Gautier (1997), Davis et al.
(1996a, 1996b), Hohti (2000), and Wagner (1995).
2
  See http://www.sba.gov/aboutsba/index.html (viewed October 31, 2007).
3
  See Davis et al. (1996b) for a long list of quotes from the media and political speeches that recite this conventional
wisdom.
4
  A series of legislative actions has continued the tradition of helping small businesses since Birch’s work, including,
for example: the Small Business Economic Policy Act of 1980; the Small Business Innovation Development Act of
1982; the Small Business Competitiveness Demonstration Program Act of 1988; the Small Business Technology
Transfer Act of 1992; the National Small Business Act of 1996; the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996; the

                                                             1
work appears to have had a lasting effect on U.S. policy. For example, the U.S. Small Business

Administration has an Office of Advocacy (for small businesses) that still trumpets Birch’s findings in

trying to help small businesses with regard to regulatory constraints, taxation, etc.5

         Birch’s work also attracted considerable criticism. Brown et al. (1990) point out that the number

of jobs created by an employer is not the only thing that matters. Spurred by Birch’s findings and the

attention they attracted, Brown et al. (1990) compare jobs created by small firms with those created by

large firms. They argue that jobs created by small firms are less desirable because they tend to exist for a

shorter period of time, pay lower wages, and have less generous fringe benefits in terms of health

insurance, vacation, and pension plans. In addition, they argue that small firms tend to have poorer

working conditions, provide less job training, and have higher job turnover rates. Based on these findings,

they recommend that policymakers should be cautious about encouraging policies to help small firms.

Although the argument of Brown et al. is an important one, it is not the focus of our paper.

         Second, focusing more specifically on the job creation debate, Davis et al. (1996a) criticize the

calculation used by Birch, which divides firms into size classes and then examines the variation of job

growth across size classes. In particular, they argue that these calculations are subject to a “regression

fallacy” that leads to upward bias in the estimated contribution of small firms to job growth. When they

use a calculation that, they argue, is not prone to this bias, with data on the manufacturing sector from the

Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) covering the period 1973-1988, they conclude that employment

growth appears to have “no systematic relationship to average plant size” (p. 68).

         There is a parallel, yet largely separate, industrial organization literature that considers a related

question: How does employment growth vary by firm size? Much of this literature responds to what is


Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996; the Small Business Reauthorization Act of 1997; the
Small Business Franchise Act of 1999; the Small Business Procurement Competition Act of 2001; the Small
Business Paperwork Relief Act of 2002; and the Small Business Health Fairness Act of 2005. In determining
eligibility for most of these programs, the Small Business Administration specifies size standards on an industry-by-
industry basis, most commonly based on number of employees, but sometimes based instead on annual receipts.
The employee size thresholds range from 100 for wholesale trade to 1,500 for industries such as petroleum
refineries, air transportation, and telecommunications. (See
http://www.sba.gov/idc/groups/public/documents/sba_homepage/serv_sstd_tablepdf.pdf, viewed October 31, 2007,
for a complete list.)
5
  See http://www.sba.gov/advo/25ann.html and http://www.sba.gov/advo/mission.html, viewed October 7, 2007.

                                                            2
known as “Gibrat’s Law,” which states that firm growth rates are independent of size (Gibrat, 1931). As

a behavioral conjecture proposed to explain the observed firm size distribution, Gibrat’s law has

generated a large amount of research testing its validity; see the review in Sutton (1997). This research is

motivated by the desire for a better understanding of the behavior of industrial organizations rather than

by the goal of informing policy with respect to job creation by small versus large businesses.

Nevertheless, it does have implications for the question of whether small firms create more jobs. For

example, if firm growth is indeed independent of firm size, then on average the proportion of jobs created

by small firms is solely determined by the employment share of small firms. In other words, if Gibrat’s

law holds and if large firms have a bigger employment share, it is impossible for small firms to create

most of the new jobs.

         In this paper, we use a new database, the National Establishment Time Series (NETS), which was

constructed using the most recent waves of the Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) data. The availability of this

new database provides a valuable opportunity to revisit the Birch thesis as well as the conclusions drawn

by Davis et al. Given that Davis et al.’s results come solely from the manufacturing sector, it is important

to ask whether their conclusions apply to the overall economy, and to other sectors of the economy, which

we are able to do using the NETS data (although because of data constraints our analysis is limited to

California).6 Also, the answer to the questions addressed by this research may depend on the period

studied. In particular, innovative start-ups appeared to have played an important role in the Internet

revolution and the boom of the “new economy” in the late 1990s (Audretsch and Thurik, 2001), raising




6
  Indeed, there are reasons to believe that growth patterns in the manufacturing sector may not apply to the rest of
the economy. As Klepper and Graddy (1990) observed, the number of firms in an industry will grow first, then
decline sharply, and level off eventually. Thus, new and mature industries tend to show different industrial
structures and growth patterns. For example, one may find a large number of new (and thus small) firms in a new
industry, which grow fast and contribute a large share of employment growth. On the contrary, a mature industry
may be shrinking and usually it is the smaller firms that exit first and thus constitute a large share of job loss. One of
the most prominent features of the U.S. manufacturing sector is that its total employment (relative to the U.S. total)
has been continuously declining since 1950 (Sachs and Shatz, 1994). Many manufacturing industries are mature
ones and it is not surprising to find a limited role of small firms in job creation in that sector. But non-
manufacturing sectors are different in that there are many new industries in which small firms may well create a
larger share of new jobs.

                                                              3
the possibility that in this period (and extending beyond the manufacturing sector) new (and thus mostly

small) firms contributed more to employment growth.7,8

2. Previous Research

         2.1 Birch’s hypothesis and Davis et al.’s critique

         Birch’s work prompted numerous researchers to consider his methods and to test his hypothesis

in different countries.9 Focusing first on methods, Davis et al. (1996a) criticized the statistical analysis

leading to Birch’s conclusions, pointing out that when businesses are classified by size for a given base

year, two types of firms will “accidentally” fall into a smaller size category: firms that are not small but

have just experienced a transitory negative shock to their employment and appear to be small for the

moment; and firms that are not small but are mistakenly classified as small due to random measurement

errors. If such transitory shocks or random measurement errors are not highly serially correlated, both

types of “small” firms will “grow” fast over the next year only because of regression to the mean. A

reverse argument can be made for large firms. That is, some large firms are categorized as large only

because of positive transitory shocks and random measurement errors. These firms tend to experience

negative growth if the transitory shocks or the measurement errors are serially uncorrelated, leading to a

downward bias in the estimated growth rate of large firms.10,11 To avoid this statistical pitfall, Davis et al.

propose computing job creation and destruction rates from the base period t to period t+1 relative to the




7
  Although young firms and small firms overlap a great deal, they are conceptually distinct groups. Most research,
following the tradition established by Birch, focuses on the dichotomy of small and large firms. See Neumark et al.
(2006) for some discussion of the contribution to job growth by young and old firms.
8
  Differences associated with the “new economy” may be particularly pronounced in data from California.
9
  Much of the latter research appeared in Small Business Economics, the founding of which was partly inspired by
Birch’s work (Acs and Audretsch, 1989).
10
   Leonard (1987) reports some direct evidence consistent with regression to the mean in establishment size (Table
6.7), and suggests that it is attributable to real dynamics, rather than measurement error (p. 154).
11
   Davis et al. (1996a) and Kirchhoff and Green (1998) point out that many studies prior to Birch (1979), which did
not use longitudinal data, could have either overstated or understated job growth due to smaller firms or larger firms,
depending on whether firms were on average shrinking or growing. Lacking establishment-level data, these pre-
Birch studies typically calculated the number of new jobs in each size category as the difference between the
number of jobs in the size category this year and the number of jobs in the same size category in the previous year.
This procedure wrongly assumes that firms do not move between size categories. Thus, for example, in periods in
which firms are on average growing, this results in overstatement of job growth in large firms because jobs created
when firms grow into a larger size class are mistakenly interpreted as job creation by firms in that size class.

                                                             4
average employment level in these two periods.12 Davis et al. argue that this regression fallacy fully

explains the relationship between establishment size and job growth. As noted in the Introduction, using

the average instead of a base-year size measure, they find no systematic relationship between size and

employment growth.13 They also suspect that the measurement error in the D&B data used by Birch is

more serious than in their LRD data, and thus that the regression fallacy bias is even more severe in

Birch’s results (Davis et al., 1996a, p. 70).14

         However, in the broader research literature on firm (or establishment) size and job creation

prompted by Birch’s work, which covers many countries, analyses that use Davis et al.’s (1996a) method

to avoid the regression fallacy more often than not confirm the finding that small establishments or firms

contribute more to job growth. For example, Kirchhoff and Phillips (1988) examine the contribution of

small and large firms to U.S. job growth. They find that firms with fewer than 100 employees are the

major sources of net new job creation. In contrast, firms with more than 1,000 employees provided only

13% of all new jobs despite their 37% employment share in 1985. Using Canadian data on the

manufacturing sector, Baldwin and Picot (1995) find that net job creation by small manufacturing

establishments is greater than that of large establishments. Broersma and Gautier (1997) and Barnes and

Haskel (2002), using data for the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, respectively, find that small


12
   Somewhat confusingly, they refer to this as the “current” establishment size measure. Davis et al. (1996b, 1996a)
also define a historical average size as a weighted average of employment over all years of an establishment’s
existence in the sample period, using employment as the weight. They consider this as a measure of the business
establishment’s “intended scale of operations.” By this definition, a business is small only if it is intended to be
small and thus stays small for many years. From this perspective, employment fluctuations at the business
establishment level are considered mostly random, as a result of changes in demand or other market conditions.
Carree and Klomp (1996) cast doubt on the usefulness of this concept of long-run firm size. First, facing constant
environmental changes, a firm should and will continuously adjust its optimal size. This reality is in conflict with
the concept of long-run firm size that is assumed to be stable over a long period of time. Second, for young firms
that just entered the market, it is simply impossible to know their intended long-run size. We do not use the latter
measure, because over a longer period the definition of size can change. Our “average” measure corresponds to
Davis et al.’s “current” measure, as “average” seems a more appropriate label.
13
   Davis et al. also extend their criticism to similar calculations included in annual reports to the President of the
Small Business Administration (in the mid- to late-1980s).
14
   In addition to avoiding the regression fallacy, the average size is widely used also because it captures job creation
and destruction symmetrically (e.g., Pivetz et al., 2001, pp. 14-15). For example, suppose a firm’s number of
employees is 1, 2, and 1 in three consecutive years. If we use base-year employment as the denominator to calculate
growth rate, this firm has experienced 100% job growth followed by 50% job decline. Alternatively, if we use two-
year average employment as the denominator, this firm has 67% job growth (= 1/1.5) followed by 67% job decline
(= −1/1.5).

                                                              5
firms/establishments contribute more to net job creation than large ones. Voulgaris et al. (2005) also find

that small firms create more jobs on net, using data from Greece. On the other hand, Hohti (2000),

studying data for Finland, reaches a conclusion more in line with Davis et al. (1996a), that there is no

clear relationship between establishment size and net job creation.15

         Davidsson et al. (1998) consider more directly whether the regression fallacy can account for the

apparent important role of small firms in job creation, by attempting to estimate the bias from the

regression to the mean that underlies the regression fallacy. Based on evidence from Swedish data, they

suggest that the regression fallacy accounts for little distortion in the relationship between firm size and

net job growth. They also – echoing concerns raised by other researchers – question drawing general

implications regarding the behavior of small establishments or firms in job creation from plant-level data

from the declining manufacturing sector in the United States.

         2.2 Gibrat’s Law

         As Mansfield (1962) pointed out, there are three versions of Gibrat’s law: the law of

proportionate growth may apply to both surviving and exiting firms, only to surviving firms, or only to

firms that exceed a minimum scale for efficiency. Clearly, if one cares about net job creation by firms of

different sizes, like Birch did, the first version of the Gibrat’s law is the most relevant one. In particular,

if Gibrat’s law holds for both surviving and exiting firms, Birch’s claim that small firms create more jobs

cannot be true. Sutton (1997) provides a comprehensive summary of this literature, concluding that the

bulk of the empirical evidence suggests that Gibrat’s law holds only for firms above a certain size limit.

That is, findings from this literature do not contradict Birch’s conclusion.




15
   Some research has also documented that, whereas small firms create a large share of new jobs, they are also
responsible for a large share of job loss. For example, using data on manufacturing establishments from Germany,
Wagner (1995) finds that although net job creation rates are not systematically related to firm size, gross job creation
and destruction rates tend to be higher the smaller the firm. Broersma and Gautier (1997), Hohti (2000), and Barnes
and Haskel (2002) also find that small firms have both higher job creation and higher job destruction rates than large
ones. Similar results are reported by Gallagher et al. (1991) for the United Kingdom, for the period 1985-1987, with
small firms contributing 48% of job creation but also 43% of job destruction, although they constituted only 21% of
all employment in 1985. For this period, there is some evidence that small firms create more jobs on net, although
the relationship is not very clear (Table IX).

                                                             6
         Audretsch et al. (2004) point out that the empirical literature on Gibrat’s law discussed in Sutton

(1997) is almost entirely within the domain of manufacturing, echoing the concern regarding the

limitation of Davis et al.’s findings to the manufacturing sector.16 They argue that the findings based on

the manufacturing sector do not necessarily apply to other industries. Gibrat originally postulated that the

growth opportunity captured by an active firm is proportional to its size (i.e., expected growth rate

conditional on survival is independent of firm size). This assumption implies that the law holds for all

(both surviving and exiting) firms if the rate of survival is independent of firm size. However, ample

empirical evidence shows that depending on the relative importance of entry cost, scale economies,

industry growth, and capital intensity, the relationship between survival rate and firm size varies a great

deal from one industry to another.17 Because of this difference in survival, it is natural that small firms

may be found to grow faster than larger ones in one industry but not in another when one examines

surviving as well as exiting firms. Indeed, using data from the Dutch services sector, Audretsch et al.

show that firm growth in services obeys Gibrat’s Law, in contrast to evidence from manufacturing.18

Audretsch et al. give a compelling reason that the research on the relationship between job creation and

firm size must also pay attention to the potential differences between manufacturing and other sectors.19

In particular, even if small firms in manufacturing do not create more net new jobs than large firms, one

has no reason to believe that the same is true for other sectors.

3. The National Establishment Time Series Database

         The database used in this study, the National Establishment Time Series (NETS), is a relatively

new longitudinal file created by Walls & Associates using D&B data (Walls & Associates, 2003). We

currently have access to an extract of this data set that covers all business establishments that were ever


16
   See, e.g., Dunne et al. (1989), Evans (1987), and Hall (1987), all of which use data from the manufacturing sector.
17
   See the long list of references cited in Audretsch et al. (2004).
18
   Audretsch et al. (2004) used a methodology originally developed by Chesher (1979). Let zt,i be the deviation of
the logarithm of the size of firm i at time t from the mean of the logarithms of firm sizes at time t, and regress zt,i on
zt−1,i. If Gibrat’s Law holds, zt−1,i should have a coefficient equal to 1, which can be tested statistically.
19
   Using data from Italy, Lotti (2007) compares the patterns of firm entry, growth, and survival in manufacturing and
services. He finds that the patterns in the services sector are qualitatively similar to the stylized facts from the
manufacturing sector, although there are some differences quantitatively. For example, the positive effect of firm
size on firm survival is larger in the services sector.

                                                              7
located in California between 1989 and 2004, their respective parent headquarters (regardless of location),

and establishments in other states that report to these headquarters.20 The NETS database does not

contain a rich set of information about each establishment, but it does include the business name, a unique

D&B establishment identifier (the DUNS number), the establishment location, an SIC code in each year

(which we have converted to a NAICS code), the type of location (single location, headquarters, branch)

in each year, the identifier of the firm’s headquarters, and employment (as well as sales, which we do not

use).

        The unit of observation in the NETS is a business establishment, which is a business or industrial

unit at a single physical location that produces or distributes goods or provides services – for example, a

single store or factory. Of course many firms own or control more than one establishment, and those

establishments may be located in different geographic areas and may be engaged in different industries.

The NETS data indicate whether an establishment is a stand-alone firm or a branch of a multi-

establishment firm, and in the latter case establishments of the same firm can be linked. We sometimes

refer to an establishment as a “business,” reserving the word “firm” to refer to what may be collections of

many establishments with a common owner.

        One highly desirable feature of the NETS database is that it covers essentially all establishments.

This reflects the fact that it is designed to capture the universe rather than a sample of establishments.

Over the sample period of 1989-2004, the database includes information each year on between 1.2 and

1.9 million establishments in California providing about 15 million to 18 million jobs per year. In total,

more than 24 million establishment-years are covered in our extract of the NETS database. However, we

regard the data prior to 1992 as less reliable, because only beginning in 1992 was D&B able to purchase

information on business units (from the Yellow Pages) from the regional Bells. We therefore use data

covering 1992-2004.21



20
   Purchasing the NETS database for the entire United States was prohibitively expensive, costing $200,000 (for a
two-year license).
21
   We have previously used the NETS data to study business relocation (Neumark et al., 2007) and the contribution
of new firms to employment growth (Neumark et al., 2006). Other work uses the NETS data to study changes in the

                                                          8
        The data construction effort – including both the cross-sectional files and the longitudinal linking

that tracks establishments over time – is a massive and complicated one. Details are provided in Neumark

et al. (2007). As previously noted, the earlier D&B data (from thirty years ago) that were used in Birch’s

work came in for considerable criticism. In particular, Davis et al. (1996a, 1996b) assert that these data

were not particularly suitable for studying job creation-destruction dynamics for two reasons. First, early

D&B data gave a much higher total employment level than alternative data sources such as those from

Census or BLS. Second, the early D&B data did a poor job in terms of capturing new businesses, as

documented in previous research that Davis et al. cite (and discussed further in Neumark et al., 2007).

However, information technology has improved dramatically during the decades since then, and data

sources have changed. Consequently the quality of the D&B data may have improved substantially. For

these reasons, we have undertaken a good deal of investigation to document and examine the quality of

the NETS data, in order to assess their reliability and their potential limitations, and how these limitations

might affect results of various analyses.22 We do not repeat the details here, except to focus on those

issues highlighted in the earlier work that are most relevant to the analysis in this paper.

        We assessed the reliability of the NETS data for measuring employment levels and changes by

comparing the NETS with data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), the

Current Employment Statistics (payroll) survey (CES), and the Size of Business data (SOB). In these

latter data sources we cannot identify establishments, but we can look at employment by industry, county,

and size category. We find that the NETS does report higher aggregate employment levels, but that this

appears to be mainly because it covers more very small businesses than alternative databases do. On the

other hand, there is a fair amount of rounding of reported employment as well as imputation of missing

data. As a result, the NETS data seem to show firm/establishment employment changes less frequently




geographic scope of firms’ operations (Kolko and Neumark, forthcoming) and agglomeration economies in the high-
tech sector (Wallace and Walls, 2004).
22
   See Neumark et al. (2007) as well as Kolko and Neumark (forthcoming).

                                                         9
than we would expect. As shown below, some of our analysis addresses possible biases from rounding

and imputation of employment.23

        It is important to track establishment births accurately in studying employment growth at small

establishments. Two approaches were used to check the accuracy with which the NETS data capture new

establishments: comparisons to new establishments identified from phonebooks in consecutive years,

coupled with information elicited from these establishments on their actual start dates; and comparisons

of the NETS data to a convenient listing of California biotech companies in the BioAbility database of

U.S. biotech companies.24 In both cases, Neumark et al. (2007) found that the NETS data identified

establishment openings and their start dates very accurately.

        Tracking births (and deaths) also requires distinguishing these events from relocations. For

example, if an establishment first appears at an address in year t, it is important to know whether it is a

new establishment or one that moved from elsewhere; in the latter case, this should not be considered a

birth. Similarly, if an establishment moves to a new location, its absence at the old location should not be

considered a death.25 By comparing relocations in the NETS with those identified in Lexis-Nexis

searches, we were able to confirm that the NETS captures inter-state relocations with considerable

accuracy.

        Finally, in this paper we focus on analysis at the establishment level, but also do some analysis at

the firm level. This raises the question of how well the NETS links existing establishments and new

establishments (births) to their parent firms. Assessing this requires another data source on the

establishments belonging to a firm, including births of new establishments. Through some efforts, we

were able to obtain such data for three large companies – a retail merchandiser, a manufacturer of

computer equipment, and a restaurant chain. Overall, the tracking of firms’ establishments works quite

23
   We doubt that any of the databases used in empirical research in this field are free of these rounding and
imputation problems. Unfortunately, researchers have little information about the nature of the measurement errors
created by rounding and imputation and know even less about how such measurement errors may bias the findings.
24
   This is a database of more than 2,000 U.S. biotech companies maintained by BioAbility, a biotech consulting
firm. See http://www.bioability.com/us_biotech_companies.htm (viewed on September 14, 2005).
25
   These statements may depend on how the relevant “economy” is defined. For example, in some runs we focus
only on establishments while they were in California, and treat moves out of the state as deaths and moves into the
state as births. However, nearly all relocations are within state (Neumark et al., 2007).

                                                           10
well, although there are sometimes establishments from the alternative data sources that do not appear in

the NETS, or vice versa. These “matching” errors appear to arise largely in the most recent years of the

data set because the NETS sometimes detects new establishments with a delay.26

         Overall, we find that the NETS database, like all others, is not without its flaws, and has both

advantages and limitations. Its complete coverage of the whole economy annually is an advantage that

we value most for our study here.27 To answer the question whether small businesses create more jobs,

we think it crucial to examine all sectors of the economy instead of just the manufacturing sector that

most previous research has focused on. Earlier D&B data were criticized for reporting higher aggregate

employment levels and capturing the births of businesses poorly. With the NETS database, which was

constructed using more recent D&B data, we find that the former is not a serious concern and the latter is

largely invalid.

4. Employer Size and Job Creation: Empirical Findings

         We take two approaches to investigating whether small businesses create more jobs. First,

following the tradition established by Birch (1987) and Davis et al. (1996a), we divide business

establishments into different size categories and examine whether there is a significant difference in net

job creation rates across size categories. Second, we non-parametrically estimate the relationship

between employment growth and establishment size to avoid any potential biases or loss of information

introduced by using arbitrary size boundaries.

         4.1 Job creation and destruction by employer size

         4.1.1 Measurement of employer size and job creation and destruction

         It is common practice among researchers in this area to divide business establishments into

different size categories and then investigate the variation in net job creation across size categories (see,

e.g., Birch, 1987; Davis et al., 1996a, 1996b). Following this practice, we define the size of an

establishment in the following two ways:

26
  For more details, see Kolko and Neumark (2007).
27
  For the purposes of research on other topics, advantages of the NETS data include the capture of businesses
relocation within the U.S., the ability to disaggregate to a fine geographic level, as well as ease of access and the
absence of confidentiality restrictions.

                                                             11
            Base-year size: the size of the business establishment at the starting point of the interval over

which employment growth is calculated. It is the definition used by Birch (1979, 1981, 1987), which was

criticized by Davis et al. because it tends to overestimate the contribution of small businesses to job

creation due to the “regression fallacy.”

            Average size: the simple average of business establishment size in base year (t−1) and current

year (t). This definition was proposed by Davis et al. to avoid the regression fallacy.28 Remember that

the regression fallacy stems from the fact that some business establishments are categorized as small only

due to random measurement errors or transitory employment declines that influence measured

employment on a year-to-year basis and thus will regress to the mean in a short time. Using this average

size measure, one will treat a business as small only if it stays small for at least two years. The

underlying assumption is that random measurement errors and transitory employment declines do not last

two years.

            It is important to note that using this average size definition one can find a less important role of

small businesses in job creation than using the base-year definition even if regression to the mean does

not exist. Consider an example in which every business establishment grows with a positive rate and the

measurement is always accurate. By construction, there will be no bias due to the regression fallacy in

the calculation of job creation using the base-year size definition. However, this average size definition

will still give a lower job creation rate among small businesses than the base-year size definition, because

the fastest-growing businesses, even if they start small, will be less likely to be categorized as small under

the average size definition. Therefore, although calculations based on average size tend to mitigate the

potential biases from the regression fallacy, we should not interpret the difference between calculations

based on these two size definitions as solely resulting from the regression fallacy.

            Although the size definitions are discussed in terms of business establishments, they can also be

applied to firms. One may argue that firm size is a more relevant measure to study than establishment

size. Indeed, government regulations related to small businesses usually target small firms instead of


28
     As noted earlier, they call it “current” size.

                                                            12
small establishments.29 Similarly, Gibrat’s law is based on the idea that growth opportunities are

proportional to size – which may be more pertinent to firms than to establishments.30 In this section, we

will examine job creation based on both establishment and firm sizes. For businesses in each size

category, we use the following measures to quantify their contributions to job creation, again following

Davis et al. (1996a):

         Gross job creation: the sum of employment gains over all business establishments whose

employment level is greater than a year ago. Businesses just started are assumed to have zero

employment prior to opening, and thus this measure captures both job growth at expanding businesses

and job creation by business openings.

         Gross job destruction: the sum of job loss over all establishments whose employment level is

smaller than a year ago. Businesses just closed are assumed to have zero employment after closing, and

thus this measure captures both job decline at contracting businesses and job loss due to business

closures.

         Net job creation: the difference between gross job creation and gross job destruction. While this

net job creation is the most relevant measure, insofar as we care about growth in the number of jobs, it is

interesting to look at gross job creation and destruction to learn how the net growth is achieved. For

example, a 3% net job creation rate can be a result of either a 5% gross job creation rate net of a 2% gross

job destruction rate, or a 13% gross job creation rate net of a 10% gross job destruction rate. The latter

case involves much more reallocation of jobs among establishments, an issue of some importance in the

macroeconomic literature.31


29
   All federal agencies are required to use the business size standard developed by the U.S. Small Business
Administration to determine eligibility for federal contracts, programs, and regulations specifically designated for
small businesses. In this size standard, small business is defined either by number of employees or average annual
receipts and the calculation of size “includes the employees or receipts of all affiliates.” See
http://www.sba.gov/services/contractingopportunities/sizestandardstopics/indexguide/index.html (viewed October 7,
2007). The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) also uses firm size when it publishes statistics on employment
dynamics by employer size (Butani et al., 2006).
30
   Although Gibrat’s work was motivated by the size distribution of manufacturing plants (establishments), later
empirical work by others was conducted at both establishment and firm levels (Sutton, 1997, p. 41 and 46).
31
   These gross job creation and destruction statistics calculated at the establishment level still underestimate worker
reallocation. For example, within an establishment some jobs (e.g., assemblers) may be destroyed and some others
(e.g., technicians) may be added, with no change in overall employment. Studying worker reallocation requires the

                                                            13
        Note that these calculations are always conducted at the establishment level although size

category may be defined at the establishment level or the firm level. At the firm level, the firm exhibits

either overall net job creation or overall net job destruction. But studied at the establishment level, a firm

may contribute to both job creation (at expanding and new establishments) and job destruction (at

contracting and closing establishments).

        4.1.2 Main results

        The first two panels in Table 1 show the annual rates of gross job creation, gross job destruction,

and net job creation by establishment size for all industries, using the base-year and average size

definitions. The last column shows the employment share of establishments in different size categories.

When the base-year size is used, we find that the rate of gross job creation decreases monotonically, and

sharply, with establishment size. While the average annual rate of job creation in the 0-19 category is

24.0%, it is only 0.4% in the “5,000 or more” category. In contrast, the rate of gross job destruction has

much lower variation (between 7.9 and 12.2%) and shows no clear relationship to establishment size. As

the difference between these two, the net job creation rate also clearly decreases with establishment size.

Total jobs at establishments with 19 or fewer employees grow by 13.4% annually. Establishments in all

other size categories show a negative net job creation rate. Overall, the findings using the base-year size

definition clearly suggest an important role of small businesses in job creation, consistent with Birch’s

(1979, 1981, and 1987) findings using the same method.

        The second panel in Table 1 presents the results using the average size definition. Under this size

definition, the rate of net job creation for small establishments falls dramatically to 1.4% (from 13.4%).

The same rate for the largest establishments, on the other hand, becomes much higher (−2.1%, in contrast

to the −11.4% calculated using the base-year size definition). However, overall there is still a clear




ability to track individual workers, as in the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics data
(http://lehd.did.census.gov/led/, viewed October 7, 2007).


                                                         14
                                                                                        32
negative relationship between the net job creation rate and establishment size.              In fact, only

establishments with fewer than 250 employees create jobs. And under either definition, all establishments

in higher size categories lose jobs. The role of business establishments with fewer than 250 employees in

overall job creation is even more significant given that these establishments also constitute a large share

of total employment (75.1%). Together, these establishments account for three-fourths of total

employment, which is true under either size definition.

         Comparing Panels I and II in Table 1, we do see evidence consistent with the regression fallacy.

In particular, the base-year size definition tends to overestimate gross job creation by the smallest

establishments and to overestimate gross job destruction by large establishments. And, therefore, it

overestimates net job creation by small establishments and underestimates net job creation by large

establishments. In this sense, for these data the concern of Davis et al. over Birch’s methodology is well

justified. However, our results in Panel II suggest that Birch’s conclusion is still valid, though to a lesser

extent than is suggested by his methods.

         We repeated the calculation of job creation and destruction rates based on firm instead of

establishment size and the results are shown in Panels III and IV of Table 1. These results reveal a

similar pattern as those in the first two panels: Under the base-year size definition, we see small firms

create substantially more jobs, on net, than large firms. This difference becomes less dramatic once we

use the average size definition, but there is still clear evidence that small firms have higher net job

creation rates.

         Table 2 translates the gross job creation and destruction rates into shares of overall job creation

and destruction attributable to each size class. The table shows that establishments in the 0-19 category

have a higher share in both gross job creation and gross job destruction than its employment share implies

– but more so for job creation. Under the base-year size definition, establishments with 19 or fewer

employees account for 33.2% of total employment, but their share is 79.3% in gross job creation and


32
  Relative to the differences in the estimates under the base-year size definition, these differences in growth rates
among average size categories seem small. However, since these are annual growth rates, the differences are still
quite substantial.

                                                             15
37.4% in gross job destruction. Similarly, under the average size definition, these smallest establishments

account for 34.1% of total employment, but represent 47.8% of gross job creation and 45.7% of gross job

destruction. Thus job reallocation at small establishments tends to be much higher. Panels III and IV of

Table 2 show similar results at the firm level.

         The results in Tables 1 and 2 are different from the findings in Davis et al. (1996a, 1996b). In

fact, Davis et al. find that once they use the average size definition instead of the base-year size definition,

the important role of small businesses in job creation as emphasized by Birch (1979, 1981, and 1987)

completely disappears, and there is instead either no relationship or a positive relationship between net

job creation and establishment size.33 In contrast, we still find that small businesses create more jobs even

if the average size definition is used, although the results are much less striking. Therefore, these findings

point to the importance of the regression fallacy in estimating the size-growth relationship. However,

there still seems to be some truth to Birch’s original conclusion regarding the important role of small

businesses in job creation.

         4.1.3 Sensitivity analysis

         We have conducted a series of sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of the main results.

The results of these analyses are shown in the two panels of Table 3. For comparison purposes, the first

column of Panel I shows the baseline result of net job creation rates for all establishments in California

across average establishment size categories, which simply reproduces the third column of Panel II in

Table 1.

         The calculations in Table 1 (and Table 2) used all establishments in California, and treated

interstate moves as births or deaths. In fact, however, some establishments originally started in other U.S.

states and moved into California later, and others started in California but moved to other states, and we

may want to include these establishments in the population we study.34 It is quite possible that these


33
   See their Table 4.2. Just to clarify, this positive relationship emerges for their “current” size measure, which we
label “average establishment size.” The correlation between net job growth and the ranking of this size category is
0.75, and the correlation between net job growth and the midpoint of the size category (using 7,500 for the 5,000 or
more category) is 0.46.
34
   However, interstate relocation is very minor (Neumark et al., 2007).

                                                            16
movers differ significantly from other establishments in terms of their survival chances or prospects for

growth. Because we have information on establishments that moved, we can check whether the inclusion

or exclusion of these movers significantly affects our baseline result. The second column of Panel I in

Table 3 is calculated using all establishments that were ever located in California, including those that

moved out. The third column uses establishments that were always in California, excluding both those

that moved out of and those that moved into California. The results differ only negligibly from the

baseline results. It is still clear, using either alternative sample, that small establishments show higher net

job creation rates than do large ones.

        Since Davis et al. used the LRD data, which cover only the manufacturing sector, their results

could be unique to manufacturing. We therefore replicated our baseline calculations using the data for the

manufacturing sector only; for comparison purposes, we also did this for the services sector. The results

are shown in the fourth and fifth columns of Panel I in Table 3. Interestingly, the results for the

manufacturing sector are different from the baseline results using all industries. First, manufacturing

establishments in all size categories lose jobs, which contrasts with the baseline result that only

establishments with 250 or more employees lose jobs, but is consistent with the fact that manufacturing

has been a declining sector. Second, although manufacturing establishments in all size categories lose

jobs, we do not see larger establishments losing a higher proportion of jobs. Manufacturing

establishments in the two smallest size categories lose 1.1% of their jobs; the net job destruction rate is

smaller for the next three size categories; it then jumps up in the next two size categories with

establishments in the 1,000-2,499 group losing the most jobs, 3.7% a year; and finally, it comes down in

the next category and goes up again in the largest size category. It is reasonable to say that under the

average size definition there appears to be no clear relationship between net job creation and

establishment size. In other words, even if Davis et al. were studying the manufacturing sector using the

NETS data, they would likely have come to the same conclusion. That is, Birch’s original conclusion is

untenable under a different (and more reasonable according to Davis et al.) size definition in the




                                                        17
manufacturing sector, even in this quite different time period.35 In contrast, the results for the services

sector in the last column are similar to the baseline results for all industries, in that small establishments

have higher net job creation rates. Therefore, these findings suggest that the conclusions that Davis et al.

reached may be unique to the manufacturing sector and cannot be generalized to the whole economy.

Given the ongoing declining share of the manufacturing sector in the U.S. economy, we believe that this

is a significant result.

           As mentioned above and documented in Neumark et al. (2007), a considerable share of

employment data in the NETS are not actual but imputed. The NETS database always indicates whether

a particular employment number is imputed or not, making it possible to check whether our main result is

robust to the use of imputed employment data. We redid the calculations dropping establishments with

imputed employment data. This is carried out in four different ways: (1) dropping an establishment if its

employment is imputed in every year; (2) dropping an establishment if its employment is imputed in more

than 50% of years; (3) dropping an establishment if its employment is imputed in more than 25% of

years; and (4) dropping an establishment if its employment is imputed in any year. The results are

presented in the first four columns of Panel II of Table 3.

           Overall, the less stringent the data exclusion criterion used, the more the results resemble the

baseline results. When we drop the establishments with all or more than half imputed employment data,

the results still support the conclusion that small establishments have higher net job creation rates. When

we exclude the establishments with more than one-quarter imputed employment data (the third column of

Panel II), the relationship is a bit less clear. In particular, the 0-19 size category has a lower net job

creation rate than the next three size categories, and it is negative. However, in four of the five largest

size categories the net job creation rate is lower still. When establishments with any imputed data are

dropped, however, there is no longer an indication that net job creation is higher at smaller

establishments. Clearly these last two analyses use two samples that are very restrictive: the first drops

57% of the establishments and the second drops 74% of the establishments. It is thus rather reassuring to


35
     Of course, our data are also limited to California.

                                                           18
see that the main result does not disappear completely even in the former case. It is also not entirely

surprising that the results are affected by the stringent criterion of dropping observations with any

imputed data; Neumark et al. (2007) show that imputation is most common for early observations on new

establishments, so that imposing a restriction of no imputed data might generate a non-random sample

that, for example, excludes small new establishments in certain industries that tend not to be picked up

right away by D&B.

        As also documented in Neumark et al. (2007), the distribution of employment numbers in the

NETS data tends to be disproportionally concentrated on multiples of 10 or 100. We consider this a sign

that some of the employment data have been rounded. Naturally, we are concerned that the higher net job

creation rates of small establishments may be an artifact of rounded employment data, although there is

no obvious reason why rounding would create bias in this direction.

        Although we do not report all the results here, we have investigated the problem of rounded

employment data in two ways. First, we drop the establishments that seem most likely to have rounded

employment numbers. Specifically, we exclude an establishment from our calculation if its employment

is a multiple of 10 or 100 in every year. The first results (based on multiples of 10) are shown in the last

column of Panel II of Table 3. The results are quite similar to the baseline, showing a monotonically

decreasing rate of net job creation with establishment size.36 Second, instead of dropping establishments

that may be reporting rounded data, we instead consider ways in which the employment data might have

been rounded, and synthetically round all employment data in the same way. We then recalculate net job

creation rates across establishment size groups using the synthetic data. The idea is that if our results are

affected by systematic differences in which establishments have rounded employment data, then the

results from the synthetic data are likely to be significantly different from our baseline results. The

results, however, were insensitive to this synthetic rounding.37 In all cases, the results still indicated that


36
   Dropping any establishment if its employment was always a multiple of 100 resulted in losing very few
observations relative to the baseline, and the results were correspondingly very similar.
37
   We synthetically rounded the employment data in four different ways: (1) round every employment number to the
nearest multiple of 10; (2) round every employment number down to the nearest multiple of 10; (3) round every
employment number up to the nearest multiple of 10; and (4) round every employment number to the nearest

                                                         19
small establishments have higher net job creation rates, and as in the baseline results, only establishments

with fewer than 250 employees were net job creators while establishments in all larger groups were

estimated to destroy jobs on net.

         4.2 Job creation and employer size: non-parametric estimation

         In the previous section, we followed existing research by dividing business establishments into

different size categories to examine the relationship between the net job creation rate and employer size.

The choice of the size boundaries – while consistent with the ones used in the existing literature – is

nevertheless arbitrary.38 The particular employer size-class boundaries that are chosen could obscure the

relationship between employer size and the employment growth rate. In order to check the robustness of

this relationship, and to offer point estimates for the complete range of establishment sizes, we estimate

the employment growth rate for every establishment size using a non-parametric locally-weighted

regression.39 Since the “regression fallacy” criticism also applies to these regression analyses, we still use

the average establishment size instead of the base-year size as our independent variable.

         Locally-weighted regressions are computationally intensive because the amount of calculations

rises exponentially with the number of observations. Our large amount of data (over 20 million

observations) would require performing over 20 million weighted mean calculations, each of which

would use a substantial proportion of the total observations (depending on the particular bandwidth

chosen). It is not feasible for us to do this. Instead, we devised a less computationally-intensive method.

We first create a mean net job creation rate and an associated frequency weight for each unique value of

establishment size. This reduces the number of observations enormously while still maintaining the

relevant information. Then, we compute the locally-weighted smoothed means using weights that are a

function of the locality and frequency of each observation. We use a 0.1 (10%) bandwidth kernel and


multiple of 10 if it is under 100, and to the nearest multiple of 100 otherwise. All of these methods except the third
resulted in substantially fewer observations because of small establishments that had their data rounded to zero.
38
   Davis et al. (1996a) note that the choice of size-class boundaries is one of the factors that influence the magnitude
of the bias associated with the regression fallacy (p. 68).
39
   Many researchers have tested Gibrat’s law based on regressions of firm growth on firm size instead of a definition
of firm-size boundaries. See, for example, Chesher (1979) and Audretsch et al. (2004). Farinas and Moreno (2000)
use a non-parametric approach that is similar to ours, although there are some differences in the estimation, and their
model is estimated using panel data on only about 2,200 manufacturing firms in Spain over a 5-year period.

                                                            20
frequency-adjusted tricubic weights. This estimation procedure is described in greater detail in the

Appendix. While this method is not computationally equivalent to the standard approach, such

smoothing would otherwise be infeasible.

           To visualize the nonparametric regression results, we plot the estimated mean net job creation

rate against average establishment size. Note that the number of jobs and its change are necessarily

integers; the smallest unit is one. When the establishment size is close to zero, even a one-unit change

(the smallest possible non-zero growth/decline) in total employment amounts to very large growth or

decline in percentage terms. Therefore, the variance of the job growth rate is many times larger when

establishment size is close to zero. Although this is essentially an artifact of the data at the individual

establishment level, it obscures the picture of the relationship between job growth rate and establishment

size. As a result, if we plot the relationship over the whole range of establishment sizes, it always appears

that the change in job growth rate is very large at the smallest sizes and indiscernible beyond that. To

show the relationship more clearly, in each figure we present the results in two panels: Panel I depicts the

relationship over the whole range of establishment sizes and Panel II focuses on the relationship in the

range of 5-2,000 employees.

           As Figure 1 shows, the net job creation rate is clearly negatively correlated with employer size,

meaning that smaller business establishments have higher net job creation rates.40 We see, more clearly

in Panel II, that the smallest establishments have a positive net job creation rate. This rate decreases as

establishment size increases. At a size close to 450 employees, the net job creation becomes zero. It then

becomes negative and stays negative for all larger establishment sizes.

           A numerical example may help illustrate the economic significance of the difference in job

creation rates. Panel II of Figure 1 suggests that an establishment with about 100 employees has a net job

creation rate close to 0.4%, whereas an establishment with about 1,000 employees has a net job creation

rate close to −0.8%. Consider two regions that each begin with employment of 100,000, one with 1,000

smaller establishments each of which has 100 employees, and the other with 100 larger establishments


40
     In this figure we otherwise use the data the same way as in Table 1.

                                                              21
each of which has 1,000 employees. In a decade, the region with the smaller establishments is expected

to create 4,100 jobs; the region with the larger establishments is expected to lose 7,700 jobs, leading to a

net difference of 11,800 jobs after a decade.41 The smallest establishments (in the 0-19 category), of

course, have much higher growth rates. However, as they grow bigger their growth rates are expected to

decline sharply.

        Parallel to the results presented in Tables 2 and 3, Figures 2 and 3 show the results from

sensitivity analyses. Figure 2 plots the relationship between net job creation rate and average

establishment size estimated using different samples. We first used all establishments that were ever

located in California, including those that started in California but later moved to other states and those

that started in other states but later moved into California (without treating these moves as births or

deaths). We then used the sample of establishments that were always in California, excluding all

establishments that moved into or out of California. Compared to those shown in Figure 1, the results in

Figure 2 using these two alternative samples are almost identical. We also estimated the relationship

using the manufacturing and services sectors separately. The differences between these two subsamples

are clear. The services sector results are almost indistinguishable from the results using the whole sample,

but the manufacturing sector is very different. First, manufacturing establishments show a consistently

lower net job creation rate over the whole range of sizes than the overall sample, and the difference seems

always greater than 0.5% a year. Again, this is consistent with the fact that the manufacturing sector was

declining. Second, and perhaps more important, the negative relationship between net job creation rate

and establishment size is much less clear in the manufacturing sector. The net job creation rate shows a

few ups and downs in the range of 5-500 employees, although it is clearly declining in the range of 500-

2,000 employees. Based on these results, one may still argue that the manufacturing sector gives no clear

evidence that small establishments create more jobs, consistent with what Davis et al. (1996a, 1996b)

found. Yet again, we emphasize the differences between manufacturing and the overall economy and



41
  These are based on calculations that assume a constant employment growth rate over a relatively small size range:
1,000·100·(1 + 0.004)10 = 104,100 and 1,000·100(1 − 0.008)10 = 92,300.

                                                          22
point out that, overall, small establishments do have higher net job creation rates, which is more in line

with the findings of Birch (1979, 1981, and 1987).

         Finally, Figure 3 shows the results with the various restrictions on establishments with imputed

data, as well as the sample dropping establishments that clearly had data rounded to multiples of 10.

Except for the two cases of the data that exclude very large numbers of observations, as discussed earlier,

the figure indicates that the results are robust to various treatments of imputed and rounded data in

pointing to declining net job creation with establishment size.42

5. Conclusions

         It has long been debated whether small businesses create more jobs than larger ones. The debate

attracts a great deal of attention both in academia and in the media because it has important implications

for policymaking at both federal and state levels. David Birch’s book (1987) was probably the most

prominent catalyst for this debate, arguing that small businesses play a much more important role in job

creation than larger businesses – a view that quickly became the conventional wisdom. Yet this work was

criticized, most notably by Davis et al. (1996a), who argued that Birch’s findings are essentially a result

of a flawed methodology applied to some unsuitable data. This debate also speaks to earlier (and

continuing) research in industrial organization on Gibrat’s Law, which posits that firm growth rates are

independent of firm size.

         Using newly-available data on businesses establishments in California, we revisit the issue of

establishment and firm size and job creation. The data are drawn from the NETS database, which was

recently constructed using raw data collected by D&B. Our evaluation of the NETS data in separate work

suggests that these data are rather reliable, and a clear improvement upon early versions of the D&B data

used by David Birch in the 1970s and 1980s. We analyze these data using two methods: one based on

size classes but following the methods of Davis et al. to avoid the regression fallacy that they argue

plagued Birch’s work; and the other a nonparametric method that does not need to define arbitrary

employer size categories.

42
   Figures for the other methods of treating rounded data, discussed in sub-section 4.1.3 are not shown. These
figures similarly demonstrated the robustness of the results, and are available from the authors upon request.

                                                           23
        Like Birch, we find that small establishments (and small firms as well) create more jobs. At the

same time, we confirmed that the concern of Davis et al. regarding Birch’s methods is well grounded, and

the base-year size definition used by Birch indeed badly overestimates net job creation rates for small

establishments. However, the result that small establishments create more jobs, on net, survives even

after we use the methodology proposed by Davis et al. to avoid the regression fallacy. Although we still

find that small establishments create more jobs, the difference is much smaller than that originally

suggested by Birch. We find similar results at the firm level – results that are inconsistent with Gibrat’s

Law.

        We also find that the negative relationship between establishment size and job creation is much

less clear for the manufacturing sector. This likely explains why Davis et al. (1996a) conclude that the

difference in job creation between small and large firms highlighted by Birch is nonexistent, as they used

the LRD data, which cover the manufacturing sector only. The NETS data (for a later period, and for

California) yield similar results for manufacturing. However, the overall economy, unlike the

manufacturing sector, does show a higher net job creation rate among small establishments.




                                                       24
                                              References

Acs, Zoltan J. and David B. Audretsch, “Editors’ introduction,” Small Business Economics 1, 1989, 1-5.
Audretsch, David B., Luuk Klomp, Enrico Santarelli, and A. Roy Thurik, “Gibrat’s Law: Are the Services
    Different?,” Review of Industrial Organization 24, 2004, 301–324.
Audretsch, David B. and Roy Thurik, “What’s New about the New Economy? Sources of Growth in the
    Managed and Entrepreneurial Economies,” Industrial and Corporate Change 10, 2001, 267-315.
Baldwin, John and Garnett Picot, “Employment Generation by Small Producers in the Canadian
    Manufacturing Sector,” Small Business Economics 7, 1995, 317-331.
Barnes, Matthew and Jonathan Haskel, “Job Creation, Job Destruction and the Contribution of Small
    Businesses: Evidence for UK Manufacturing,” Working Paper No. 461, Queen Mary, University of
    London, 2002.
Birch, David L., The Job Generation Process, Unpublished report prepared by the MIT Program on
    Neighborhood and Regional Change for the Economic Development Administration, U.S.
    Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 1979.
Birch, David L., “Who Creates Jobs?” The Public Interest 65, 1981, 3-14.
Birch, David L., Job Creation in America: How Our Smallest Companies Put the Most People to Work,
    Free Press, New York, 1987.
Broersma, Lourens and Pieter Gautier, “Job Creation and Job Destruction by Small Firms: An Empirical
    Investigation for the Dutch Manufacturing Sector,” Small Business Economics 9, 1997, 211-224.
Brown, Charles, James Hamilton, and James Medoff, Employers Large and Small, Harvard University
    Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
Butani, Shail J., Richard L. Clayton, Vinod Kapani, James R. Spletzer, David M. Talan, and George S.
    Werking Jr., “Business Employment Dynamics: Tabulations by Employer Size,” Monthly Labor
    Review 129, 2006, 3-22.
Carree, Martin and Luuk Klomp, “Small business and job creation: A comment” Small Business
    Economics 8, 1996, 317-322.
Chesher, Andrew, “Testing the Law of Proportionate Effect,” Journal of Industrial Economics 27, 1979,
    403-411.
Cleveland, William S., “Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing Scatterplots,” Journal of
    the American Statistical Association 74, 1979, 829-836.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction, The MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA, 1996a.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, “Small Business and Job Creation: Dissecting the
    Myth and Reassessing the Facts,” Small Business Economics 8, 1996b, 297-315.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, “The Growth and Failures of U.S. Manufacturing
   Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 1989, 671-698.
Evans, David S., “The Relationship between Firm Growth, Size, and Age: Estimates for 100
    Manufacturing Industries,” Journal of Industrial Economics 35, 1987, 567-581.
Farinas, Jose C., and Lourdes Moreno, “Firms’ Growth, Size, and Age: A Nonparametric Approach,”
     Review of Industrial Organization 17, 2000, 249-265.
Gallagher, Colin C., Daly, Michael J., and Thomason, Jeremy C., “The Growth of U.K. Companies and
     Their Contribution to Job Generation, 1985-87.” Small Business Economics 3, 1991, 269-286.
Gibrat, Robert, Les Inégalités Économiques, Librairie du Recueil Sirey, Paris, 1931.
Hall, Bronwyn H., “The Relationship between Firm Size and Firm Growth in the US Manufacturing
     Sector,” Journal of Industrial Economics 35, 1987, 583-606.
Heshmati, Almas, “On the Growth of Micro and Small Firms: Evidence from Sweden,” Small Business
    Economics 17, 2001, 213–28.
Hohti, Satu, “Job Flows and Job Quality by Establishment Size in the Finnish Manufacturing Sector
    1980–94,” Small Business Economics 15, 2000, 265–81.
Kirchhoff, Bruce and Bruce Phillips, “The Effect of Firm Formation and Growth on Job Creation in the
    United States,” Journal of Business Venturing 3, 1988, 261-272.
Kirchhoff, Bruce A. and Patricia G. Greene, “Understanding the Theoretical and Empirical Content of
    Critiques of U.S. Job Creation Research,” Small Business Economics 10, 1998, 154-169.
Klepper, Steven and Elizabeth Graddy, “The Evolution of New Industries and the Determinants of Market
   Structure,” RAND Journal of Economics 21, 1990, 27-44.
Kolko, Jed, and David Neumark, Business Location Decisions and Employment Dynamics in California,
   Public Policy Institute of California, San Francisco, 2007.
Kolko, Jed, and David Neumark, “Changes in the Location of Employment and Ownership: Evidence
   from California,” forthcoming in Journal of Regional Science.
Leonard, Jonathan S., “In the Wrong Places at the Wrong Time: The Extent of Frictional and Structural
    Unemployment,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard (eds.), Unemployment and the Structure of
    Labor Markets, Blackwell, 1987, 141-163.
Lotti, Francesca, “Firm Dynamics in Manufacturing and Services: A Broken Mirror?” Industrial and
     Corporate Change 16, 2007, 347-369.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall, “Where the Jobs Are: Business Dynamics and
   Employment Growth,” Academy of Management Perspectives 20, 2006, 79-94.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall, “Employment Dynamics and Business Relocation:
   New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series,” Research in Labor Economics 26,
   2007, 39-83.
Pivetz, Timothy R., Michael A. Searson, and James R. Spletzer, “Measuring Job and Establishment Flows
     with BLS Longitudinal Microdata,” Monthly Labor Review, 2001, 13-20.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Howard J. Shatz, “Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing,” Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity, 1994, 1-84.
Sutton, John, “Gibrat’s Legacy,” Journal of Economic Literature 35, 1997, 40-59.
Voulgaris, Fotini, Theodore Papadogonas, and George Agiomirgianakis, “Job Creation and Job
    Destruction in Greek Manufacturing,” Review of Development Economics 9, 2005, 289–301.
Wagner, Joachim, “Firm Size and Job Creation in Germany,” Small Business Economics 7, 1995, 469-
   474.
Wallace, Nancy E., and Donald Walls, “Agglomeration Economies and the High-Tech Computer,” Fisher
    Center Working Paper No. 292, University of California, Berkeley, 2004.
Walls & Associates, “NETS: National Establishment Time-Series Database,” Oakland, California, 2003.
                                      Appendix: Technical Notes for the Non-parametric Analysis

              Our non-parametric analysis uses a method that is a slight modification of the locally-weighted

scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS) method originally proposed by Cleveland (1979).

              Let yi be the employment growth rate of observation i (an establishment over a two-year period),

xi the size of observation i measured using the average size definition, and N the total number of

observations. The standard implementation of locally-weighted mean smoothing would proceed as

follows. Order the data such that xi ≤ xi+1 for all i = 1, …, N−1. For each yi, choose the subset of the data

that is indexed by i− = max(1, i – k) through i+ = min(i + k, N), where k =[(N·h − 0.5)/2] and h is the

prespecified bandwidth that indicates the proportion of the data used in the calculations of the smoothed

value ŷi. Choose a function that assigns a weight wi to each observation j = i−, …, i+; observations outside

of this range are given no weight. For example, one may choose a tricubic weight function (the kernel),

in which case the smoothed value ŷi is calculated as:


         i+

        ∑ (w           j   ⋅ yj )                 ⎧ ⎛ x −x
                                                  ⎪              ⎞
                                                                     3
                                                                         ⎫
                                                                         ⎪
                                                                          3


                                    , where w j = ⎨1 − ⎜         ⎟
        j = i−                                           j i
ŷi =                                                                    ⎬ and Δ = 1.0001·max(xi+ – xi, xi – xi−).
                                                       ⎜         ⎟
                                                  ⎪⎩ ⎝ Δ
                 i+
                                                                         ⎪⎭
              ∑w
              j = i−
                            j
                                                                 ⎠


              Given the large size of our dataset, this method is computationally infeasible. It would involve

making approximately 20 million weighted calculations each using the share of observations determined

by the specified bandwidth. Instead, we utilize the following method where we first compute an average

value y for each unique value of x, and then calculate a smoothed value ŷi’ from the reduced dataset.

              We use the following procedure. First, order the data such that xi ≤ xi+1 for all i = 1, …, N−1. For

each unique value of xi, create a zi’ = xi. Let the total number of zi’ be M and order all of them such that zi’

                                                               ∑y  ~
                                                               yi ∈Yi '
                                                                          i
                                                                                             ~
< zi’+1 for all i’ = 1, …, M−1. Then, let yi ' =               ~ for all i’ = 1, …, M, where Yi ' ={ (yi , xi ) : xi = zi’ }
                                                            C (Yi ' )

              ~                                 ~
and C (Yi ' ) is the cardinality of Yi ' . Now apply the standard smoothing procedure to observations (yi’, zi’),
except that the weight function is adjusted using the frequency of yi’. Again using a tricubic weight

function, this amounts to calculating the following smoothed value:

                                   i '+

                                 ∑ (w                j'   ⋅ y j' )                             ⎧
                                                                                      ~ ⎪ ⎛⎜ z j ' − zi '   ⎞
                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                    ⎫
                                                                                                                    ⎪
                                                                                                                     3


                      yˆ i ' =
                                 j '= i ' −
                                                                     where w j ' = C (Yi ' ) ⋅ ⎨1 −         ⎟       ⎬ .
                                                                                                    ⎜       ⎟
                                                                                               ⎪⎩ ⎝ Δ
                                              i '+
                                                                                                                    ⎪⎭
                                          ∑w
                                          j '=i '−
                                                           j'
                                                                                                            ⎠


         These two methods essentially use the same information in the data although they usually assign

slightly different smoothed values to different observations. Whereas the standard method gives multiple

predicted values for each zi’ in cases where there are multiple xi such that xi = zi’, our method only returns

one predicted value per unique value of x.43




43
  As a consequence, another advantage of this procedure, aside from shrinking the data set, is that it avoids the
arbitrariness in the treatment of ties in LOWESS estimation.
                                                  TABLE 1
                    Rates of job creation and destruction by employer size, 1992-2004
                                 (All industries, excluding government*)
 Size class (employees) Gross job creation Gross job destruction Net job creation Employment share
                                      I. Base-year establishment size**
 0 to 19                        24.0%                   10.6%             13.4%        33.2%
 20 to 49                        4.5%                    7.9%             −3.5%        15.2%
 50 to 99                        3.6%                    7.9%             −4.2%        12.3%
 100 to 249                      3.3%                    8.3%             −5.0%        13.7%
 250 to 499                      2.6%                    9.4%             −6.8%         7.3%
 500 to 999                      1.9%                   10.2%             −8.3%         5.5%
 1,000 to 2,499                  1.5%                   11.8%            −10.2%         6.6%
 2,500 to 4,999                  1.0%                   12.2%            −11.2%         3.4%
 5,000 or more                   0.4%                   11.8%            −11.4%         2.9%
                                      II. Average establishment size***
 0 to 19                        14.0%                   12.6%              1.4%        34.1%
 20 to 49                        9.0%                    8.1%              0.8%        15.2%
 50 to 99                        7.8%                    7.1%              0.7%        12.3%
 100 to 249                      7.8%                    7.4%              0.4%        13.5%
 250 to 499                      7.8%                    8.2%             −0.4%         7.2%
 500 to 999                      9.1%                   10.3%             −1.2%         5.5%
 1,000 to 2,499                  7.5%                   10.0%             −2.5%         6.4%
 2,500 to 4,999                  7.1%                    8.3%             −1.2%         3.2%
 5,000 or more                   3.7%                    5.7%             −2.1%         2.7%
                                           III. Base-year firm size**
 0 to 19                        32.5%                   10.4%             22.1%         8.5%
 20 to 49                       12.2%                    7.7%              4.5%         3.6%
 50 to 99                       13.2%                    8.1%              5.1%         3.1%
 100 to 249                     15.5%                    9.2%              6.3%         4.2%
 250 to 499                     16.3%                   10.1%              6.2%         3.5%
 500 to 999                     15.4%                   10.7%              4.7%         4.2%
 1,000 to 2,499                 13.9%                   11.1%              2.8%         7.4%
 2,500 to 4,999                 10.3%                   11.9%             -1.5%         7.1%
 5,000 to 9,999                  9.4%                   11.9%             -2.5%         8.4%
 10,000 to 24,999                7.7%                   11.4%             -3.6%        13.1%
 25,000 to 49,999                6.3%                   10.5%             -4.3%        11.3%
 50,000 or more                  4.5%                    7.5%             -3.0%        25.5%
                                           IV. Average firm size***
 0 to 19                        15.1%                   11.9%              3.2%         8.6%
 20 to 49                       10.5%                    7.8%              2.7%         3.6%
 50 to 99                        9.6%                    7.6%              2.0%         3.1%
 100 to 249                     10.2%                    8.6%              1.6%         4.2%
 250 to 499                     10.2%                    9.1%              1.0%         3.5%
 500 to 999                     10.4%                    9.3%              1.0%         4.2%
 1,000 to 2,499                  9.9%                    9.4%              0.4%         7.5%
 2,500 to 4,999                  9.3%                    9.5%             −0.2%         7.2%
 5,000 to 9,999                  9.2%                   10.0%             −0.9%         8.5%
 10,000 to 24,999                8.5%                    9.8%             −1.4%        13.0%
 25,000 to 49,999                7.9%                    9.6%             −1.8%        11.3%
 50,000 or more                  7.5%                    9.0%             −1.6%        25.3%
* Establishment calculations use all observations in California and treat interstate moves as births or deaths; firm
calculations use all branches of firms with at least one establishment ever located in California.
** Equal to the number of employees in the initial year of the interval over which the growth rate is calculated.
*** Average business size for base year (t−1) and current year (t); used to avoid regression fallacy described by Davis et
al. (1996a).
                                                   TABLE 2
              Shares of gross job creation and destruction by employer size, 1992-2004
                                 (All industries, excluding government*)
 Size class (employees)      Job creation share          Job destruction share Employment share
                                    I. Base-year establishment size**
 0 to 19 employees                     79.3%                      37.4%               33.2%
 20 to 49                               6.9%                      12.7%               15.2%
 50 to 99                               4.6%                      10.2%               12.3%
 100 to 249                             4.7%                      11.8%               13.7%
 250 to 499                             1.9%                       7.1%                7.3%
 500 to 999                             1.1%                       5.8%                5.5%
 1,000 to 2,499                         1.0%                       7.7%                6.6%
 2,500 to 4,999                         0.3%                       4.0%                3.4%
 5,000 or more                          0.1%                       3.3%                2.9%
                                    II. Average establishment size***
 0 to 19 employees                     47.8%                      45.7%               34.1%
 20 to 49                              13.8%                      13.1%               15.2%
 50 to 99                               9.5%                       9.0%               12.3%
 100 to 249                            10.6%                      10.5%               13.5%
 250 to 499                             5.6%                       6.1%                7.2%
 500 to 999                             5.0%                       5.7%                5.5%
 1,000 to 2,499                         4.7%                       6.2%                6.4%
 2,500 to 4,999                         2.1%                       2.4%                3.2%
 5,000 or more                          0.9%                       1.4%                2.7%
                                         III. Base-year firm size**
 0 to 19 employees                     25.7%                       9.5%                8.5%
 20 to 49                               4.1%                       3.0%                3.6%
 50 to 99                               3.7%                       2.6%                3.1%
 100 to 249                             6.0%                       4.0%                4.2%
 250 to 499                             5.1%                       3.7%                3.5%
 500 to 999                             6.0%                       4.6%                4.2%
 1,000 to 2,499                         9.7%                       8.4%                7.4%
 2,500 to 4,999                         6.8%                       8.6%                7.1%
 5,000 to 9,999                         7.2%                      10.0%                8.4%
 10,000 to 24,999                       9.0%                      14.8%               13.1%
 25,000 to 49,999                       6.3%                      11.8%               11.3%
 50,000 or more                        10.3%                      19.0%               25.5%
                                          IV. Average firm size***
 0 to 19 employees                     14.2%                      11.7%                8.6%
 20 to 49                               4.2%                       3.2%                3.6%
 50 to 99                               3.2%                       2.5%                3.1%
 100 to 249                             4.6%                       3.9%                4.2%
 250 to 499                             3.8%                       3.5%                3.5%
 500 to 999                             4.6%                       4.1%                4.2%
 1,000 to 2,499                         7.9%                       7.5%                7.5%
 2,500 to 4,999                         7.2%                       7.2%                7.2%
 5,000 to 9,999                         8.5%                       8.9%                8.5%
 10,000 to 24,999                      11.8%                      13.2%               13.0%
 25,000 to 49,999                       9.6%                      11.1%               11.3%
 50,000 or more                        20.4%                      23.2%               25.3%
* Establishment calculations use all observations in California and treat interstate moves as births or deaths; firm
calculations use all branches of firms with at least one establishment ever located in California.
** Equal to the number of employees in the initial year of the interval over which the growth rate is calculated.
*** Average business size for base year (t−1) and current year (t); used to avoid regression fallacy described by
Davis et al. (1996a).
                                                                      TABLE 3
                     Net job creation rate under alternative empirical specifications, by average establishment size, 1992-2004
                           (All industries, excluding government; all establishments in California unless otherwise noted)
 I. Robustness to scope of observations
                                                                                      Sample

                                                    Using establishments              Using establishments
                            Baseline results (using  ever in California,              always in California,       Using establishments in       Using establishments
                             all establishments in  including those that              excluding those that          the manufacturing           in the services sector
 Size class (employees)           California)         moved in or out                   moved in or out                sector only*                     only*
 0 to 19 employees                    1.4%                  1.4%                              1.4%                        −1.1%                          1.8%
 20 to 49                            0.8%                   0.9%                              0.9%                        −1.1%                          0.9%
 50 to 99                            0.7%                   0.7%                              0.7%                        −0.6%                          0.5%
 100 to 249                          0.4%                   0.5%                              0.5%                        −0.7%                          0.2%
 250 to 499                          −0.4%                 −0.3%                             −0.4%                        −0.8%                         −0.4%
 500 to 999                          −1.2%                 −1.1%                             −1.1%                        −2.1%                         −0.8%
 1,000 to 2,499                      −2.5%                 −2.4%                             −2.6%                        −3.7%                         −2.0%
 2,500 to 4,999                      −1.2%                 −0.9%                             −1.1%                        −0.7%                         −1.7%
 5,000 or more                       −2.1%                 −2.0%                             −2.2%                        −1.9%                         −1.9%
 No. of observations              21,076,927            21,194,984                        20,935,749                    1,327,157                    12,249,318
 II. Robustness to use of imputed/rounded employment data
                                                                                             Sample
                                                                Drop any
                                    Drop any               establishment with        Drop any establishment             Drop any                     Drop any
                               establishment with         employment imputed           with employment             establishment with           establishment if its
                              employment imputed           in more than 50%           imputed in more than        employment imputed           employment is always
 Size class (employees)           in every year                   years                  25% of years                  in any year               a multiple of 10
 0 to 19 employees                     1.1%                       0.8%                       −0.5%                          −2.8%                      1.4%
 20 to 49                             1.0%                        1.0%                        0.5%                          −0.7%                      1.1%
 50 to 99                             0.8%                        0.9%                        0.6%                          −0.2%                      1.1%
 100 to 249                           0.5%                        0.7%                        0.5%                          −0.2%                      1.1%
 250 to 499                           −0.3%                      −0.2%                       −0.6%                          −1.4%                      0.4%
 500 to 999                           −1.2%                      −0.8%                       −1.0%                          −1.7%                     −0.1%
 1,000 to 2,499                       −2.4%                      −1.6%                       −1.7%                          −1.9%                     −1.8%
 2,500 to 4,999                       −1.1%                       0.3%                        0.0%                          −0.6%                     −1.4%
 5,000 or more                        −2.6%                      −2.4%                       −2.6%                          −1.3%                     −2.1%
 No. of observations               16,730,011                  12,982,772                  9,089,282                      5,582,543                 20,351,872
* We treat the 2% of the establishments whose NAICS code changed over time as belonging to the industry in which they are classified for the most number of years.
In the event that an establishment is classified in two industries for an equally long period of time, the more recent of the two industries is chosen.
                  Figure 1: Net job creation rate vs. establishment size (10% bandwidth),
                                      all establishments in California

                                                     (I) Establishments up to 10,000 employees

                         60
    Smoothed net employment growth rate (%)
          0           20 -20     40




                                              0       2,000        4,000         6,000        8,000   10,000
                                                                    Establishment size



                                                  (II) Zoomed in to the range of 5-2,000 employees
                     6
Smoothed net employment growth rate (%)
      0           2  -2      4




                                              0           500              1,000           1,500       2,000
                                                                    Establishment size
                   Figure 2: Net job creation rate vs. establishment size (10% bandwidth),
                                    robustness to scope of establishments

                                                 (I) Establishments up to 10,000 employees
 Smoothed net employment growth rate (%)
-20      0        20       40         60




                                           0      2,000          4,000         6,000            8,000          10,000
                                                                  Establishment size

                                                Estabs ever in California              Estabs always in California
                                                Manufacturing                          Services



                                               (II) Zoomed in to the range of 5-2,000 employees
                                      6
Smoothed net employment growth rate (%)
 -2      0         2        4




                                           0           500               1,000               1,500             2,000
                                                                  Establishment size

                                                Estabs ever in California              Estabs always in California
                                                Manufacturing                          Services
                  Figure 3: Net job creation rate vs. establishment size (10% bandwidth),
                         excluding establishments with imputed employment data

                                                 (I) Establishments up to 10,000 employees
Smoothed net employment growth rate (%)
 -40   -20     0    20     40     60




                                          0       2,000         4,000         6,000          8,000       10,000
                                                                 Establishment size

                                                                     Excluding
                                                 Always imputed                       More than 50% imputed
                                                 More than 25% imputed                Ever imputed
                                                 If always multiple of 10



                                              (II) Zoomed in to the range of 5-2,000 employees
Smoothed net employment growth rate (%)
  -5              0                5




                                          0           500               1,000             1,500           2,000
                                                                 Establishment size

                                                                     Excluding
                                                 Always imputed                       More than 50% imputed
                                                 More than 25% imputed                Ever imputed
                                                 If always multiple of 10
