                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        A LONG TERM PERSPECTIVE ON THE EURO

                                          Michael D. Bordo
                                           Harold James

                                        Working Paper 13815
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13815


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




Paper prepared for the conference "Ten Years After the Euro", DGECFIN Brussels, Belgium, November
26-27, 2007. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Michael D. Bordo and Harold James. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
A Long Term Perspective on the Euro
Michael D. Bordo and Harold James
NBER Working Paper No. 13815
February 2008
JEL No. F02,F33,N20

                                              ABSTRACT

This study grounds the establishment of EMU and the euro in the context of the history of international
monetary cooperation and of monetary unions, above all in the U.S., Germany and Italy. The purpose
of national monetary unions was to reduce transactions costs of multiple currencies and thereby facilitate
commerce; to reduce exchange rate volatility; and to prevent wasteful competition for seigniorage.
By contrast, supranational unions, such as the Latin Monetary Union or the Scandinavian Currency
Union were conducted in the broader setting of an international monetary order, the gold standard.
There are closer parallels between EMU and national monetary unions. Historical monetary unions
also were associated with fiscal unions (fiscal federalism). Both fiscal and monetary unions were an
important part of the process of political unification. In the past, central banks, and the currencies they
managed, have been discredited or put under severe strain as a result of: severe or endemic fiscal problems
creating pressures for the monetization of public debt; low economic growth may produce demands
for central banks to pursue more expansionary policies; regional strains producing a demand for different
monetary policies to adjust to particular regional pressures; severe crises of the financial system; and
tensions between the international and the domestic role of a leading currency. In particular, there
is the possibility for the EMU that low rates of growth will produce direct challenges to the management
of the currency, and a demand for a more politically controlled and for a more expansive monetary
policy. Such demands might arise in some parts or regions or countries of the euro area, but not in
others and would lead to a politically highly difficult discussion of monetary governance.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Harold James
History Department and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544
hjames@princeton.edu
   EMU and the euro, the single currency of its members, will be ten years old in 2009.
   Monetary Unions as currency arrangements have been implemented for a few centuries,
   but the European experiment of embarking on a monetary union without an
   accompanying full political union is bold and unprecedented. Monetary union has run
   ahead of the process of fiscal integration. EMU has helped to develop an integrated
   capital market, as well as providing many obvious consumer benefits in convenience and
   price transparency for an increasingly mobile European population. However, the
   novelty of the single currency while accompanied by divided sovereignty raises a number
   of problems and potential threats, some of which were anticipated at the time of the
   institutional preparations for monetary union, while others were not.

   This essay will evaluate the experience of the first decade of EMU and the euro in
   historical perspective. It will ground the establishment of EMU and the euro in the
   context of the history of international monetary cooperation and of monetary unions. A
   discussion of the origins, key operating characteristics and problems encountered by
   earlier monetary arrangements will serve as a backdrop for an evaluation of the euro’s
   performance and challenges in future decades. The essay will develop and expand upon
   the following three themes: 1. Lessons from the evolution of past monetary unions for
   EMU; 2. Fiscal policy arrangements for EMU in historical perspective; 3. Challenges
   facing EMU. The first two take an historical perspective. The third looks to the future.

1. Lessons from the evolution of past monetary unions for EMU.

   A monetary union, defined as a common currency and set of monetary arrangements
   (including cooperation among central banks and a common central bank) for a group of
   member states is a form of international monetary cooperation. In the past international
   monetary regimes evolved to facilitate international commerce. The earliest regime, the
   international specie standard, in its most well known variety, the gold standard, emerged
   de facto because participating countries defined (pegged) their currencies in terms of a
   common precious metal. This led to a fixed exchange rate arrangement which in the late
   nineteenth century encouraged international trade and capital movements. The limitations
   on government fiscal and monetary action implied by the gold standard enhanced policy
   credibility, and consequently reduced the cost of borrowing for both governments and
   private actors (Bordo and Rockoff 1996). Central banks by following the rule of gold
   convertibility implicitly cooperated with each other. In some cases direct cooperation was
   arranged. In the twentieth century, more explicit forms of monetary cooperation evolved,
   first with the Gold Exchange Standard in the 1920s, then the Tripartite agreement in the
   1930s and then with the Bretton Woods Articles of Agreement in 1944, which required
   all members to adhere to a set parity and to other rules.

   Monetary unions of the past were set up under two circumstances: as international
   arrangements between countries using similar specie currencies, to harmonize interstate
   transactions and as part of the creation of a nation state from a number of smaller
   political units. In the latter case case monetary unification was part of the process of
   nation building which was combined with the creation of a fiscal union. A common




                                               2
currency was seen as a way to avoid the costs of currency competition and currency
instability among the member states.

International monetary unions of the past were successful as long as the international
environment was stable. Large shocks such as wars led to their dissolution. National
monetary unions were also successful as long as the nation was politically cohesive. It
took the historical national MUs decades to establish the necessary integration of goods
and factor markets and the creation of well functioning central banks. The greater success
of some MUs over others reflected their patterns of economic development and evolution
of sound financial institutions and sound monetary and fiscal policies.

1.1 The history of monetary unions1

A monetary union or a unified currency area is the extreme version of a fixed exchange
rate regime. The essence of a monetary union is that all the member states adopt the same
currency as a unit of account, medium of exchange and store of value.This implies that
the monetary union has one exchange rate towards the rest of the world.

The history of monetary unions is best understood if we make a distinction between
national and multinational monetary unions. By a national monetary union we mean that
political and monetary sovereignty go hand in hand. Roughly speaking, the borders of
the nation state are the borders of the monetary area. A national monetary union has as a
rule one single monetary authority, commonly a central bank.

By a multinational monetary union we mean an international monetary arrangement
between independent countries based on permanently fixed exchange rates between their
currencies. Multinational monetary unions occur when independent nation states link
their monies together through a perfectly fixed exchange rate so that one member’s
money is perfectly exchangeable for another member’s at a fixed price. An extreme
example of this would be that all member states use the same currency.

A second important distinction is between the monetary union per se and the type of
monetary policy pursued within the union. Adoption of a common money by a number of
states can be consistent with alternative sets of institutional arrangements governing
monetary policy, ranging from complete laissez faire to monolithic central banking. As
we demonstrate below monetary unions, once created, differed substantially depending
on the evolution of monetary institutions. The currencies could be unified without
specifying any particular rule for governing monetary policy as will be seen from the
examples of the U.S., German and Italian monetary unions and two multinational
monetary unions, the Latin Monetary Union( LMU) and the Scandanavian monetary
union ( SMU).

1.2 National Monetary Unions.

1.2.1 The United States
1
    See Bordo and Jonung 2003.


                                            3
The U.S. monetary union was created with the signing of the constitution in 1789. The
constitution gave the Congress the sole power to “coin money” and “regulate the value
thereof”. Moreover, the Coinage Act of 1792 defined the U.S. dollar in terms of fixed
weights of gold and silver coins, placing the country on a bimetallic standard. Finally,
establishment of a national mint in Philadelphia in 1792 secured the foundations of an
effective currency area.

In the preceding two centuries, the colonial experience was chequered with examples of
excessive issue of paper money, “the bills of credit”, leading to high inflation as well as
competing seigniorage between the colonies. This experience was repeated after
independence during the Confederation period 1793 to 1789. The Constitution of 1789
was designed expressly to avoid giving the states the power to issue paper money and to
preserve the control of the currency for the Congress.

While the Congress was given the exclusive power to coin money, the States were
allowed to charter commercial banks and to regulate their note issuing activity. All bank
notes had to be convertible into specie. In the early decades of the 19th century, bank note
issue varied considerably and various state bank notes circulated at a discount. Moreover
there is evidence that the price level may have been higher in the west than the east.

The movement towards a complete currency union with a more uniform nationwide price
level was aided by the practices of the First Bank of the United States (1791-1811) and
the Second Bank of the United States (1816-1836). Neither bank was designed as a
central bank but as a public bank. Both banks were sufficiently well capitalized to be able
to provide the government with medium–term bridge loans to finance shortfalls in
government tax receipts. Both were also intended to provide loans to the private sector to
spur economic development. Finally, it was deemed imperative that they hold sufficient
specie reserves to always maintain convertibility of their notes. One of the practices of
both Banks was to enforce the convertibility of state bank note issues and to transfer
specie between regions.

After the demise of the Second Bank of the United States in 1836, the United States did
not have any form of a central bank until the establishment of the Federal Reserve
System in 1914. However the U.S. Treasury served as a monetary authority and
maintained specie convertibility. Although the 19th century was characterized by
considerable banking instability, the currency union remained intact with the exception of
the Civil War period when the Confederate States issued their own fiat currency. In the
face of great difficulties in raising tax revenues and in selling debt both at home and
abroad, the Confederate government expanded its money issues at an ever increasing rate.
By the end of the Civil War a hyperinflation vastly reduced the value of Confederate
notes. Upon Union victory in April 1865, Confederate notes were declared illegal in the
United States. The National Banking system, established in 1865 , finally created a
uniform national bank note system. Several different types of high powered money: gold
coins, silver coins, gold and silver certificates, and U.S. notes ( greenbacks) circulated at
par for the next half century until the creation of the Federal Reserve system in 1914,



                                             4
which issued Federal Reserve notes. Although bank notes now circulated across the
country at par, demand deposits did not, charges for check clearing varied depending on
the distance from the East coast money centers. The Fed instituted par checking for the
member banks, not nonmembers, eliminating the final hurdle to par acceptance of all
forms of money.

The Federal Reserve System consisted of 12 regional Reserve Banks coordinated by the
Board of Governors in Washington DC. As described by Eichengreen (1997a, 1997 b)
and Wheelock ( 2000), the Reserve Banks initially had some monetary independence
within their respective regions with the power to set discount rates. Regional conflicts
over the conduct of monetary policy occurred throughout the 1920s and 1930s, and many
scholars believe that those conflicts were an important part of the paralysis in decision
making that helped create the Great Depression ( Friedman and Schwartz 1963 and
Meltzer 2004). It was only with the Banking Act of 1935 that full power to implement
monetary policy was given to the Board of Governors. Thus monetary unification of the
United States was not finalized until long after political unification.

1.2.2 The Italian Monetary Union

The main reason for the establishment of a currency union on the Appenine peninsula in
the 1860s was political unification under the leadership of the Kingdom of Sardinia. The
Kingdom of Italy was proclaimed in 1861, and completed in stages in 1866 and 1871.
Prior to unification as many as 90 different metallic currencies were legal tender in the
many small Italian states. In addition, major banks in the small states issued bank notes
that served as legal tender. The variety of different currencies was commonly regarded as
a barrier to trade. In order to achieve more than a de jure unified Italy, measures were
taken to turn the country into a monetary union as well.

The issue of coins was quickly resolved. During a brief transition period, four currencies
were accepted while all other old currencies were exchanged into these. Finally, in 1862,
a new, unified coinage was introduced based on the lira of Sardinia. All pre-unification
coins and paper monies were abolished and exchanged for coins denominated in the new
lira, equal in value to the French franc. A bimetallic currency standard was preferred,
primarily to conform to the monetary system of Italy’s major trading partners and to
accommodate the dominance of silver coins in southern Italy. The currency ratio between
silver and gold was set at the French ratio of 15.5 to 1.

 Although Italy had unified its coinage in 1862, it had considerable difficulty in
remaining on the specie standard in which its currency was defined. In 1862, Italy
adopted the bimetallic standard, although de facto the standard was gold. In 1865 Italy
joined the Latin Monetary Union (see section 1.8.1 below). Fiscal improvidence and the
war of unification against Austria in 1866, however ended convertibility (with a new
regime known as the Corso Forsozo). Fiscal and monetary discipline was achieved by
1874, and exchange rate parity was restored. The government announced on March 1,
1883, that it would restore convertibility on April 12, 1884 but convertibility only took
place in silver because it was overvalued at the mint. Public finances then deteriorated



                                            5
and unlawful bank note issues indicated an absence of monetary discipline. By 1894 Italy
was back on a paper standard, and floating exchange rates. Inconvertibility lasted until
1927.

It took Italy 30 years to establish a central bank. No immediate action was taken to
establish a single monetary authority. Several regional banks were issuing notes as well
as performing central bank functions. The Banca Nazionale nel Regno d’Italia ( BNR),
which was formed by the previous national bank of Sardinia, absorbing some other state
banks in the process, held a leading position among banks, however, partly by being the
largest bank in operation and partly by being the bank of the state that led the political
unification process.

In the following decades a number of competing banks of issue coexisted. By 1884 the
number had declined to six. There has been considerable debate on whether the existence
of multiple banks of issue was per se inflationary or whether the lack of fiscal difference
and intermittent departures from specie were the causes of the inflationary episodes
(Fratianni and Spinelli 1997). An enquiry into the state of the banking system led to a
major restructuring in 1893. The Banca d’Italia was formed as an amalgamation between
the BNR and the two remaining Tuscan banks. The three remaining note-issuing banks
were put under direct state supervision. In sum, the formation of the Italian monetary
union, as was the case with the U.S., took place after political unification and it was a
time consuming process.

1.2.3 The German Monetary Union

The German monetary- as well as political-unification process proceeded stepwise. Prior
to monetary unification, each principality and free town issued its own coins and in
addition a multiplicity of issue banks gave out paper money. In addition, large numbers
of foreign coins circulated. The diversity of coins was perceived as a great nuisance.
Merchants and industrialists, often with a liberal orientation, became the main proponent
of unified economic and monetary conditions to reduce transactions cost emanating from
monetary disarray, while the governments of the principalities resisted, safeguarding their
seigniorage gains.

In 1834, under the Zollverein, all internal customs barriers were removed. The 1838
Dresden Coinage Convention brought some simplification, with southern states adopting
the Gulden and northern states the Thaler. Both the Thaler and the Gulden were
explicitly linked to silver, with one Thaler being valued at 1.75 Gulden. The Vienna
Coinage Treaty of 1857 constituted a further step towards monetary unification. The
Treaty incorporporated Austria into the Dresden arrangement by fixing the exchange rate
of 1 Thaler to 1.5 Austrian Gulden and to 1.75 south German Gulden. In addition, the
amount of petty coins that each state could issue was regulated. The circulation of gold
coins, previously left to the discretion of each state, now became subject to stringent
rules. No gold coins other than special Vereinshandelsgoldmünze designed for foreign
trade were minted. The exchange of gold coins into silver at a fixed parity was forbidden
as well, avoiding the risk of turning the currency standard into a bimetallic one.



                                             6
Secondly, the treaty dealt with paper money, the first international monetary arrangement
to do so, by prohibiting the granting of legal tender status to inconvertible paper money.

The establishment of the new unified German empire following Germany’s war of
unification (the Franco-Prussian) war induced further steps. The coinage acts of 1871 and
1873 unified coinage throughout the empire and introduced the Mark as the unit of
account, based on the decimal system. Individual states continued to have their own
coinage, with images of their rulers on the heads of their now standardized coins. In
order to link the German currency to the British pound, at the time the leading currency,
the gold standard was adopted with silver being reduced to use in coins of small
denominations with less metal content than their face value. In 1875 a new banking act
created a new central bank, the Reichsbank, and forced most of the other issue banks to
restrict themselves to ordinary banking business. The Reichsbank was to serve as the
central bank for the new Germany.

 From the 1870s to the outbreak of World War I, Germany was part of the international
gold standard. German monetary conditions were determined by international ones.
Political unification epitomized by the creation of the German Reich was followed by
three major changes in the German monetary system: the conversion of the currency
standard from silver to gold; the replacement of the Thaler with the Mark as the unit of
account and the formation of a single central bank that in practice monopolized the
issuing of paper money. These changes meant that Germany after a lengthy process was a
full-fledged monetary union. Again monetary unification followed political unification,
with concessions being made in the form of coinage design to people who still clung to
the old states that made up the new federally organized empire (James 1997).

1.3 Multinational monetary unions

We consider two multinational monetary unions, the Latin and Scandinavian monetary
unions. Both were based on a common coinage but where each member country retained
its central bank.

1.3.1 The Latin Monetary Union

The Latin Monetary Union ( LMU) was created in 1865 by France, Belgium,
Switzerland and Italy. Prior to its establishment these countries had a history of
recognizing each other’s currencies as means of payment based on the French bimetallic
system, in operation since 1803. The French system stipulated that the fineness of each
coin, regardless of whether it was a gold or silver coin, was to be 90 percent and fixed
the value between gold and silver to 15.5. (Redish 2000 ).

In the 1850s, a fall in the price of gold relative to silver made gold coins overvalued at
the mint. Consequently it became profitable to melt silver coins and sell silver for gold at
the market rate. As the price of gold continued to fall, even worn coins with low silver
content started to disappear. The process left the countries virtually with a gold standard
currency since gold was the only medium of exchange that remained in circulation.



                                             7
However the shortage of silver coins meant a lack of small denomination monies for use
in minor transactions.

Switzerland was the first country to enact a feasible solution by reducing the silver
content to 80 percent of all coins except the five franc coin, thus ensuring that it was no
longer profitable to export the newly reduced value silver coins. Italy, upon unification,
decided to lower the silver content of every coin smaller than one franc to 83.5 percent.
The result of Italian and Swiss actions was that France and Belgium were flooded by
debased silver coins from their neighbors creating seigniorage gains for the issuers.
France reacted in 1864 by reducing the silver content in each silver coin, except the 5
franc coin, to Italy’s 83.5 percent and by suspending the acceptance of Swiss coins by her
customs offices (Einaudi 2001).

Thus there was an apparent need for coordination. The acute shortage of small
denomination coins constituted a hindrance to trade both within and between countries
and forced the countries into action to remedy the problem. The unilateral response by
each country of creating token coins of varying fineness created an additional problem in
the form of one country reaping seigniorage benefits at the expense of the others. To deal
with this situation, Belgium proposed a joint monetary conference, held at the end of
1865 that created the LMU.

The main issues at the conference in 1865 were to secure and standardize the supply of
subsidiary coinage for smaller transactions and the formal adoption of gold as the
currency standard. The first issue was unanimously resolved by deciding that all silver
coins less in value than the five franc coin were to be token coins with 83.5 percent silver
fineness which the state treasuries had to accept as payment up to 100 francs regardless
of the country of origin. Each state treasury was then obliged to exchange the other state
treasury’s holdings of its token coins into gold or silver five franc coins at par. The total
value of token coins that each country was permitted to mint was restricted to six francs
per capita. The adoption of a gold standard was rejected in favor of retaining the
bimetallic standard.

The existing currencies continued to be in use virtually unchanged as parallel currencies.
Each state treasury remained ultimately responsible for the redemption of its own coins.
Apart from solving the problem of scarcity of small denomination coins, the purpose of
the standardization of the dimension and metal content of the coins was to eliminate the
possibility of seigniorage gains through the minting of debased coins. While aiming to
restrict the amount of money in circulation, the conference failed to consider restrictions
preventing the member countries from issuing other forms of money- a failure that was to
be exploited by the issue of paper notes. Consequently the members still had considerable
monetary independence.

Initially, the union achieved what it had set out to achieve. However two problems soon
emerged. After the inauguration of the union, the price of gold started to rise again, and
led to silver 5 franc coins returning to circulation and gold coins being exported or
melted. At the same time, France and Italy began to issue inconvertible paper money. In



                                              8
the case of France, it was a temporary measure due to the Franco-Prussian war in 1870-
71. Italy’s chronic government deficit preserved inconvertibility of the lira until 1881 and
then introduced it again in 1894. The increased money supply in Italy led to a
depreciation of the lira. Consequently, Italian silver coins were exported to the other
member countries where they were legal tender. Obviously, this enabled the Italian
government to finance part of her deficits with seigniorage, the costs of which were
shared between all four countries.

In response to the problems facing the union, a conference by the members in 1874
decided to maintain the bimetallic standard but restrict the minting of silver five franc
coins. In 1878 the members agreed to cease issuing five franc silver coins although those
still in circulation were to remain legal tender, and the silver coins remained as in effect
token coinage. This arrangement established the “limping gold standard’.

As the relative price of gold continued to rise, the union in 1885 considered full adoption
of the gold standard and thus withdrawing the 5 franc silver coins. The main problem was
once again the cost of redeeming silver in circulation, since the intrinsic value of silver
was now far below its face value. In the end , this proved too great an obstacle to
overcome and a new agreement was signed stipulating that any party leaving the union
would have to exchange the others’ holdings of its silver coins into gold.

World War I led to the break-up of the LMU. The sharp increase in military expenditures
left the members with no choice but to issue paper money. The large quantities of fiat
issued during the war remained in circulation after hostilities ended. As paper money was
not recognized as legal tender in any country other than the issuing one, the union was in
effect put out of business. During the war, silver coins were melted or exported. The
remaining coins constituted a small share of the total money supply. Belgium was the
first country to act accordingly, declaring in 1925 that she would leave the union at the
start of 1927. The other countries followed and the LMU was dissolved.


1.3.2 The Scandinavian Monetary Union

Prior to the formation of the Scandinavian Monetary Union (SMU) in 1873, the three
Scandinavian countries had a long history of similar units of account and exchange of
notes and coins between them (Bergman, Gerlach and Jonung 1993). They were all on
the silver standard and they all used the riksdaler as the unit of account. One Norwegian
specierigsdaler was roughly equal to two Danish rigsdaler which in turn was roughly
equal to four Swedish riksdaler. In consequence, a considerable fraction of the coin
circulation in either of the three countries consisted of coins minted in the other two. The
difference in value separating these exchange rates from the exchange rates based on the
currencies’ values in silver was small enough in the case of the Danish and Norwegian
currencies for any profits that could have arisen from arbitrage to be negligible. This was
not the case for the Swedish currency whose value exceeded 0.5 Danish or 0.25
Norwegian riksdaler by an amount sufficiently large to produce an inflow of Danish and
Norwegian coins into Sweden to be perceived as a nuisance.



                                             9
In addition to this currency flow there were other reasons for aiming at a unified coinage.
There was a lively debate across Scandinavia over which metal-gold or silver would be
most suitable for the monetary standard. There also was discussion regarding the merits
of basing the unit of account on the decimal system. The intellectual climate favored the
decimal system on the grounds of rationality and adherence to the gold standard – the
standard followed by the leading commercial nations Britain and Germany. In addition
the nationalistic movement called Scandinavism fostered social and political willingness
to bring the Nordic countries closer together. All of these factors contributed to the three
countries creating a common currency in 1873. Norway did not formally sign the
agreement until 1875, but in practice altered her monetary standard in 1873.

The formation of the SMU in 1873 replaced the old unit of account, the riksdaler, with a
new one, the krona, which was specified in terms of gold and was to be equal in all three
countries. Subsidiary coins were to be minted in silver and copper with a fineness of 80
percent and no restrictions were placed on the amount of subsidiary coins minted. All
coins were given legal tender status throughout the union. The state treasuries accepted
unlimited amounts of coins irrespective of their country of origin. The only restrictions
were a maximum amount stipulated for the settlement of private debts.

Notes were used widely in Sweden because of the larger denominations of the gold coins.
Intercountry circulation consisted of notes and subsidiary coins. This caused some
dissatisfaction since notes were not covered by the union agreement and thus did not
always circulate at par.

In 1885 the three central banks decided to establish inter-country drawing rights.
Transactions between the central banks were made free of interest and other charges.
Then in 1894 Sweden and Norway further extended the scope of the union by accepting
each others notes at par without restrictions. The Danish central bank joined the
agreement in 1901.

The SMU worked smoothly in the years before World War I. The gold standard, by
requiring convertibility into gold, ensured stability in the money supply. All three
countries avoided issuing excessive amounts of subsidiary coins. The money supply in
the member countries expanded in line with economic growth. Inflation rates and interest
rates exhibited identical patterns in Scandinavia during the union.

 Like the LMU, the SMU’s collapse was induced by World War I. At the outbreak of the
war, Scandinavian notes were declared inconvertible into gold. At the same time, in order
to prevent an outflow of gold, the export of gold was prohibited. Money growth ceased to
be tied to the supply of gold and the basis for the exchange of Scandinavian notes at par
was eliminated. Monetary policy was more expansive in Denmark and Norway than in
Sweden. In 1915, the official exchange rates changed accordingly with one Swedish
krona buying more than one Danish or Norwegian krona.




                                             10
Since the legal tender status of Scandinavian coins in all Scandinavian countries was still
in force, Danish and Norwegian gold coins were exported to Sweden. The governments
in Denmark and Norway often granted exemptions from the prohibition of export of gold
coins. The Swedish central bank objected to the inflow of gold coins. Negotiations were
opened in order to achieve the suspension of the legal tender arrangement. Neither
Denmark nor Norway wished to terminate it however, and the outcome in 1917 was
instead a strict enforcement of the prohibition of gold exports.

 At the end of the war, the three Scandinavian currencies were no longer traded at par.
Gold coins could not circulate across borders because of the ban on gold exports. In
virtually all respects the SMU had been rendered ineffective by the war. The only
remaining parts of the original agreement were the legal tender and equal value status and
unrestricted minting and flow of subsidiary coins. Because the Swedish coins were more
valuable than Danish and Norwegian coins, subsidiary coins flowed into Sweden. To
come to terms with this situation, a supplementary agreement was put into force in 1924
which stated that, without regard to the coinage treaty of 1873, each country could only
issue new subsidiary coins that was legal tender in the issuing country, thus phasing out
the common subsidiary coins in circulation. The union was effectively terminated by the
decision.

1.4 Lessons from the Historical Record.

The past monetary unions we have described were demarcated into the categories of
national and multinational. The evolution of the former set of arrangements was tied up
closely with the creation of nascent national states in the three countries we examined.
The economic case for monetary unification in each of them was clear: to reduce
transactions costs of multiple currencies and thereby facilitate commerce; to reduce
exchange rate volatility; and to prevent wasteful competition for seigniorage. The
multinational monetary unions were set up for basically similar economic reasons but
there was no underlying political imperative to create a nation state. The two international
unions we examined were part of a more general international monetary standard based
on specie and although the members had central banks, the scope for following monetary
policies inconsistent with the rules of the gold standard regime were limited. This made
coordination between the monetary authorities relatively easy.

This key distinction between the two types of arrangements was reflected in their
durability. The national monetary unions we describe have endured for two centuries
reflecting the cohesion of their underlying nation states. The record was not without
serious strains produced by political forces, witness the American Civil War and the
postwar division between West and East Germany. There have been prominent
dissolutions in the twentieth century of national monetary unions which reflected the
breakup of their underlying polities, for instance Austria-Hungary, the USSR,
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia. But the key element in the survival of these unions has
always been political.




                                            11
 In the case of the international monetary unions we have covered, dissolution occurred
when faced with the large exogenous shock of World War I. The exigencies of war put
the various member states on divergent paths of monetary and fiscal rectitude. The
underlying common nominal anchor, gold convertibility, became inconsistent with
pressing national goals. Moreover both the LMU and SCU were part of a broader
international monetary system which because of its common basis of adherence to specie
also implicitly fostered monetary cooperation (although not as clearly demarcated as by
the MUs). Like the two regional sub arrangements, it collapsed with the strains of the
war. In the postwar the gold exchange standard and Bretton Woods were arrangements
which combined the discipline of gold adherence with the flexibility of allowing
domestic financial authorities to pursue domestic stability goals. In both cases the
regimes ultimately collapsed because of the incompatibility between the two goals.

An additional lesson is the role of the monetary authority in the two types of
arrangements. The national MUs all developed central banks as part of the process of
monetary unification. It took a long time in each of the three examples for this process to
reach fruition and for the central banks to provide monetary stability. The path was far
from smooth as seen in the U.S. case in the destruction of the two Banks of the U.S. in
the early nineteenth century and the Federal Reserve’s massive failure in the 1930s; in
Germany in hyperinflations after the two world wars; and in Italy in monetary instability
for most of the Banca d’Italia’s existence. The multinational MU’s we examine kept
separate monetary authorities. Cooperation between them was focused primarily on the
limited goals of maintaining compatible coinages and in the case of the SCU the
international clearing of bank notes .They did not engage in policy coordination in the
modern sense in part because given the common adherence to the gold standard it was
not necessary.

EMU is different from the earlier experiences with monetary unification that we have
described. It has created a single currency, the euro and a common monetary authority,
the ECB, like in the case of the national MUs, but the member states have kept a
substantial part of their political sovereignty and, as will be discussed in section 2, their
fiscal sovereignty. Also like the historic gold standard the EMU has a common nominal
anchor, the commitment by the ECB to price stability, albeit in a fiat regime. A key
potential problem as in the case of the earlier international monetary arrangements and
the multinational MUs is conflict between national agendas for growth and full
employment, a problem which is related to the incidence and severity of potential
asymmetric shocks. Here political will in either driving towards greater political
integration or in the creation of cooperative fiscal arrangements will be vital for the
underlying durability of the EMU.

2. Fiscal policy arrangements for EMU in historical perspective

National MUs of the past, like Germany, Italy and the United States, which in some
respects served as prototypes for the EMU also evolved as fiscal unions with either a




                                              12
centralized fiscal authority or fiscal federalism with revenue sharing. In this section we
consider some theoretical and historical perspectives on fiscal unions.2

2.1 Theoretical perspectives : fiscal unions and fiscal federalism.

The concept of a fiscal union entails fiscal federalism or some other kind of cooperative
arrangement between the members regarding the rules designed to allow the long run
sustainability of fiscal positions. Fiscal federalism defines the roles of the different levels
of government and the way in which they relate to one another through different
instruments like grants and transfers.

The traditional theory of fiscal federalism contends that the central (federal) government
should have the basic responsibility for macroeconomic stabilization and income
distribution. It also provides national public goods. According to the theory,
decentralized levels of government should provide goods and services whose
consumption is linked to their own jurisdictions. The economic argument for providing
public goods at the sub-national level is based on the Decentralization Theorem, namely
that “the level of welfare will always be as high if Pareto-efficient levels of consumption
are provided in each jurisdiction than if any single, uniform level of consumption is
maintained across all jurisdictions.” (Oates 1972).

The most obvious cost of federalism is the loss of autonomy by the central government.
In fact, the advantages of decentralization require that the central government’s authority
be limited. As a result, in highly decentralized fiscal federations, central governments
might find it difficult to implement coordinated policies and provide federation wide
collective goods.

That decentralized governments will provide the efficient level of public goods depends
on three assumptions: a) households are freely mobile and generate competition between
jurisdictions. If this is not the case, competition among local governments can lead to
sub-optimal outcomes; b) the lack of interdependencies between jurisdictions. When
interdependencies are significant, competition among local governments can generate
spillovers; c) a federation should be properly structured and its actions disciplined.

Thus if there are strong interdependencies between sub-national jurisdictions, local
officials may face incentives to increase their expenditure while externalizing the costs to
others. This incentive is higher if the central government cannot fully commit to a no-
bailout rule. And the central government’s commitment becomes less credible if sub-
central governments are heavily dependent on transfers from the central authority.

The interplay between several fiscal and one monetary authority can lead to free riding.
Each individual fiscal authority sees itself as a small player who has little impact on
monetary policy. In equilibrium each country free rides and the outcome is worse than in
a cooperative equilibrium. An extensive literature has analyzed the existence of
independent fiscal authorities with a single central bank (Dixit and Lambertini 2001,
2
    See Bordo, Jonung and Markiewicz 2007.


                                              13
Chari and Kehoe 2004, Uhlig 2002). In line with the proposition by Rodden (2004 and
2006), these studies point out that a setup of a single monetary authority and numerous
fiscal authorities requires effective fiscal policy constraints to avoid excessive deficits at
the sub-central level.

2.2 Theoretical Perspectives: Optimum Currency Areas

The classical case for a fiscal union accompanying a monetary union is the theory of
Optimum Currency Areas pioneered by Mundell (1961), Kenen (1969) and McKinnon
(1963). The original OCA approach weighed the benefits of adopting a single currency
against the costs of abandoning independent monetary policy. The benefits of adopting a
single currency and a single monetary policy are the reduction of transactions costs of
using multiple currencies. These benefits would be greater the more open and the more
extensive the trade connections are for the economies involved. The costs occur in the
face of shocks which hit the members asymmetrically. Adjustment to such shocks can be
facilitated by flexible wages and prices and by labor mobility. If these mechanisms do not
function well then this approach makes the case for a common fiscal authority or a formal
fiscal arrangement (fiscal federalism) to transfer resources from the members facing
positive shocks to those facing negative shocks.

Mundell (1973), referred to as Mundell II in distinction to his 1961 article ( McKinnon
2004), argued that in the case of free capital mobility, the exchange rate becomes a target
for speculative movements and a source of asymmetric shocks. Hence abandoning a
flexible exchange rate is an additional benefit of a currency union. Therefore a country
might be interested in joining a currency union even if other adjustment mechanisms are
not well developed. More recently it has been argued that financial integration leads to
the development of market based risk – sharing arrangements which will offset the
effects of asymmetric shocks and obviate the need for additional fiscal stabilizing
instruments.

Two market based mechanisms can provide private agents insurance against negative
idiosyncratic shocks and hence ameliorate the negative consequences of EMU: an
internationally diversified portfolio can protect private individuals from a negative
idiosyncratic shock to their domestic assets and borrowing and lending can smooth
consumption.

Finally Frankel and Rose (2003) have argued that areas which do not qualify ex ante as
OCAs may actually ex post become OCAs. They present evidence that ex post
integration of goods and capital markets follows monetary unions. In rationalizing
production across national boundaries, the asymmetry of real output movements between
markets is reduced and hence there is less of a need either for fiscal transfers or for the
preservation of independent monetary policies.

2.3 Empirical Evidence




                                              14
An extensive empirical literature since the 1990s has ascertained the extent to which the
euro area satisfied the various criteria for an OCA and whether there is a case for a fiscal
union or fiscal federalism to supplement the MU.

2.3.1 Asymmetric shocks?

The literature assesses the extent to which the euro area is subject to idiosyncratic shocks
defined as different economic disturbances that are either initially different or affect
regions in different ways. Eichengreen (1997b) finds that asymmetric disturbances,
measured by the real exchange rate, are more variable in Europe than in the U.S.. Other
evidence by Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1993) and von Hagen and Neumann (1994)
complement these results. According to Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1993) “These studies
uniformly point to the conclusion that adjustment to region-specific shocks , whether by
market or by policy, is faster in the USA than in Europe.”

2.3.2 Labor Mobility

De Grauwe and Vanhaverbeke (1993) report very low migration within the European
countries. Eichengreen (1993) finds that interregional mobility is much is much more
sensitive to changes in wage differentials in the U.S. than in the UK and in Italy. Obstfeld
and Peri(1998) find that there is little migration in response to asymmetric shocks within
European countries, relative to the U.S.. The literature suggests that intraregional
mobility in the euro area is low. International migration in the euro area will probably be
even lower since language and culture add further barriers to labor mobility.

2.3.3 Wage and Price flexibility

The empirical evidence indicates that both wages and prices are sticky in the short run,
indicating a costly adjustment to negative shocks, involving an increase in
unemployment. One recent study by Dessy (2004) analyses wage dynamics using the
European Community Household Panel data for 12 countries 1994-96. She finds a high
degree of nominal wage rigidity for all the countries. Thus wage/price flexibility in the
euro area do not seem to be very helpful in accommodating idiosyncratic shocks.

2.3.4 Risk sharing mechanisms.
.
The early OCA literature emphasized the role of government based risk sharing
mechanisms consisting of transfers and other discretionary grants. Initial evidence by
Sala-i-Martin and Sachs (1992) showed for the U.S. that a one dollar drop in state income
could be compensated by an increase in net transfers by 60 cents, while Eichengreen
(1997a, 1997b) calculated that fiscal transfers between the member states of the EU was
only a fraction of the U.S. magnitudes. According to Hartland (1949), fiscal federal
transfers served to offset much of the interregional losses following the collapse of the
U.S. banking system in the 1930s. However recent work (Von Hagen 2000, Obstfeld and
Peri 1998, Melitz and Zumer 2002, Balli and Sorensen 2007) has greatly diminished the




                                             15
size of the offsets estimated by Sala-i-Martin and Sachs and by Eichengreen to between
5% and 15%.

The recent evidence on risk sharing finds that for the U.S., the capital markets provide
most of the insurance against idiosyncratic shocks (Asdrubali, Sorensen and Yosha 1996,
Melitz 2004). Europe lags behind the U.S. in pooling risks through portfolio
diversification (Melitz 2004) but the borrowing channel is almost as well developed in
the EU as the U.S. ( Bali and Sorensen 2007). Increasing financial integration in the EU
although less than the U.S. suggests an even stronger contribution of financial markets to
risk sharing. Finally recent evidence (Melitz 2004, Kalemli-Oczan et al 2004, Balli and
Sorensen 2007) finds that financial and real integration in the EU has increased the
symmetry of business cycles. This again may reduce the need for accomodation of
idiosyncratic shocks through risk sharing mechanisms. This is in line with the hypothesis
of endogeneity of currency unions advanced by Frankel and Rose (1998).

2.4 Monetary and Fiscal Unions: History and Current Practice

The argument by Eichengreen (1991) and others that fiscal federalism can offset the
effects of asymmetric shocks and improve upon the operation of a monetary union
depends on a number of assumptions which may not hold. To isolate the characteristics
that make fiscal unions successful we describe the historical experience of several fiscal
unions: the United States; Argentina and Germany. The first can be viewed as a
successful fiscal union. Canada and Australia have had similar experiences. The second,
Argentina can be viewed as a less successful MU. Brazil may fit into the same category.
Germany is an intermediate case.

2.4.1 The United States

The history of U.S. fiscal federalism goes back to the constitution of 1789. After the
Declaration of Independence in 1776, The Articles of Confederation created a league of
sovereign states in which the Congress did not have the power of taxation, or the power
to control trade or the currency. This arrangement was unsuccessful largely: because of
spillover effects of each states independent monetary and fiscal policy; because of the
impediments to a free market; and the weakness of Congress. The Constitution of 1789
gave the Federal Government the power to collect taxes and tariffs and to issue currency
and to provide the public goods of defense and international diplomacy. The tenth
amendment declared that all powers not expressly delegated to the federal government by
the Constitution were preserved for the states. This laid the foundation for the concept of
states rights, limited national government and dual spheres of authority between the state
and federal governments.

The period from 1789 to 1901 was the era of Dual Federalism, characterized by little
collaboration between the federal and state governments. In the 1830s many states ran
large fiscal deficits to finance infrastructure projects. In the face of a major international
financial crisis and fiscal shock in the years 1837 to 1840, many states faced insolvency
and demanded a bailout by the Congress. This was refused leading to widespread defaults



                                             16
in 1840. Thus the federal government sent a costly signal of the limits to its commitments
to the states. As a result the states have approximate fiscal sovereignty.

Between 1901 and 1960 cooperation and collaboration between various levels of
government increased. The defining moment in the U.S. fiscal federalism was the Great
Depression (Bordo, Goldin and White 1998). In the face of the massive decline in real
income, the states were unable to raise the revenue necessary to meet unavoidable
expenditure. In 1933, as a major component of the New Deal, President Roosevelt greatly
expanded the role of the federal government in the domestic economy. In the 1930s there
was a massive shift in expenditure from the local to the state and federal levels. Before
1932 the relative shares of government expenditures were: 50% local, 20% state and 30%
federal government. After 1940 the shares were: local 30%, state 24% and 46% federal
(Oates and Wallis 1998). Most of the increase in government expenditure came in
programs administered at the federal level in cooperation with state and local
governments.

Creative federalism from 1960-68 further shifted the power relationship between
government levels toward the federal government through the expansion of the grant in
aid system and the increasing use of regulations. Since 1970 there has been some
devolution of powers back to the states.

2.4.2 Argentina

Argentina is a federal republic with 24 provinces. It was born out of the union of colonial
regions with differing economic and social characteristics. The establishment of a
national government and a constitution took almost four decades accompanied by violent
struggle. The Constitution gave the provinces priority over the nation.

The Great Depression, although milder in impact than in the U.S. also led to major
changes in the role of government. The key events of the 1930s were the abandonment of
a currency board linked to gold and the creation of a central bank (Della Paolera and
Taylor 1999). The Depression led to the insolvency of many of the provinces. They were
bailed out by transfers from the federal government financed by paper money issues by
the central bank. The Depression also spawned an increase in both the federal and state
government’s shares in national income.

In subsequent decades the states kept running large fiscal deficits which were financed by
transfers and loans from the federal government and by loans from the provincial banks.
These loans were then discounted at the central bank. By the late 1980’s Argentina had a
hyperinflation. It was ended by the 1991 Convertibility Law which established a currency
board arrangement ending inflationary central bank financing of public sector deficits at
all levels.

By the mid 1990s many provinces again began running large deficits which were funded
by national treasury bonds. In 2002, Argentina suffered a serious debt, banking and
currency crisis which ended the Convertibility Law. Many commentators have attributed



                                            17
the 2002 crisis to irresponsible behavior by the provinces and the subsequent run up in
the national debt to GDP ratio.

2.4.3 Germany

The Federal Republic of Germany consists of a federal government, 16 Länder (state)
governments and numerous municipal governments. The national unification of Germany
in 1871 was based on a strong tradition of regional governments. After unification of the
German Reich total government spending increased from 10% of GDP in 1881 to 18% in
1913 with an increase in the central government’s share from 3% to 6%.

The Weimar Republic was founded as a“decentralized unitary state” after the defeat of
World War I, and experienced dramatic shocks in quick succession: the hyperinflation of
1922-23, the stabilization of 1923-4, and the Great Depression. The Nazi regime after
1933 created a unitary state with all power held by the central government while the
states were relegated to administrative districts.

After World War II, a federal state was created based on Länder which were conceived as
state units. They were given considerable power. The German system is less cooperative
and more competitive than federations like the U.S., Canada and Switzerland. Although
the central government officially follows the no bailout rule, the commitment is not fully
credible and this can create an incentive by the Länder to borrow excessively. This was
the case in the 1970s and 1980s when the Länder of Bremen and Saarland received
special supplementary transfers from the federal government. Many have argued that the
large debts of the Länder are largely responsible for Germany’s breach in recent years of
EU’s Stability and Growth Pact.

2.5 Some Lessons from History.

The brief historical comparison of three fiscal unions has some relevance for the case for
a fiscal union for the EU. First, we observe that all of the fiscal unions were preceded by
political unions. In each case independent regions decided to found a union because of
military insecurity and a consequent need for common defense or the desire to be
independent of foreign powers. Second, institutional development in these federations
was driven by exceptional events, often economic disasters. The best example is the
Great Depression which affected the institutions at all levels of government. In all cases it
lent to an increase in government power and its centralization. Third, institutional
evolution worked through an “institutional learning by doing” process. Not all the
federations learned from their negative experiences of the past. In the presence of moral
hazard the Federal Government has to give a signal of commitment and often a lesson to
the sub-national authorities, otherwise they do not learn. Thus the U.S. Federal
government taught the right lesson to the states in 1840 that there would be no bailout of
their debt. This was not the case in Argentina or Germany. In the case of Argentina (and
Brazil) there is still no credible mechanism to impose fiscal discipline.




                                             18
3 Future Challenges facing EMU

Institutions may be conceived of as continually evolving systems of rules, that depend for
their legitimacy on a relatively widely shared consensus that they are not actively
dysfunctional. They are not usually transformed without a major crisis. This paper tries
to evolve a few lessons that can be learnt about transformative crises in the histories of
national currencies and national central banks. In the past, central banks, and the
currencies they managed, have been discredited or put under severe strain as a result of
• severe or endemic fiscal problems creating pressures for the monetization of public
    debt
• low economic growth may produce demands for central banks to pursue more
    expansionary policies
• regional strains producing a demand for different monetary policies to adjust to
    particular regional pressures (such conflicts have played an important part in the near
    or actual break up of federations)
• severe crises of the financial system (which discredited the central banks of the
    interwar era)
• tensions between the international and the domestic role of a leading currency
    produced conflicts about British monetary policy in the 1920s and about U.S. policy
    in the 1960s and 1970s.
How far do there exist analogies between the circumstances that produced these historical
problems and the likely development of the euro?

3.1 The fiscal dilemma

The extreme fiscal strains that destroyed monetary regimes such as that of the French
revolutionary regime, or of Russia and the central European states in the first decades of
the twentieth century, were the result of prolonged and intense military conflict of a type
that is no longer conceivable in contemporary Europe. But in the second half of the
twentieth century all industrialized states, including especially those of western Europe,
experienced a sustained rise in government expenditure that was historically unique in
that it was not an accompaniment of war. While it is often argued that the increase in
such expenditure has made the states concerned more socially stable and also more
resilient to economic shocks, there is also a limit to that expansion of public sector
activity. At some stage, a society reaches the limit of the impositions it can bear.

In a globalized world, there is increasing pressure to reduce rates of taxation, especially
corporate taxation. The accession to the EU of new member countries with a low tax
regime (notably the flat tax regimes of Estonia and Slovakia) has produced additional tax
competition within the EU. On the other hand, the political pressures that result in rising
demand for public services are continually increasing. The ageing of the population, and
the increased technical availability of expensive medical treatments, add to those
pressures.

One way of solving the fiscal dilemma in the past was inflation. In the 1970s and 1980s
Europe, and the world, had generally high levels of inflation. But it was also increasingly


                                            19
recognized that such inflation imposed a cost because it distorted incentives; and at
higher levels, it provoked considerable political unease. One way of seeing the evolution
of an increasingly hard European Monetary System, and then the European Monetary
Union, is as a mechanism for the imposition of external discipline. The European
framework made it easier for governments to press on with reforms to limit expenditure,
that could be presented to hostile parliaments and pressure groups as an unavoidable part
of an exercise in integration that promised substantial long run benefits. Within the EMS,
however, some countries still experienced considerable fiscal pressure; and fiscal stimuli
translated into increased demand, increased prices and a real exchange rate appreciation
that threatened competitiveness. These countries could still in the EMS resort to an
exchange rate realignment (as in 1992, where pressure in Italy set off a general
realignment).

The monetary union obviously prevents such adjustment measures being undertaken by
national policy-makers. The only (partially effective) substitute left is fiscal measures to
compensate firms for real exchange rate appreciation. But such measures have a fiscal
cost.

The most obvious threat to the single currency is usually held to arise out of the imperfect
control and coordination of national fiscal policies. Some commentators argue as a result
that monetary unions produce an inexorable dynamic in the direction of fiscal unions.

The stability criteria in the Maastricht Treaty were the subject of immensely protracted
and complicated negotiation, and were intended to address this problem. In the aftermath
of the recession of 2000-1, and of Europe’s weak growth performance, substantial
pressure from the large states led to some loosening of the criteria. When most of the
large member states broke the rules, the then President of the Commission, Romano
Prodi, referred to the pact as absurd, and a 2005 summit formally modified the rule so as
to make it more flexible in the face of cyclical downturns.

A formalized system of fiscal federalism would however not necessarily deal with the
problems of fiscal indiscipline on the part of member states. Indeed, the expectation of
institutionalized transfers or bailouts following fiscal problems might well be expected to
increase the incentives for bad behavior. Stricter observance of the existing system and
its rules, on the other hand, might lead to pressure to reform. Fiscal reforms would in the
longer run be expected to raise the rate of growth.

3.2 Growth rates

The growth rate of the economy is a central determinant of the likely long run success of
the euro. For reasons that will be discussed below, low growth, or very different rates of
growth in different parts of the Euro area, would be likely to raise political questions and
produce political tensions around the setting of the common or single monetary policy.
Both the ability to comply with the Maastricht criteria, and the political tolerance of an
autonomous central bank, are highly dependent on the overall rate of economic growth.
The revival of growth in Europe since 2005 has brought a reduction in the deficits, but



                                             20
they will reappear should there be a renewed faltering. In the longer term (as in other rich
industrial countries), the additional costs imposed by increased life expectancy, an ageing
population structure, and rising health costs are likely to impose a heavy strain.
Forecasting long-run developments involves many uncertainties, but almost every
contemporary prognosis sees Europe as growing significantly slower than other parts of
the world. Robert Fogel in a recent overview suggested a rate of real GDP growth for the
period 2000-2040 of 1.2 percent for the industrialized EU-15, a slightly higher figure
than the 1.1 percent for Japan, but much lower than the 3.8 percent for the United states
or 7.1 percent for India or 8.4 percent for China (Fogel 2007).

The relatively poor growth performance is conventionally explained by inflexible labor
markets and by more limited capital markets that make venture capital harder and scarcer.
In both areas, the introduction of the single currency has brought greater flexibility, but
one other brake on European growth remains widely recognized but poorly counter-acted
in policy terms. The Lisbon Agenda included an opening up of services, yet this is the
area where the most restrictions still apply, and where national governments are
powerfully pressed to resist attempts on an EU-wide basis to introduce greater elements
of competition. The services directive was effectively so watered down in 2007 by
national politics that little remains of the reform initiative. There is in short, especially at
a national level, a critical resistance to important elements of the liberalizing agenda. The
blockage is historically disappointing, in that in the early stages of European integration
in the 1950s and 1960s, the European authorities enforced a highly competitive market in
the dynamic sectors of the time, in manufacturing, while offering compensation to the
less dynamic agricultural sector. This highly successful strategy would, if translated into
today’s circumstances, involve enforcing a high level of competition in the dynamic areas
of today, mostly services, while providing safety nets to those affected by the relative
decline of Europe’s competitive advantage in some areas of manufacturing. But the
vision of the European Union as providing enhanced competition has not been universal
or pervasive, and the consequences has been sub-optimal growth.

There is a political economy reason to worry about the effects of low growth on the euro,
and to see it as politically vulnerable to backlashes against globalization. In many parts
of Europe, globalization is widely seen as a major threat to the social order; and the
resentments are used by politicians eager to establish a higher political profile. Workers,
especially in manufacturing, are faced with a threat of job losses or radical reductions in
income as a consequence of low wage competition from Asia or from eastern Europe.
Workers in manufacturing and in services are worried about the effects of immigration on
income levels. Politically, the backlash against globalization is associated with the
extremes of left and right, which often take their themes and rhetorical engagement from
each other. But since the conventional right and the conventional left compete against
each other, and need to mobilize as many votes as possible, they are also likely to take up
some of the anti-globalization language in order to maximize their support and prevent a
slippage of voters to the extremes. Sometimes they will also experience pressure to
transform this rhetoric into policy.




                                              21
The anti-globalization movement however finds it hard to identify concrete targets
against which to direct the widespread malaise. Protests directed against American fast
food restaurants do not really seem adequately to confront the issues raised by
globalization. In consequence, the single currency has already become a popular
whipping boy for anti-globalization sentiment. It is blamed for price increases of some
consumer items: in Germany, popular newspapers launched campaigns detailing the
effects of the “Teuro” (expensive Euro; teuer = expensive). In Italy, some very
prominent consumer items became very much more expensive (coffee by 30 percent and
pizza by 16 percent).3

The immediate wave of dissatisfaction surrounding the introduction of the euro quickly
ebbed. But it holds an instructive lesson: the episode was used by governments, and
governments took at least some part in the mobilization of critical opinion. The German
Finance Minister Hans Eichel endorsed the view that the euro had led to price increases,
and the Consumer Affairs Minister Renate Künast created an office to marshal
complaints from customers. The Greek Socialist government under Costas Simitis
encouraged a one day boycott of shops.

A major feature in anti-globalization sentiment is the belief that some protection against
the forces of the world economy is needed. According to this view, the primary
obligation of the political system is to steer or cushion the process of globalization: to
stop takeovers by predatory investment groups (in German referred to as locusts or
Heuschrecken); to protect local jobs; and to provide credit to lack business. An obvious
corollary to this argumentation sees a national currency as a better carapace than a
Europeanized currency. The necessity of a common monetary policy requires interest
rates that are “too high” in some countries and areas (higher that the rate that would be
desirable if a local central bank were setting rates).

Consequently, interests that demand a monetary policy more focused on growth are
usually critical of the ECB; and in some cases (such as the Italian Liga Nord) see a return
to national money as an appropriate solution. In the 2007 French presidential election,
Nicolas Sarkozy derived considerable mileage from criticism of the ECB, and then
repeated the criticism after the election. The inclusion of the ECB as an institution of the
European Union in the slimmed down and revised constitutional treaty raises the
possibility that a formal mechanism will evolve for putting pressure on the ECB to make
growth as well as price stability an objective of policy.

At present, the signs of such a use of the euro as a focus of globalization fears are
relatively weak. Indeed, the euro is generally quite popular – more so than at its launch
as a circulating currency in 2002. Since the Maastricht Treaty, and even more
dramatically since the introduction of the euro, public opinion surveys conducted by
Eurobarometer have shown increasing degrees of support for the single currency (2000:

3
  BBC January 3, 2002: Italy rows over rising euro prices; see for an academic treatment: Gaiotti, Eugenio
and Lippi, Francesco, "Pricing Behavior and the Introduction of the Euro: Evidence from a Panel of
Restaurants" (February 2005). CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4893. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=730525


                                                   22
53 percent; 2004: 62 percent; 2005: 65 percent).4 But these figures also reflect a general
increase in satisfaction that accompanies better economic performance, and they are
likely to reverse at the onset of economic difficulties or even a slowdown of growth.

3.3 Regional pressures

Regions with different growth patterns or different political economies are likely to press
for different monetary policies, and in a democratic setting the result might be extreme
polarization and conflict. Such polarization occurred in many gold standard countries in
the late nineteenth century, when farming regions believed that they would benefit from
the abandonment of a deflationary gold regime and the adoption of a bimetallic standard.
In the United States, the agrarian mid-West and the South were pitted against the North-
east; in Germany there was a similar divide between a grain-producing East and the
industrial areas of western Germany. Until a general price rise occurred after the
discovery of gold in Alaska, Australia and South Africa in the last years of the century,
monetary policy was highly politicized. In more extreme settings, federations can even
break up. In the last years of the Yugoslav Federation, as democratization began, a gap
opened up between the industrially stagnant Serb areas and more dynamic regions in the
north, and fuelled an ethnic conflict that had not been a prominent part of most of the
experience of postwar Yugoslavia. For the non-Serbs, the realization that Serbians were
imposing an inflation (and using the fiscal proceeds of inflation to finance their own
goals) made a breakup of the Federation an urgent political demand for Slovenes, Croats
and tragically also for Bosnians. Similarly, in post-1918 Germany, the idea that Berlin
was promoting an inflationary policy to its own advantage prompted Rhineland, Saxon
and Bavarian separatism and a “Los von Berlin” movement.

These may appear to be extreme and problematic precedents. But very different
economic experiences undoubtedly promote feelings of regional and sometimes even of
ethnic difference. Given Europe’s highly troubled twentieth century history, many
responsible policy-makers are worried about a resurgence of historical divides.

We should distinguish between shorter term and longer term problems. One potential
source of difficulty in the shorter term horizon lies in the expansion of the euro area.
Introducing the euro (in the recent EU accession countries) or pegging to the euro in
other countries (or even adopting the euro as a currency as has already been undertaken
in Montenegro and Kosovo) is likely to be an increasingly attractive option. Countries
see the euro as an external anchor that can give a powerful anti-inflationary credibility.

The extension of the euro to new accession countries (which is a requirement of the
accession treaties, rather than being a political option) in itself will create new challenges.
This issue has already been widely debated in regard to the adoption of the euro by the
Baltic states. The new member countries are powerfully growing emerging market
economies, which experience and will continue to experience rising inflation as prices for
services rise, corresponding to the increased incomes producers of tradables derive from
selling to global markets (Belassa effect). Correspondingly, the mature markets of the
4
    http://www.gesis.org/en/data_service/eurobarometer/standard_eb_trend/trend/currency.htm


                                                   23
west are likely to experience periodic bouts of anxiety about deflation (and anxiety about
excessively tight ECB policy), as competition on markets for tradable goods and services
drives down prices.

The EU requirement that these two types of countries (emerging central European
markets on the one hand, and the mature economies of western Europe on the other) have
a single currency or a permanent fix is likely to produce serious problems in one or both.
The mature markets should have monetary policies that are less restricted than they were
in the past by fears of deflation. They will experience substantial pressure for a more
growth-oriented monetary policy. On the other hand, the emerging markets should be
free to conduct tighter policies to minimize the possibilities of destabilizing surges in
asset prices.

Monetary policy in the mature market economies is likely to come under populist
pressure to respond to weak economic growth. Yet without continued immigration,
which is also likely to produce populist backlashes, the chances of overcoming the
demographic deficits are substantially reduced.

In the longer run, there is a different sort of question about growth in the European
setting. Will there be unequal growth across the European Union, with faster growth in
the catch-up economies of central and eastern Europe? At present, the disparity in
growth is very apparent, and is causing significant problems for the formulation of an
appropriate monetary policy (see below); but in the longer run, these disparities may
disappear. The major channel here is migration flows: the inflow of central Europeans to
Britain, Ireland and Sweden (the three EU countries with no control on movements from
the new member countries) since 2005 has significantly raised growth rates in those
recipient economies.

Conversely, the outflow from eastern and central Europe of the most skilled and active
sectors of the labor force is likely to reduce the growth potential in the long run, and
create the fiscal problems associated with ageing and with demographic imbalances
elsewhere in the EU. By 2025 a fifth to a quarter of the East European population is
estimated to be 65 or older. The World Bank takes this argument to forecast a sharp
reduction in growth in eastern Europe, which it terms “from red to gray” (World Bank
2007). Low growth rates are likely to become a common European destiny.

3.4 Financial Stability

In the past, financial sector shocks have played a decisive role in the undermining of
monetary regimes and the discrediting of the central banks responsible for their
operation. The most dramatic of such episodes occurred in the interwar Great
Depression, where banking panics in central Europe and the United States exacerbated
the problems of the real economy. Unstable banks withdrew credits from borrowers,
forcing firms that would otherwise have been solvent to liquidate stock at depressed
prices. The major industrial countries that had significant banking problems fared
significantly worse than those economies with no or only limited banking collapses. In



                                            24
particular the United States, with waves of banking panics after the fall of 1930, and
Germany, with a meltdown of the banking system in June and July 1931, were very badly
hit by the real consequences of the financial storm.

The weakness of the American and German banks in the interwar era was at least in some
measure the consequence of political federalism. Federalism
1. encouraged the development of a banking system that was regional in character. In
particular in the United States, state banks suffered because their risk was concentrated in
particular sectors.
2. made for inefficiencies in regulating banks. In Germany, a major source of difficulty
was the parallel system of Savings Banks (Sparkassen) which were controlled by local
authorities, and which responded to local political pressures to lend.
3. produced a dispute about the appropriate monetary response of the central banking
institutions. This may be an especially acute problem in the early life of the federation or
the central bank. With regard to the United States, Eichengreen (1992) and Wheelock
(2000) showed how the Federal Reserve found it difficult to resolve regional conflicts in
the early 1920s. Friedman and Schwartz famously presented a major cause of the
immobilization of the Federal Reserve System after 1930 as lying in tensions between the
New York and Chicago Banks.

Europe is an integrated capital market with national bank regulators that respond in
different ways to incipient problems. Since the 1980s, and especially since the
introduction of the single currency, the Euro-zone capital market has become partially
integrated, but there are still in some countries substantial impediments to cross-national
financial ownership. Nevertheless, financial institutions operate in this single capital
market across national boundaries. Big mergers, such as those between Santander and
Abbey National in 2004 and Unicredito and Hypervereinsbank (which had previously
acquired a dominant share in the Austrian banking industry) in 2005, have started to
create Europe-wide superbanks.

The problem of a bank getting into difficulties because of engagements in a different
country is a widely recognized problem, in theoretical discussions. But a unification of
banking regulation is still a long way from being realized.

At the same time as finance has become internationalized, each country preserves its own
idiosyncratic system of financial supervision and regulation. Though there has been an
extensive discussion of the possibility of shifting supervision to the European level (Prati
and Schinasi 1999;), there are practical obstacles to making such a shift (apart from
inbuilt bureaucratic resistance from existing regulators). In particular, regulation is often
linked to implicit or explicit lender of last resort functions. But such activity has a
significant fiscal cost, which at present cannot be assumed at a European level but would
remain an issue for national governments and national parliaments. Much of the previous
literature has concentrated in consequence on the issue of how bailouts and rescues
should be paid for after a financial crisis, as a consequence of the reluctance of national
authorities (and their tax payers) to bear the financial burden of bailing out depositors or
creditors in other states (Goodhart and Schoenmaker 2006). The current institutional



                                             25
framework unambiguously limits socially beneficial post-crisis workouts. But it may
also limit the capacity to provide efficient preventative or pre-crisis prudential
supervision. The consequent limits on the extent to which national regulators were aware
of bank problems became highlighted in the credit crunch of the summer of 2007. The
ECB supplied general liquidity to the market, and may have been able to avoid some
financial distress. But it does not have a responsibility to regulate and thus may not be
aware of banking problems until a late stage.

Additionally, in the event of financial sector difficulty, the monetary policy response
would be highly contested. Conventionally, bailout or reorganization is seen as the
answer to solvency problems, while liquidity provision is an answer for solvent but
temporarily illiquid institutions. In crisis situations, and where information about credit
risk is faulty or incomplete, as in the summer of 2007, such a judgment between solvency
and liquidity problems is impossible to undertake. In the absence of an ability to deal
specifically with the threat posed by individual institutions and to make choices about
crisis support or closing the institution, there will be more pressure on the ECB to simply
deal with the situation by extending large amounts of liquidity rather than to address the
solvency issues which may be concealed.

The difficulty of an effective Europe-wide response to financial sector problems thus
reflects a more general problem with respect to the making of monetary policy: there may
be a different political economy of money in regions of the Euro-zone and EU member
countries, leading to contradictory pressures on policy.

3.5 The Euro as an international currency

Another set of contradictory pressures on policy arises out of the increasingly important
international role of the euro. The euro quickly became the second largest reserve
currency of the world: the IMF’s figures show for December 2006 the euro accounting
for 25.8 percent of world declared reserves, with the dollar at 64.7 percent (these figures
however only cover around half the world’s total reserves, with another quarter held in
undeclared currencies, and a further quarter in also generally hidden sovereign wealth
funds outside the control of central banks) (ECB 2007). The euro has also become the
second largest currency for the issuance of securities. For short-term international debt
issue, in the last quarter of 2006, it had a share of 34 percent (with the U.S. at 40 percent).

The euro is attractive to some countries and governments because it is not the dollar.
While the international role of the dollar is deeply associated with the political
preeminence of the United States, the euro is not the currency of a superpower or even of
a conventional state. For general political strategy reasons it looks more attractive.
Russia in particular has made an explicitly political point in progressively raising the
weight of the euro in its operational currency basket (from 35 to 40 percent in December
2005 and then again to 45 percent in February 2007).

But there is also an economic rationale in terms of diversification. The euro is not as
precariously dependent on continued capital inflows as is the dollar. It may also appear



                                              26
better on more technical policy grounds. As a consequence of the complicated
institutional structure guaranteeing the independence of the European Central Bank, it
appears to be less vulnerable to political pressure. On the other hand, especially in the
response to the dollar depreciation of 2007 and the French presidential elections, there
have been unmistakable attempts at influence.

Considerations such as greater independence and a healthier Euro-zone current account
may make the euro desirable as an international currency: as a reserve currency, as a store
of value, as a benchmark for the pricing of internationally traded commodities. But a
potential development of the euro as the major international currency poses policy
problems analogous to those faced by Britain and the Bank of England in the nineteenth
century and by the United States and the Federal Reserve System in the second half of the
twentieth century. What are the ECB’s global obligations as to the creation of liquidity in
the case of emerging market crises? How should the ECB support the U.S. dollar in
order to forestall a dollar collapse which would be harmful for Europe in particular as
well as the world at large? Would political pressure be stronger or even irresistible in
these circumstances?

For both the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve System, there were moments
when international considerations seemed to outweigh considerations connected with
domestic stability. In the most dramatic of such crises in 1931, the Bank of England was
largely discredited, and the response to the crisis ended in 1945 with the nationalization
of the Bank. One widely accepted interpretation of the collapse of the Bretton Woods
fixed exchange rate regime between 1968 and 1973 is that at crisis moments, the United
States was unwilling to sacrifice domestic priorities (particularly maintaining fast
economic growth) for the sake of maintaining an international regime that was in any
case widely criticized.

By contrast with Britain and the United States, Japan and West Germany took a very
different stance. They did not see themselves as political hegemons, and saw a
widespread use of their currencies as reserves as inherently dangerous, because it would
make the export economy more vulnerable to unpredictable exchange rate swings. In
consequence, the two fast growing big industrial economies of the second half of the
twentieth century, sought as much as possible to avoid an international role for their
currencies (as did Switzerland, whose currency also seemed attractive as a stable measure
of value).

The euro is in a quite different position to the yen or the Deutschemark. It has inevitably
become the world’s second reserve currency. One of the causes of the appreciation of the
euro is often supposed to lie in the triangular relation between Asia, the United States and
Europe. If for trade reasons many Asian economies notably China try to hold their dollar
exchange rate stable (in the so-called Bretton Woods II regime), exchange rate
movements arising out of large U.S. deficits mean the appreciation of the Euro. Even in
the largely favorable environment of 2002-2007, many European exporters have
complained about the appreciation of their currency, especially in countries such as Italy
which compete quite extensively with the textiles, clothing and leather goods production



                                             27
of Asian economies. In these circumstances, the political debate about the euro can be a
reflection of much larger concerns with globalization, and of Europe’s perceived
vulnerability in the face of the challenges that global markets in goods and services will
pose.

It is – projecting into the future – quite conceivable that there will be moments at which
massive political pressure, built up by underlying anti-globalization concerns and focused
on the technical necessities of dealing with major international crises, leads to a serious
onslaught against the ECB and against the euro.

4. Conclusions

The past experience is of monetary unions developing as part of a process of political and
consequently fiscal integration. By contrast, EMU is neither purely a national nor purely
an international monetary union, but has characteristics of both types, because the
transfer of sovereignty is incomplete. This may mean that objections that it is not an
OCA are misplaced, because the workings of an integration process are likely also to
induce moves toward a closer approximation to an OCA. The incomplete transfer of
sovereignty on the other hand means that there are substantial political pressures that
build up in national areas that are no longer also the area of a single currency that can be
adjusted against external currencies. There may be a momentum toward further fiscal
integration, and that will be an indication of success in that the MU is working as similar
unions did in the past, especially in the case of the U.S. and Germany, and fiscal
centralization gradually emerged over a rather lengthy period of time. Analogies with the
monetary unions of Germany, Italy and the U.S. suggest that the process of evolving a
fiscal union takes a long time. The EMU has the additional problem that its area will
change more dramatically because of the addition of new members, and because of the
governance issues raised by the non-coincidence of EMU and the EU.

On that long road to more fiscal integration, however, there may be many bumpy areas.
Some of these bumps cannot easily be measured or mapped in advance. In particular,
unpleasant fiscal arithmetic for member countries may produce strain in the area as a
whole. Such arithmetic is most likely to arise as a consequence of continually depressed
rates of growth. One of the benefits that the move to the single currency brought was a
reduction of interest rates that might lead to better fiscal performance but also better
growth performance. But supposing that this stimulus is not adequate, and the euro area
continues to face sluggish growth? In order to reap the benefits of a better growth
performance, competitive stimuli as well as a low interest environment are needed, but
EU countries have been slow in opening up the potentially fast growing services sector to
competition.

Low growth will also produce direct challenges to the management of the currency, and a
demand for a more politically controlled and for a more expansive monetary policy.
Such demands might arise in some parts or regions or countries of the euro area, but not
in others. They would lead to a politically highly difficult discussion of monetary
governance. This discussion will be more difficult if there is a widespread perception



                                            28
       that the international role of the euro is at odds with domestic political demands that the
       currency should be supportive or sustaining of growth. Financial sector instability, with a
       potential need for bank bailouts, could also be a source of difficulty. Finally, in addition
       to all these threats, domestic responses to the challenge of globalization in markets for
       goods and services may also be displaced into a discussion of the euro, with the single
       currency and the central bank that manages it taking the position of fall guy for
       radicalized and generalized discontent. On the other hand, if all these bumps are
       overcome, and a process of gradual transfer of fiscal responsibility toward greater
       centralization occurs, there is the possibility that the euro zone with match the
       achievement of other late achievers of monetary unification, such as the United States or
       Germany.




References:



Asdrubali, Pierfederico, Bent Sørensen and Oved Yosha (1996). "Channels of inter-state risk-
      sharing: United States 1963-1990," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, pp. 1081-1110.

Balli Faruk and Bent E. Sørensen (2007). The Role of Capital Gains, Capital Income, Transfers,
       and Savings on Risk Sharing among OECD Members. University of Houston,
       manuscript.

Bayoumi, Tamim, and Barry Eichengreen (1993) 'Shocking aspects of European Monetary
      Integration', in F. Torres and F. Giavazzi (eds.) Adjustment and growth in the European
      Monetary Union, Cambridge University Press (for CEPR, London).

Bordo, M.D. and F. Kydland (1999), “The Gold Standard as a Commitment Mechanism”, chapter 7 in
       M.D. Bordo, The Gold Standard and Related Regimes: Collected Essays, Cambridge University
       Press, Cambridgen.

Bordo, M.D. and Jonung, L., (1997), "The History of Monetary Regimes Including Monetary Unions -
       Some Lessons for Sweden and the EMU", Swedish Economic Policy Review, vol 4, no 2,
       Autumn, pp 285-358.

Bordo, M.D. and Jonung, L., (2003), "The Future of EMU: What does the History of Monetary Unions
       tell us?”, in Forrest Capie and Geoffrey Wood ( eds). Monetary Unions . London MacMillan



                                                   29
Bordo, M.D. , Jonung, L. and A. Markiewicz ( 2007)” Does the Euro need a Fiscal Union? “
       DGECFIN ( December mimeo)

Bordo, M.D. and Rockoff, H. (1996) "The Gold Standard as a `Good Housekeeping Seal of
       Approval'." Journal of Economic History (June 1996).

Chari, V.V. V. and Kehoe, Patrick J., (2004), On the Desirability of Fiscal Constraints in a
       Monetary Union. NBER Working Paper No. W10232.

De Grauwe, Paul, and Wim Vanhaverbeke (1993), Is Europe an Optimum Currency Area?
      Evidence from Regional Data, in Policy Issues in the Operation of Currency Unions,
      edited by Paul Masson and Mark Taylor, Cambridge University Press.

della Paolera, Gerardo, and Alan M. Taylor. (1999) Economic Recovery from the Argentine
        Great Depression: Institutions, Expectations, and the Change of Macroeconomic
        Regime. Journal of Economic History 59.

Dessy Orietta (2004) Nominal wage flexibility and institutions: preliminary micro-evidence from
      the Europanel, Dipartimento di Economia Politica e Aziendale. Universita degli Studi di
      Milano. Working paper no. 17

Dixit, Avinash and Luisa Lambertini. (2001) Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and
       Commitment versus Discretion in a Monetary Union. European Economic Review 45,
       977—87.

Eichengreen, B., (1996), “Déjà vu all over again: lessons from the gold standard for European monetary
      unification”, chapter 13 in T. Bayoumi, B. Eichengreen and M. P. Taylor, eds., Modern
      perspectives on the gold standard, Cambridge University Press.

Eichengreen, B., (1997a), "One Money for Europe?" , chapter 2 in B. Eichengreen, European
      Monetary Unification: Theory, Practice, and Analysis, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Eichengreen, B., (1997b), "Is Europe an Optimum Currency Area?" chapter 3 in B. Eichengreen,
      European Monetary Unification: Theory, Practice, and Analysis, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Eichengreen, B. (1993). ‘Labor Markets and European Monetary Unification,’ in Masson and
      Taylor (eds), Policy Issues in the Design of Currency Unions. Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press.

Einaudi, L. ( 2001), Money and politics : European monetary unification and the international
       gold standard (1865-1873) . Oxford ; New York : Oxford University Press.

European Central Bank (2007), Review of the International Role of the Euro.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, (1998), The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area
       Criterion, The Economic Journal, Vol. 108, No. 449 (July), pp. 1009-25.


                                                  30
Fratianni, M. and Spinelli, F., ( 1997) A Monetary History of Italy. New York. Cambridge University
       Press.

Goodhart, C. and Schoenmaker D.(2006), “Burden Sharing in a Banking Crisis in Europe”, Economic
      Review, no. 2, 34-57, Sveriges Riksbank, Stockholm

James, H, (1997) Monetary and Fiscal Unification in Nineteenth Century Germany; What Can
       Kohl Learn from Bismarck?, Princeton : Princeton Essays in International Finance No.
       202

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Sorensen, Bent E. and Yosha, Oved (2004) Asymmetric Shocks and
      Risk Sharing in a Monetary Union: Updated Evidence and Policy Implications for Europe
      CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4463.

Kenen, P. (1969), The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View in Mundell R,
      and A. Swoboda (eds). Monetary Problems of the International Economy. Chicago.
      University of Chicago Press.pp 41-61

McKinnon Ronald I. (2004), Optimum Currency Areas and Key Currencies: Mundell I versus
     Mundell II, Journal of Common Market Studies 42 (4), 689–715.

McKinnon, Ronald I., (1963), Optimum Currency Areas, American Economic Review, Vol 53,
     pp. 717-724.

Melitz, J. and F. Zumer, (1998), "Interregional and International Risk Sharing and Lessons for
        EMU", paper prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference, November.

Mélitz, Jacques and Frédéric Zumer (2002). "Regional redistribution and stabilization by the
       center in Canada, France, the United Kingdom and the United States: A reassessment and
       new tests," Journal of Public Economics, 86, pp. 263-286.

Mélitz, Jacques, (2004) Risk Sharing and EMU, CEPR Discussion Paper 4460.

Mundell, R., (2000), “Currency Areas, Volatility and Intervention”, Journal of Policy Modeling, 22, p.
      281-299.

Mundell, Robert A (1973), Uncommon Arguments for Common Currencies”, in H.G. Johnson
      and A.K. Swoboda, The Economics of Common Currencies, Allen and Unwin, pp.114-
      32.

Mundell, Robert A., (1961) A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas, American Economic
      Review, 51, pp. 509-17.

Oates, Wallace. (1972), Fiscal Federalism. New York: Harcourt Brace




                                                   31
Oates. Wallace and John Wallis ( 1998) “ The Impact of the New Deal on American
       Federalism”. in Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin and Eugene N. White eds. The
       Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth
       Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Pp 155-180.

Obstfeld, M. and and Peri G. (1998) Regional Non-Adjustment and Fiscal Policy, Economic
       Policy, Vol. 26 pp. 205-260.

Prati, A. and G. Schinasi, (1999), "Financial Stability in European Economic and Monetary
        Union", IMF working paper, December 1998.

Redish A. ( 2000) Bimetallism: An Economic and Historical Analysis. New York. Cambridge
       University Press.

Rodden, Jonathan A., (2004) Achieving Fiscal Discipline in Federations: Germany and the
      EMU. Paper prepared for ‘Fiscal policy in EMU: New Issues and Challenges” Workshop
      organized by European Commission, Brussels, 12 November 2004.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and Jeffrey Sachs (1992). Fiscal federalism and optimum currency areas:
       Evidence for Europe from the United States, NBER Working Paper no. 3855;
       subsequently published in Matthew Canzoneri, Vittorio Grilli and Paul Masson, eds.
       Establishing a Central Bank: Issues in Europe and Lessons from the U.S., Cambridge
       Univeristy Press.

Samuelson P.A. (1954), The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure. The Review of Economics and
      Statistics, Vol. 36, No. 4. pp. 387-389.

Uhlig, Harald. (2002) One Money, But Many Fiscal Policies in Europe: What are the
       Consequences? Discussion Paper 3296. Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Von Hagen Jürgen and Manfred J. M. Neumann (1994), Real Exchange Rates within and
     Between Currency Areas: How Far Away is EMU. The Review of Economics and
     Statistics, Vol. 76, No. 2. pp. 236-244.

Von Hagen, Jürgen (1992). "Fiscal arrangements in a monetary union – Some evidence from the
      US," in Don Fair and Christian de Boissieu, eds., Fiscal Policy, Taxes, and the Financial
      System in an Increasingly Integrated Europe, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Von Hagen, Jürgen (2000). Fiscal policy and intranational risk sharing. In: Hess, G.D., van
     Wincoop, E. (Eds.), Intranational Macroeconomics. Cambridge University Press, New
     York, pp. 272-294.




                                                 32
33
