NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CROSS-SECTION OF FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK PREMIA AND CONSUMPTION GROWTH RISK:
A REPLY
Hanno Lustig
Adrien Verdelhan
Working Paper 13812
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13812

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

The authors would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Dave Backus, John Cochrane, Xavier Gabaix, François
Gourio, Christian Hellwig, Bob King, Nikolai Roussanov, and Stijn VanNieuwerburgh for comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Hanno Lustig and Adrien Verdelhan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth Risk: A Reply
Hanno Lustig and Adrien Verdelhan
NBER Working Paper No. 13812
February 2008, Revised November 2010
JEL No. F31
ABSTRACT
The U.S. consumption growth beta of an investment strategy that goes long in high interest rate currencies
and short in low interest rate currencies is large and significant. The price of consumption risk is significantly
different from zero, even after accounting for the sampling uncertainty introduced by the estimation
of the consumption betas. The constant in the regression of average returns on consumption betas is
not significant. In addition, the consumption and market betas of this investment strategy increase
during recessions and times of crisis, when risk prices are high, implying that the unconditional betas
understate its riskiness. We use the recent crisis as an example.
Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu
Adrien Verdelhan
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-621
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
adrienv@mit.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w13812

I

Introduction

Generations of economists have been trained to think that investors ex ante should expect to earn a zero
return on investments in high interest rate currencies that are funded in low interest rate currencies. In
this view, large carry trade returns are an anomaly. Our work shows that this is a reasonable view of
the world only if you are willing to believe that investors in currency markets take on aggregate risk
without being compensated for it.1
Investments are risky if they offer low returns in bad times, when the typical investor experiences
higher marginal utility growth than average. As an example, let us examine what transpired in currency
markets during the current crisis.
160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

2005

2007

Figure 1: Currency Carry Trade Excess Returns
This figure presents an index of monthly excess returns on currency carry trades. Carry excess returns correspond to the
Deutsche Bank Carry Harvest Index, which is available online at http://www.dbfunds.db.com/Dbv/index.aspx and starts in 1993.
In Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), the sample ends in 2002. We focus here on the recent sample from December 2002 to June
2009. The index is equal to 100 at the end of 2002. The gray area, which starts in December 2007, corresponds to the latest
recession.

The current recession, which started in December 2007, provides an interesting out-of-sample test
1 Other authors have pursued a risk-based explanation of the forward premium puzzle. Our work is closest to Burton
Hollifield and Amir Yaron (2001) and Campbell Harvey, Bruno Solnik and Guofu Zhou (2002). Hollifield and Yaron (2001)
find some evidence that real factors, not nominal ones, drive most of the predictable variation in currency risk premia. Using
a latent factor technique on a sample of international bonds, Harvey, Solnik and Zhou (2002) find empirical evidence of a
factor premium that is related to foreign exchange risk. More recently, Michael J. Brennan and Yihong Xia (2006) show that
their estimates of currency risk premia derived in affine term structure models satisfy the Eugene F. Fama (1984) necessary
conditions for explaining the forward premium puzzle. Their paper builds on David Backus, Silverio Foresi and Chris Telmer
(2001) who delineate the class of affine models that satisfy the Fama (1984) necessary conditions.

2

case for our claims. We start with the real side of the economy. In the fourth quarter of 2008, the United
States recorded a 4.9% (annualized) drop in real personal consumption expenditures on nondurable
goods, following a 5.6% (annualized) decrease in the third quarter. These growth rates are 3 standard
deviations below the mean U.S. consumption growth rate in postwar data. Table I summarizes the
evidence for 2008: -0.8% in nondurable consumption growth, -4.5% in durable expenditures growth,
and -38.4% in the U.S. stock market return. The drop in durable consumption expenditures translates
into a weak increase in the stock of durable goods (our measure of durable consumption growth) of
2.7%, much lower than the post–WWII average of 3.6%. It seems safe to say that the average investor in
the United States experienced a higher than usual growth rate in marginal utility, regardless of which
model is employed.
What happened in currency markets during the same period? High interest rate currencies depreciated and low interest rate currencies appreciated. As a result, returns on currency carry trades were low
exactly in bad times. No computation needed here; market data are readily available. For example, the
Deutsche Bank G10 Carry Harvest Index consists of long futures contracts on the three G10 currencies
associated with the highest interest rates and of short futures contracts on the three G10 Currencies associated with the lowest interest rates. We use this index as one measure of carry trade returns because
the corresponding exchange traded fund is easily available to any investor. The evolution of this index is
clear. The current crisis has erased almost all of the carry trade gains made since the end of 2002. Figure
1 plots the evolution of this carry index (we normalized the index to 100 at the end of 2002). Carry
traders first enjoyed a long period of steadily high returns. The index peaked at 155 in June 2007, but by
the end of 2008 it was back down to 105. Thus, a 55% cumulative gain was followed by a like decrease.
During the last two quarters of 2008, we witnessed a decrease of more than 31% of the Deutsche Bank
carry trade index, a negative return equivalent to three standard deviations. The currency portfolios
constructed by Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan (2008) (denoted LRV) cover more contracts than the
Deutsche Bank Index. Even so, applying the long-short strategy still yielded a decrease of more than
10% if one invested in both developed and emerging countries.
In a reversal, the Deutsche Bank carry trade index recovered 16.8% during the first two quarters of
2009. Nondurable expenditures increased by 4.11%, and expenditures on durables increased by 7.4%.
The U.S. stock market recovered 4.9 %. Again, if Burnside were right then the opposite pattern would
have been just as likely: investors would have fled from the dollar and yen directly to the Australian
3

dollar and the Icelandic Krone during the fall of 2008, ignoring the higher-yield currencies when the
crisis abated.
One might argue this is not surprising; maybe all risky zero-cost investment strategies had similar
returns during this episode. Far from it. Panel C shows the returns for small-minus-big (long in small,
short in large stocks), high-minus-low (long in high book-to-market stocks, short in low book-to-market
stocks) and momentum (long in winners over the past 12 months, short in losers over the past 12 months)
equity investment strategies. All of these are zero-cost strategies that historically have produced large
and positive average excess returns. All three did well during the last two quarters of 2008, while HML
and momentum actually did very poorly during the first two quarters of 2009, when U.S. consumption
rebounded. The exact opposite from what we see in currency markets. Clearly, U.S. investors with
positions in the carry trade have incurred larger portfolio losses and consumption drops than those
experienced by the average U.S. investor. Remarkably, this was not the case for other popular zero-cost
investment strategies that have proven profitable: size, value and momentum stock investment strategies
all posted positive returns during 2008.

Table I: Currency Excess Returns and Risk Factors — Subprime Crisis

2007–2008

2008:III–2008:IV

2009:I–2009:II

Panel A: Carry Trade Returns
Deutsche Bank Returns
LRV Returns — All Countries
LRV Returns — Developed Countries

−28.8%
−10.2%
−31.1%

Expenditure — Nondurables
Expenditure — Durables
Consumption — Durables
U.S. Stock Market

−0.8%
−4.5%
2.7%
−38.4%

−31.4%
−6.1%
−20.1%

16.8%
3.6%
8.6%

Panel B: Risk Factors

−1.6%
−10.2%
0.4%
−29.9%

4.1%
7.4%
.9%
6.06%

Panel C: Other Zero-Cost Investment Strategies
SMB
HML
Momentum

4.2%
1.0%
13.4%

5.6%
10.3%
.4%

10.3%
−10.7%
−45.4%

Notes: The annual sample starts on 31 December 2007 and ends on 31 December 2008 (first column). The quarterly data correspond to the sum of the 2008 third- and fourth-quarter (second column) growth rates and to the sum of the first two quarters
of 2009 (third column). The Deutsche Bank Carry Harvest Index is available online at http://www.dbfunds.db.com/Dbv/index.aspx.
The LRV returns were computed by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008), updated through June 2009. Section A in the
separate appendix contains a detailed description of our series. SMB, HML and the momentum factor were taken from
Kenneth French’s web site.

In a previous paper entitled “The Cross-Section of Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth”
(Hanno Lustig and Adrien Verdelhan 2007) we showed that, on average, high interest rate currencies
4

are more exposed to aggregate consumption growth risk than low interest rate currencies in a sample
with 81 currencies spanning 50 years of data. High interest rate currencies do not depreciate as much
as the interest rate difference, and as a result, U.S. investors can generally earn positive excess returns
by investing in these currencies. However, these high interest rate currencies tend to depreciate relative
to low interest rate currencies in bad times for U.S. investors.
Furthermore, the average risk factor loadings of currency portfolios that we reported in Lustig and
Verdelhan (2007) tend to understate the true risk inherent in the carry trade because the exposure of
carry trade returns to aggregate risk factors increases dramatically during crisis episodes and recessions,
exactly when the price of risk should increase in currency markets. To anyone who kept track of recent
developments in currency markets, this may now seem obvious, but some economists still insist that
“there is no relation between risk factors and currency returns” (see Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum,
Isaac Kleshchelski and Sergio Rebelo 2008).

Our Previous Paper In his comment on our previous paper, Burnside does not question our findings,
yet he starts a debate about their statistical significance. In that paper, we departed from the literature
by examining the cross-sectional relation between average returns on foreign currency investments and
interest rates rather than examining the time-series relation.2 To do so, we sorted currencies into eight
portfolios based on their current interest rate. This approach (developed in Lustig and Verdelhan 2005)
is helpful because it averages out changes in exchange rates that are purely idiosyncratic and hence
are not priced in currency markets. We found that investors on average earn large excess returns
simply by taking long positions in baskets of currencies with currently high interest rates and taking
short positions in baskets of currencies with currently low interest rates, regardless of the history of
interest rate differences for individual currency pairs. The average excess returns increase from the first
portfolio, with currently low interest rate currencies, to the last portfolio, with currently high interest
rate currencies. Moreover, we established that currencies sorted by interest rates share a lot of common
variation, a necessary condition for a risk-based explanation. Finally, we tied this common variation to
aggregate risk exposure — more specifically, to durable consumption growth, nondurable consumption
growth, and the market return. Our paper was the first to make this point. The literature that precedes
it focusses almost exclusively on currency-specific variation in bilateral exchange rates.
2

See Lars P. Hansen and Robert J. Hodrick (1980) and Fama (1984) for earlier examples of time-series tests. Geert Bekaert
and Hodrick (1993) investigate biases as an explanation of the forward premium puzzle. Hodrick (1987) and Karen K. Lewis
(1995) provide extensive surveys and updated regression results.

5

On average, the high interest rate currency portfolio produces a return that is 5 percentage points
larger per annum than the return on the low interest rate currency portfolio. We find that U.S. aggregate
consumption growth risk explains a large share of the variation in average returns for these currency
portfolios, because the consumption betas for low interest rate currencies are smaller than the consumption betas for high interest rate currencies. In other words, high interest rate currencies do not depreciate
as much as the interest gap on average, but these currencies tend to depreciate in bad times for a U.S.
investor, who in turn receives a positive excess return in compensation for taking on this risk.
Our model is a standard representative agent model that allows for nonseparable utility from nondurable and durable consumption and also for nonseparable utility over time. In Lustig and Verdelhan
(2007), our analysis proceeds in two steps. First, as is standard in modern macroeconomics, we calibrate
the actual model. We adopted the structural parameters from Motohiro Yogo (2006), who estimates these
parameters based on stock returns and macroeconomic data. We compute the pricing errors implied
by the representative agent’s Euler equation evaluated over the sample of the eight currency portfolios. These results are shown in Table 4 (see section I.E). When confronted with the postwar sample of
foreign currency returns and U.S. aggregate consumption growth, the representative agent demands a
much higher risk premium on the high interest rate currency portfolio than on the low interest rate portfolio. The benchmark model explains 68% of the variation in returns. This finding alone disproves the
common claim that the forward premium puzzle cannot have a risk-based explanation (see, for example,
Kenneth Froot and Richard Thaler 1990).
Second, as is standard in empirical finance, we linearize the model (in section II of the paper). We
then estimate the factor betas for this linearized model by regressing the currency portfolio returns on
the three factors (nondurable and durable consumption growth and the market return). Finally, we
regress average returns on these betas in order to estimate the risk prices. This exercise confirms our
earlier results. The risk prices of nondurable and durable consumption are large, and they are in line
with what we and others have found using different test assets (like stocks and bonds). Our paper
concludes by explaining why low interest rate currencies tend to appreciate when U.S. consumption
growth is lower than average.

Burnside’s Comments In his comment on our paper, Burnside (2007) replicates our point estimates
for the risk prices in the linear model using currency portfolios as test assets. He agrees that the
consumption betas are aligned with the returns on these currency portfolios. In other words, there
6

is no question that consumption risk is priced if you accept the consumption betas in our sample.
However, Burnside questions how accurately these betas are measured. As a result, the debate has
shifted away from the claim that risk premia cannot explain the forward premium puzzle —after all,
we have shown that the sample moments of consumption growth and currency returns do support a
risk-based explanation— to a debate about how accurately these sample moments are measured.
More specifically, Burnside questions the conclusion of our paper by claiming (1) that there is no
statistical evidence that aggregate consumption growth risk is priced in currency markets and (2) that
our definition of the measure of fit overstates our results.

Our Reply

In this paper, we first address these two claims. We show that they have no merit with

respect to our initial sample that ends in 2002. Furthermore, extending the sample to 2009 actually
reinforces our points.
First claim: Burnside claims there is no statistical evidence that aggregate consumption growth risk is
priced in currency markets or that currency excess returns do not covary with U.S. consumption growth.
This is his most important claim, and it is false.
Let us define H ML FX as the difference in returns between the high interest rate portfolio and the low
interest rate portfolio. We focus on the seventh portfolio minus the first portfolio because this produces
the largest spread (5.3% per annum). By construction, the consumption β of H ML FX is the difference
between the consumption β of the seventh and the first portfolio (β HML = β7 − β1 ). Hence, we can
simply test Burnside’s claim by regressing H ML FX on consumption growth.
The consumption growth beta of H ML FX is 1 for nondurable and durable consumption growth in
a long sample starting in 1953. As a result, the consumption Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) can
account for the average return on this investment strategy of 5.3% per annum given a market price
of consumption risk of around 5% per annum. This spread in betas is economically significant. As
a benchmark, the consumption beta of the return on the U.S. stock market (the return on the valueweighted CRSP index) is 0.97 for the same sample. In order to explain the average annual stock market
excess return of almost 7% in the standard consumption CAPM, the price of consumption risk has to
be 7.1% per annum. This implies a substantial carry trade premium of 7.1 = 1.0 × 7.1 % on the H ML
strategy, compared to 5.3% in the data. We obtain similar results in the post–Bretton Woods sample.
As a result, if we simply use risk prices from stocks then the model already predicts a sizable carry
trade risk premium. Moreover, in section IV.C of our 2007 paper, we show that the risk prices we found
7

for currency excess returns are similar to those obtained when estimating the same model on other
test assets such as equity and bonds, even though these currency returns are not spanned by the usual
factors of value and size. Burnside does not discuss this evidence.
In addition, the spread in consumption betas is statistically significant. In the simple univariate
regression case, the p-values for a t-test are smaller than 2.5 % in all of the four cases that we consider:
nondurables in the 1953-2002 and the 1971-2002 samples, durables in the 1953-2002 and the 1971-2002
samples. The multivariate regressions lead to the same conclusion. The Wald test statistic’s p-values are
both below 1%.3
Finally, it is not the case that all of the consumption betas should be statistically different from zero.
The interesting economic question is whether betas are different from each other, not different from
zero. Since, for example, the average excess returns on the fifth and sixth currency portfolios are very
close to zero, we should expect to see betas close to zero for these portfolios. This is why we focus on
the “corner portfolios”.
Burnside then argues that the price of consumption risk estimated for currency portfolios is not
significantly different from zero once you correct for the fact that the betas are estimated. In our previous
paper, we report the standard errors obtained by bootstrapping samples from the observed consumption
and return data (see section IV.C). These standard errors take into account the two steps and the small
sample size. Using these bootstrapped standard errors, the price of durable consumption growth risk
is significant at the 5 % level. The separate appendix presents additional evidence from generalized
least squares (GLS) and generalized method of moments (GMM) estimates that were omitted from the
published version. All the evidence indicates that the price of consumption risk is statistically significant.
Second claim: Burnside points out that the constant in the second stage of our regression is large and
negative, and he argues that a risk-based explanation can be discounted because our model overpredicts
the returns on the eight currency portfolios. The constant is large (about 300 basis points), but it is not
precisely estimated and is not significantly different from zero. Since the rest of Burnside’s comment is
exclusively about estimation uncertainty, we are puzzled by his emphasis on the point estimate for the
constant without emphasizing the large standard error.
3 Why does Burnside reach a different conclusion? In the multivariate case, the only case he considers, Burnside mistakenly
focuses on the t-statistics of the individual betas; the strong correlation of the consumption factors renders the individual
coefficient estimates imprecise. This inference problem is commonly referred to as multicollinearity in textbooks. Obviously,
two low t-stats on the consumption growth betas in the multivariate regression do not imply that consumption growth does
not covary with currency returns.

8

This constant measures the price of that part of dollar risk that is not explained by our risk factors. All
of our currency portfolios share the same loading on dollar fluctuations, so the cross-section of currency
returns cannot be informative about the price of dollar risk. In other terms, the first principal component
of currency returns is a dollar factor; all currency portfolios have essentially the same loadings on this
factor. We never claim that consumption growth risk explains the returns on investing in a basket of all
foreign currencies (i.e., the dollar risk premium), and no such claim is supported by the data.
If instead we use test assets that go long in high interest rate portfolios and short in low interest
rate portfolios, we eliminate the dollar risk factor. These test assets are now dollar-neutral. In this case
the estimated constant is much smaller and insignificant, as expected, and the model does even better
on these test assets. Figure 2 plots the benchmark model’s predicted excess returns against the realized
excess returns for these seven test assets. The model’s predicted excess returns are a linear combination
of the factor betas. The left panel reflects the inclusion of a constant and the right panel does not, but
there is hardly any difference in the fit. The consumption CAPM model explains 80% of the variation
in currency excess returns regardless of whether we include a constant. Even though we agree that
it overpredicts the average (dollar) excess return on foreign currency investments, the model has no
trouble explaining the spread between high and low interest currency returns and this is the essence of
the forward premium puzzle. We could have written our entire paper about these zero-cost investment
strategies that go long in high and short in low interest rate currencies without changing a single line of
the conclusion.
Our paper is not about dollar risk. We agree with Burnside that consumption risk does not explain
the average returns earned by U.S. investors on a basket of all foreign currencies, and we have never
claimed that it did. Our focus is on the returns obtained by going long in high interest rate currencies
and short in low interest rate currencies for this is how the carry trade is defined.

Additional Evidence To address Burnside’s concerns about estimation uncertainty, we also bring new
evidence to bear on the relation between aggregate risk and currency returns.
First, the statistical link between asset returns and macroeconomic factors is always weaker than the
link between asset returns and return-based factors. That is why John H. Cochrane (2001) warns against
pointless horse races between models with macroeconomic factors and those with return-based factors.
Statistical uncertainty is not a license to ignore the link with the macroeconomy. However, an alternative
is to use return-based risk factors. This reduces statistical uncertainty at the cost of economic content.
9

EZ−DCAPM without a constant
6

5

5

Actual Mean Excess Return (in %)

Actual Mean Excess Return (in %)

EZ−DCAPM with a constant
6

4

3

2

1

1

2

3

4

5

4

3

2

1

6

Predicted Mean Excess Return (in %)

1

2

3

4

5

6

Predicted Mean Excess Return (in %)

Figure 2: Short in Low and Long in High Interest Rate Currencies
This figure plots actual versus predicted excess returns for seven test assets. Currencies are sorted into eight portfolios according to their
interest rates. The seven test assets are obtained by subtracting the returns on the first portfolio from the returns on the other portfolios.
These test assets correspond to an investment strategy of going long in the high interest rate currency portfolios and short in the low interest
rate currency portfolio. The risk factors are nondurable consumption growth, durable consumption growth and stock market returns. Risk
prices are estimated following Fama and James D. MacBeth (1973). The data are annual from Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), and the sample is
1953–2002.

Return-based risk factors are more precisely measured, and their loadings and prices are precisely
estimated. Lustig, Nick Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008) use the first two principal components of
the currency excess returns as risk factors to explain the cross-sectional variation in monthly currency
returns. The second principal component captures the common time-series variation in exchange rates
of currencies sorted by their interest rates. As a risk factor, it can account for 65% of the cross-sectional
variation in average excess returns across our eight portfolios. This factor’s market price of risk is
precisely estimated and has t-stats well in excess of the 1% significance level. Clearly, average currency
excess returns can be attributed to covariances between returns and common risk factors. Going back to
the sample of countries we used in Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), we obtain similar results on long series
of quarterly returns.
Second, by looking at monthly and daily return data, we show that the risk factor loadings of carry
returns vary over time. We emphasize that these loadings tend to increase during recessions and other
crisis episodes, when the price of risk tends to be higher. As a result, the average factor loadings
reported in our previous paper tend to understate, not overstate, the true riskiness of these currency
portfolios. For example, consider what happened during the recent crisis. At daily frequency, the
10

correlation between one-month returns on the U.S. stock market and carry trade returns increased to
0.70 during the subprime crisis. We report similar findings for the LTCM crisis, the Mexican “Tequila”
crisis, and the Brazilian/Argentine crisis.

Taking Stock Burnside replicates our point estimates of both the quantity and price of consumption
growth risk and he concludes that “it is impossible to reject [our] model using formal statistical tests”.
He ignores the current crisis, which provides a striking counterexample to his own claims. In the
face of all this evidence, what is the point of a lengthy digression on standard errors? In a series of
papers, Burnside has consistently argued against risk-based explanations of the carry trade, and he has
explored such other avenues as adverse selection and price pressure in attempting to explain the forward
premium puzzle.4 Most recently, however, Burnside et al. (2008) find some support for the disaster risk
model of Robert Barro (2006). They conclude that “the same value of the stochastic discount factor
that rationalizes the average payoffs to the carry trade also rationalizes the equity premium.” Thus it
seems like they finally ended up where we started off. We agree that neither price pressure nor adverse
selection is a plausible explanation of the forward premium puzzle. Remarkably, Burnside et al. (2008)
still insists that carry excess returns are “uncorrelated to traditional risk factors”.
The evidence presented in our original paper, and in this reply, presents a serious challenge to the
view that risk is not priced in currency markets. All the data used in Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) and
in this reply are available on-line.5 As a result, all tables in the 2007 paper and in this reply can be easily
replicated.

Outline The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II addresses Burnside’s first claim in
detail. We have already addressed his second claim. To save space, we present additional results and
robustness checks in the separate appendix. Section III studies the low frequency changes in carry trade
risk premia and risk exposure. Section IV documents the high frequency time variation in risk prices
4 Burnside,

Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2006) argue that the average payoffs to currency-speculation strategies
are low and not risky, and that spot and forward prices move against currency traders in response to ‘price pressure’, thus
explaining the forward premium puzzle. However, in a reversal, Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2007) consider emerging
market currencies and do obtain large excess returns, but they still argue against a risk-based explanation. The same claim
appears in Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2008) and Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2008). Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2009) argue that the forward premium puzzle is explained by adverse selection, but not by risk. In
the first version of their paper, Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2008) conclude that excess returns in currency
markets are not risk compensation arguing that “the peso problem cannot be a major determinant of the payoff to the carry
trade.” The second version reaches a different conclusion. Finally, Burnside and Bing Han and David Hirshleifer and Tracy
Yue Wang (2010) argue that investors’ overconfidence explains the forward premium puzzle.
5 Data sets are available at http://hlustig2001.squarespa e. om/ and at http://web.mit.edu/adrienv/www/ .

11

and quantities on currency markets, and section V concludes. The separate appendix, available on-line,
details our sources and the construction of each variable, and provides additional evidence.

II

The Exposure to Consumption Risk Across Currencies

Burnside argues that the estimated market prices of risk are not significant once one considers the
sampling uncertainty introduced by the first-stage estimation of the betas. In addition, he argues that the
consumption betas are all indistinguishable from zero. This is incorrect. We start with the consumption
beta estimates.
We first refute Burnside’s claim with respect to our previous sample, which ends in 2002. We then
check the robustness of our results by extending our annual sample through 2008.

A Consumption Growth Betas in Previous Sample
Let us first recall our previous results. Table 6 of our previous paper reports the univariate consumption
betas and standard errors. The (nondurable and durable) consumption betas for the seventh currency
portfolios are significantly different from zero, but this does not hold for the other portfolios. We
obviously agree with Burnside’s comment that consumption betas are not estimated as precisely as
return-based betas.
Are the consumption betas all indistinguishable from zero and not different across portfolios, as
Burnside claims? We show in Table II that the consumption growth betas on a simple currency carry
trade strategy (borrowing in low interest rate currencies and lending in high interest rate currencies)
vary between 1 over the entire sample and 1.5 in the post–Bretton Woods sample. As already reported,
this spread in betas over the entire sample easily accounts for the carry trade excess return. The same is
true on the post–Bretton Woods sample. The consumption beta of the return on the U.S. stock market is
1.2 over the 1971–2002 sample. To explain the average annual stock market excess return of 5.75% over
the same post–Bretton Woods sample in the standard consumption CAPM, the price of consumption
risk has to be 4.9%. This implies a substantial spread of 7.4 = 1.5 × 4.9% on the H ML strategy, compared
with 6.9% in the data for the 1971–2002 sample.
All these betas are statistically significant at the 5% confidence level and are economically meaningful
as well.
12

Table II: Estimation of Consumption Betas for H ML FX
Panel I: Simple Regression
β cH ML

R2

β dH ML

4.04

1.06
[0.40]

0.89

8.72

1.65
[0.60]

0.63

p (%)
Panel A: Nondurables

1953–2002

1.00
[0.44]

2.23

1971–2002

1.54
[0.52]

0.28

β cH ML

β dH ML

0.07
[0.68]
0.28
[1.20]

1.03
[0.62]
1.48
[1.24]

p (%)

R2

Panel B: Durables
9.07
14.02

Panel II: Multivariate Regression
1953–2002
1971–2002

χ2
9.40
14.15

R2
9.07
14.90

Notes: In Panel I, each entry reports OLS estimates of β 1 in the following time-series regression of the spread on the factor: HML FX,t +1 =
β 0 + β 1H ML f t + ǫt +1 , where HML FX,t +1 is the return on the seventh portfolio minus the return on the first portfolio. The estimates are based
on annual data; standard errors are reported in brackets. Following Donald W. K. Andrews (1991), we use Newey–West heteroscedasticityconsistent standard errors with an optimal number of lags to estimate the spectral density matrix. The p-values (reported in %) are for a t-test
on the slope coefficient. The factor f t is nondurable consumption growth ( ∆c) in the left panel and durable consumption growth ( ∆d) in the
right panel. In Panel II, we report the multivariate regressions HML FX,t +1 = β 0 + β 1H ML ft + ǫt +1 , where ft = [∆ct , ∆dt ]. The χ2 are for a Wald
test that the slope coefficients are zero. The data are annual, and the samples cover 1953–2002 and 1971–2002.

B Durable Consumption Growth and Currency Returns in Longer Sample
We now extend our sample through 2008. In order to conserve space, we consider only one risk factor:
durable consumption growth. This risk factor matters for asset prices if preferences are nonseparable.
In addition, durable consumption growth has intuitive appeal as an asset pricing factor because it is
highly cyclical. Our baseline measure of durable consumption growth, denoted ∆d1 , corresponds to
the change in the stock of consumer durables, as in Yogo (2006). As a robustness check we also use a
second measure, ∆d2 , which is the log change in the quantity index for consumer durable goods from
the U.S Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) fixed asset tables. Durable consumption growth is strongly
pro-cyclical, more so than nondurable consumption growth. In fact, Joao Gomes, Leonid Kogan and
Yogo (2009) find that an investment strategy that is long on the durable-good producers portfolio and
short on the service industry portfolio earns a risk premium exceeding 4% annually.
In Figure 3, we plot the average currency excess returns against the durable consumption growth
betas, for the first measure ∆d1 , estimated on the 1953-2008 sample; we also add standard-error bands.
The univariate durable consumption growth betas are reported in Table VII in Section B of the separate
appendix, where Newey-West standard errors are reported in brackets. The durable consumption beta of
low interest rate currencies (portfolio 1) differs from the consumption beta of high interest rate currencies
13

(portfolio 7). Clearly, portfolios with higher interest rates tend to have higher consumption betas. What
does this mean? It means that investing in low interest rate currencies does not carry the same risk
as investing in high interest rate currencies. Low interest rate currencies tend to appreciate in bad
times while high interest rate currencies tend to depreciate. The betas on the last portfolios (7 and 8)
are statistically different from zero. The betas of the intermediate portfolios are lower, but so are the
excess returns on these portfolios. Recall that we are only using one risk factor here; hence Burnside’s
discussion about the rank of the beta matrix is meaningless.
5

4

Actual Mean Excess Return (in %)

8

7

3

2

1

4
6
5
3

0
2

−1

1

−2

−3
−0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Betas

Figure 3: Durable Consumption Growth Betas and Average Currency Excess Returns
The dots represent point estimates; the lines represent one standard deviation above and below the point estimates. The
sample is 1953–2008 and data are annual. Durable consumption growth (∆d1 ) is defined in Section A in the separate appendix.

Durable consumption growth betas are higher for higher interest rate currencies. For the most
comprehensive sample of currencies, which includes developing countries, we find that the durable
consumption growth betas (i.e., the factor loadings on ∆d1 ) increase from 0.70 for the first portfolio to
1.37 for the last portfolio. We find similar results using the second measure; the loadings on ∆d2 increase
from 0.51 to 1.44. The variation in betas increases in the post–Bretton Woods sample: the loadings on
∆d1 increase from 1.19 on the first portfolio to 2.19 on the sixth portfolio, declining to 1.64 on the last
portfolio; the loadings on ∆d2 range from 0.83 to 1.60. For the sample of developed currencies, the
spreads in loadings are even larger. The loading increases from 0.44 on the first portfolio to 1.46 on the
last portfolio for our baseline measure, ∆d1 , and from 0.46 to 1.11 for ∆d2 . In the post–Bretton Woods
14

sample, the loadings increase from 0.68 to 2.83 on the sixth portfolio, and then decreases to 2.27 on the
last portfolio; from 0.67 to 1.83 to the fifth portfolio.
We now examine Burnside’s (2007) claim that there is no statistically significant relation between
durable consumption growth and the excess returns on the currency portfolios. For ∆d1 , this null
hypothesis is rejected at the 1% significance level for portfolio 7, at the 5% level for portfolio 3 and at
the 10% level for portfolios 2 and 6. For ∆d2 , this null is rejected at the 5% significance level for five
portfolios out of 8 and at the 10% level for an additional portfolio. In the post–Bretton Woods sample,
this claim is rejected at the 1% significance level for three portfolios, at the 5% level for two more, and at
10% for a last one. In sum, six of the eight portfolios have significant consumption betas, and the results
are similar for the second measure of durable consumption growth (∆d2 ). The results are even stronger
if we consider only developed currencies. When using the first measure the null is rejected at the 5%
level four times and once at the 10% level. In the post-Bretton-Woods sample, the null is rejected at the
1% level for three portfolios and at the 5% level for two more. Durable consumption growth betas are
statistically different from zero.
Are the loadings on the other currency portfolios statistically different from those on the first portfolio? To answer this question, we look again at loadings on returns on zero-cost portfolios that short the
first basket of currencies and go long in the other currencies. These results are reported in the bottom
panel of Table VII in the separate appendix (Section B). Without exception, the loadings are positive.
For the sample of developed currencies, the loadings are significantly different from zero at the 10%
level in half the cases, when we use ∆d1 , the first measure of durable consumption growth. In the
post–Bretton Woods sample, all of the differences (excepting the fourth) are statistically different from
zero. Clearly, the null that the betas on the first portfolio of funding currencies are identical to those
of the other currency portfolios is overwhelmingly rejected at conventional levels of significance. These
loadings for the 8 − 1 portfolio vary between 0.68 (resp. 0.45) in the entire (post–Bretton Woods) sample
for all currencies, and 1.02 (resp. 1.59) in the sample of developed currencies.
We have established that the average high interest rate currency depreciates relative to the average low
interest rate currency in case of negative durable consumption growth innovations and appreciates in the
case of positive durable consumption growth innovations. This effect is statistically significant, and also
economically meaningful; for the sample of developed currencies, the beta of the zero-cost portfolio is
around 2, which indicates a 2% depreciation for every 1% drop in durable consumption growth below
15

its mean.
We have shown in this section that average excess returns correspond to covariances between returns
and risk factors. The quantities and prices of risk are precisely estimated when one uses return-based
risk factors. Consequently, it is not possible to ignore a risk-based approach to exchange rates merely
on the basis of the large standard errors obtained with consumption-based risk factors.
We now rapidly turn to Burnside’s second claim. Burnside stresses that the constant in the second
stage of our regression is large and negative. We have already largely addressed this claim in the
introduction of this paper. The constant is not significant. It simply represents the dollar factor. For the
sake of completeness, we re-estimate our model on a set of 7 assets, built from the original 8 portfolios
by going short in first portfolio (low interest currencies) and long in the other ones. We use Fama and
MacBeth (1973) and GMM procedures. To save space, we report these additional results in Section C of
the separate appendix. Figure 2 in this paper already shows the main point: estimating the model on
dollar-neutral portfolios gives similar results with or without a constant.
In the asset pricing literature, standard errors on the estimates of macroeconomic factor loadings are
typically large. We report in our previous paper and in this reply estimates that are nonetheless significant. To reduce the estimation uncertainty, an alternative strategy is to construct return-based factors.
These are much more precisely measured and thus deliver better estimates of the loadings and the risk
prices. In Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008), we pursue this approach using monthly currency
return data constructed from one-month forward contracts (not T-bills) over the period from 1983.1 to
2008.12. Our results extends to a longer sample of quarterly returns starting either in 1953:I or in 1971:I.
The second principal component is a slope factor that explains a large share of the cross-sectional variation in average returns on the currency portfolios. There is much less estimation uncertainty when we
use return-based factors. The market price of risk has a t-statistic of 3.4. Again to save space, we report
these additional results in Section D in the separate appendix.

III Low Frequency Variation in the Carry Trade Risk Premium and Risk
Exposure
We have refuted Burnside’s two claims regarding our previous sample. We turn now to the additional
evidence made available by extending the sample in time and frequency. The sample used in Lustig
16

and Verdelhan (2007) ends in 2002. Since we published our first paper, new data have, if anything,
strengthened our case. The correlation between currency returns and risk factors has increased. For
example, the correlation between nondurable consumption growth and returns on the Deutsche Bank
carry trade index is equal to 0.4 in the 1993:II–2009:II sample, and it increases to 0.6 in the 2003:I to
2009:II subsample. Thanks to the long sample of high frequency currency returns of Lustig, Roussanov,
and Verdelhan (2008), we can compare the increased correlation of returns and risk factors to the average
excess returns on currency markets.
Is this increased correlation between consumption growth and carry returns evident in currency risk
premia? It turns out that during the last ten years the carry trade risk premium has doubled. Table
III provides an overview of the returns on the monthly currency portfolios of Lustig, Roussanov, and
Verdelhan (2008), where the monthly returns are annualized. The table reports the moments for the
entire sample in the first panel. The second panel shows the sample moments for the first half of the
sample (1983–1995), the third panel for the second half of the sample (1996–2009). Finally, the fourth
panel shows the results for the sample starting in 2000. The carry risk premium, the average return on
a long position in the last portfolio and a short position in the first portfolio, has increased from 2.9%
(2.16% for developed currencies) in the first half of the sample to 6.84% (3.65%) in the second half of the
sample. The premium essentially doubles in the second half of the sample.
Table IV gives the estimated factor loadings for the different subsamples of monthly data. In the
panel on the left, we report the contemporaneous betas for durable expenditure growth, nondurable
expenditure growth, and the market return. In the panel on the right we report forward-looking betas,
which are obtained by regressing returns at t + 1 on consumption growth and returns between t and
t + 3.6
In the 1983.11–1995.12 sample, which is characterized by a small carry risk premium, a long position
in the highest interest rate currencies and a short position in the first position did not expose investors to
durable expenditures risk. The estimated loadings are close to zero and sometimes negative. Similarly,
the market betas are small or negative. However, in the second half of the sample (1996.1–2009.6), the
6 Jonathan Parker and Christian Julliard (2005) show that future consumption growth improves the explanatory power of
the standard consumption CAPM, presumably because of lags in household consumption adjustment, which are especially
relevant at monthly frequencies. These are the time-series regressions we run:
j,e

j,k

j,k

j,k

Rt+1 = θ0 + θ1 f tk→ t+3 + ηt+1 ,
j,e

where Rt+1 denotes the excess return on portfolio j and f tk→ t+3 denotes the risk factor.

17

Table III: Monthly Currency Portfolio Returns

Portfolios

All Currencies

Developed Currencies

6 minus 1

5 minus 1
Panel A: 1983.11–2009.6

Mean
Standard Deviation
Sharpe Ratio

4.97%
9.03%
0.55

2.94%
9.74%
0.30
Panel B: 1983.11–1995.12

Mean
Standard Deviation
Sharpe Ratio

2.90%
9.14%
0.42

2.16%
8.72%
0.25
Panel C: 1996.1–2009.6

Mean
Standard Deviation
Sharpe Ratio

6.84%
8.92%
0.77

3.65%
10.61%
0.34
Panel D: 2000.1–2009.6

Mean
Standard Deviation
Sharpe Ratio

6.52%
7.84%
0.83

4.42%
11.26%
0.39

Notes: The mean and standard deviation are annualized. Results reported for monthly currency portfolio returns from Lustig, Roussanov, and
Verdelhan (2008), updated through June 2009.

durable expenditure beta of the long short position is 0.16, increasing to 0.19 in the subsample that starts
in 2000. The market beta is 0.20. The results for developed currencies are similar but not significant. In
the forward-looking consumption betas, the differences are even more striking. The durable expenditure
beta increases from -0.46 in the first half of the sample to 0.45 in the second half, and the market beta
increases from -0.01 to 0.25. These differences are statistically significant. In short, the large increase
in the carry trade risk premium over the past 14 years has been matched by a similar increase in the
consumption and market betas of carry trade returns.

Finally, the last panel reports betas using industry returns for non-durables and durables from
Kenneth French’s web site; he creates 10 industry portfolios using all stocks traded on NYSE-AMEXNASDAQ. These betas confirm our earlier results. The durable beta increases from 0.02 to 12, the
non-durable beta from 0.07 to 0.16. In the sample of developed currencies, the increases in consumption
betas measured using industry returns are even larger. In the second half of the sample (1996.1–2009.6),
where carry trade excess returns are the largest, industry betas are all significant.
18

IV High Frequency Variation in the Carry Trade Risk Premium and Risk
Exposure
In the first sections of this paper, we have only used unconditional betas, obtained by regressing returns
on the factors over the entire sample, to measure the quantity of risk inherent in each portfolio of
currencies. However, as we have just seen, the factor betas of currencies vary over time. As demonstrated
by Jagannathan and Wang (1996), this time variation matters for asset pricing if the betas co-vary with
risk prices. We show that this does occur in currency markets. The factor betas of these currencies
increase whenever the market price of risk increases. Hence, the average factor loadings reported by
Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) tend to understate the riskiness of these currencies.
Consider two assets with zero average market betas: one asset has a beta of 1.5 during recessions
and crises whereas the other asset has a beta of -1.5 during those times. Considering only average betas,
one might conclude that investors should be indifferent between these two assets, but this conjecture is
false unless the price of risk is constant (see Jagannathan and Wang 1996 for a detailed analysis). Yet it
seems reasonable to assume that the price of risk increases during episodes like the financial crisis.7
In Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) we start from Epstein-Zin preferences and use the implied three components of the stochastic discount factor as risk factors – namely, consumption growth in nondurables
and durables and stock market returns. This last factor proxies for the return on wealth. In unconditional asset pricing tests, this return factor does not play much of a role in explaining the cross-section
of currency excess returns. Using the annual returns of Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), we show in Section
E of the separate appendix that unconditional equity market betas are too low, and thus lead to implausibly high market prices of risk. However, the stock market risk in carry trades increases during crisis
episodes. To make this point we turn again to higher-frequency data, the daily and monthly returns of
Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008). We start with the current recession and then show that similar
results obtain for previous crises.8
The recent subprime mortgage crisis offers a good example of the changing nature of the connection
between currency and equity markets. Figure 4 plots the monthly returns on a carry trade at daily
7

Time variation in the quantity and price of risk is indeed well established on equity and bond markets. It underlies the
leading dynamic asset pricing models: the habit preferences of John Campbell and John H. Cochrane (1999), the long-run risk
model of Ravi Bansal and Yaron (2004), and the time-varying disaster risk of Xavier Gabaix (2009). We show that a similar
result holds for currency markets: the factor loadings of carry trades tend to increase dramatically during these episodes. This
implies that the average betas tend to understate the true riskiness of these investments.
8 We could make a similar point about the subprime crisis and the CAPM using the Deutsche Bank currency index as in
Section ??. However, because this index does not begin until 1993, we would not be able to present results for previous crises.

19

Returns on Currency and Equity Markets during the Mortgage Crisis

0.2

Currency Carry Trade
MSCI US Stock Market

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.3

−0.4

Correlation (Currency Carry Trade, MSCI US Stock Market) = 0.65

Jul

Sep

Nov

Jan

Mar

May

Jul

Sep

Nov

Jan

Mar

May

Figure 4: Currency Carry Trade and U.S. Stock Market Returns during the Mortgage Crisis (July 2007
through June 2009).
This figure plots one-month carry trade returns at daily frequency against one-month returns on the U.S. MSCI stock market index at daily
frequency. Currency carry trade returns come from Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008). They correspond to the returns on their last
portfolio (i.e., high interest rate currencies) minus the return on their first portfolio (i.e., low interest rate currencies). The sample period is 2
July 2007 through 30 June 2009.

frequencies against the U.S. stock market return. Clearly, a U.S. investor who was long in these high
interest rate currencies and short in low interest rate currencies was heavily exposed to U.S. aggregate
stock market risk during the subprime mortgage crisis, and therefore should have been compensated by
a risk premium ex ante.
This increase in correlations is not specific to the recent mortgage crisis. We compute the correlation
between one-month currency returns and the return on the value-weighted U.S. stock market return
using 12-month rolling windows on daily data over the entire 1983-2009 sample. Figure 5 plots the
difference between the correlation of the 6th and the 1st portfolio with the U.S. stock market excess
return. We also plot the stock market beta of H ML FX , defined again as the difference in returns between
high and low interest rate portfolios. The shaded areas indicate NBER recessions and financial crises.
These market correlations exhibit enormous variation. In times of crisis and during U.S. recessions, the
difference in market correlation between high and low currencies increases significantly. During the
Mexican, Asian, Russian, and Argentinean crises, the correlation difference jumps up by 50–90 basis
points.
20

Rolling HML Betas
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

1990

1995

2000

2005

Rolling HML Correlations
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 5: HML Market Correlations and Betas
This figure first presents Corr τ [ Rm
t , HML FX,t ], where Corr τ is the sample correlation over the previous 12 months (253 days; i.e, over the
sample [τ − 253, τ ]), Rm is the return on the U.S. stock market, and HML FX denotes currency carry trade returns. We use monthly returns at
daily frequency. The figure also presents β H ML , the stock market beta of HML FX . The stock market return is the return on U.S. MSCI index.
The solid red line uses carry returns on a large sample of developed and emerging countries; the dotted blue line corresponds to a sample of
developed countries. The sample period is 31 October 1983 through 30 June 2009.

Market Betas

We explore time variation in the stock market betas over the 1983–2008 sample in more

detail for three crisis episodes. To estimate the market βm , we use daily observations on monthly
currency and stock market returns. During these three crisis episodes, stock market betas of carry trades
increase dramatically.9 Table V reports the market betas of currency portfolios for 6-month windows
before the end of May 1998, August 2007 and June 2009.
We observe that βm
HML increases to 1.08 in the run-up to the Russian default in 1998, implying that
high interest rate currencies depreciate on average by 1.08% relative to low interest rate currencies when
the stock market goes down by 1%. In times of crisis, low interest rate currencies provide a hedge
against market risk while high interest rate currencies expose U.S. investors to more market risk. And
as expected the estimated market betas increase monotonically as we move from low to high interest
rate currency portfolios. Similarly, βm
HML increases to 0.64 at the start of the mortgage crisis in August
of 2007 and drops to 0.13 toward the end of the crisis in June 2009.

9 Charlotte

Christiansen, Angelo Ranaldo, and Paul Soderlind (2009) find similar results on a shorter sample (1995–2008)
using a logistic smooth transition regression model.

21

Consumption Betas

Also, there is substantial high frequency variation in the consumption betas as

well. These consumption betas tend to increase during recessions and financial crises. In Table VI,
we revisit the same three episodes and report the consumption exposure in these long–short currency
strategies. We use 18-month windows to estimate the factor betas. The nondurable betas of the 6 − 1
(H ML FX ) zero-cost portfolio are 0.99 in May 1998, 1.53 in August 2007, and 1.73 in June 2009 (as estimated using the most comprehensive sample of currencies). For the sample of developed currencies, the
respective consumption betas are 1.98, 3.76 and 2.07. The panel on the right reports the corresponding
industry return betas. These produce the same pattern.

V

Conclusion

Our paper on “The Cross-Section of Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth” demonstrates
that consumption growth risk is priced in currency markets. To make this point, we use currency
portfolios sorted by interest rates. These portfolios average out the idiosyncratic risk in exchange rate
changes, and this produces a sharper picture of the risk-return trade-off in currency markets. In our
sample, low interest rate currency portfolios have low consumption growth betas and high interest
rate currency portfolios have high consumption growth betas. This implies that the forward premium
puzzle has a risk-based explanation. Burnside argues that the data are not informative about the relation
between consumption growth and foreign currency returns. We disagree and have pointed out the parts
of our paper that Burnside overlooked. We have also provided additional evidence in favor of a riskbased explanation based on factor betas that are measured precisely. Our portfolios do not allow us to
identify the price of dollar risk which is Burnside’s second point. We agree, but this is not what either
our paper or the forward premium puzzle is about. Our paper is concerned with the spread between
high and low interest rate currency returns, and we have shown that the model explains about 80% of
the variation in these returns.

What Have We Learned?

Our approach of building portfolios of currencies has helped to establish

that low and high interest rate currencies have undeniably different risk characteristics. The current
crisis provides a painful lesson to anyone who doubts this. Had researchers started by looking at these
currency portfolios 25 years ago, the forward premium would probably not have been assigned the
“puzzle” label. In fact, these researchers would have been puzzled to find that uncovered interest rate
22

parity actually holds.
Our approach to studying currencies has been adopted by several authors recently (including Burnside). It enabled, for example, Roberto A. DeSantis and Fabio Fornari (2008), Jakub W. Jurek (2008),
Lukas Menkho, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling and Andreas Schrimpf (2009), Farhi, Samuel Fraiberger,
Gabaix, Romain Ranciere and Verdelhan (2009), Christiansen, Ranaldo and Soderlind (2009), Andrew
Ang and Joseph S. Chen (2010) to make further progress on the road to a better understanding of
exchange rates.

References
Andrews, Donald W.K., “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation,” Econometrica, 1991, 59 (1), 817–858.
Ang, Andrew and Joseph S. Chen, “Yield Curve Predictors of Foreign Exchange Returns,” 2010. Working Paper Columbia University.
Backus, David, Silverio Foresi, and Chris Telmer, “Affine Models of Currency Pricing: Accounting for
the Forward Premium Anomaly,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56, 279–304.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 2004, 59 (4), 1481 – 1509.
Barro, Robert, “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121, 823–866.
Bekaert, Geert and Robert J. Hodrick, “On biases in the measurement of foreign exchange risk premiums,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 1993, 12, 115–138.
Brennan, Michael J. and Yihong Xia, “International Capital Markets and Foreign Exchange Risk,”
Review of Financial Studies, 2006, 19 (3), 753–795.
Burnside, Craig, “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and US Consumption Growth: A
Comment,” 2007. Working Paper NBER No. 13129.
, Bing Han, David Hirshleifer, and Tracy Yue Wang, “Investor Overconfidence and the Forward
Premium Puzzle,” 2010. Working Paper Duke University.
, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “The Returns to Currency Speculation in Emerging
Markets,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2007, 97 (2), 333–338.
,

, and

, “Carry Trade: The Gains of Diversification,” Journal of the European Economic

Association, 2008, 6 (2), 581Ű588.
23

,

, “Understanding the forward premium puzzle: A microstructure approach,”

, and

American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (2), 127Ű54.
,

, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo, “The Returns to Currency Speculation,” November

2006. Working Paper NBER No. 12489.
,

,

, and

, “Can Peso Problems Explain the Returns to the Carry Trade?,” May 2008.

NBER Working Paper 14054.
Campbell, John and John Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (2), 205–251.
Christiansen, Charlotte, Angelo Ranaldo, and Paul Soderlind, “The Time-Varying Systematic Risk of
Carry Trade Strategies,” 2009. Working Paper.
Cochrane, John H., Asset Pricing, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001.
DeSantis, Roberto A. and Fabio Fornari, “Does Business Cycle Risk Account for Systematic Returns
from Currency Positioning? The International Perspective,” June 2008. European Central Bank.
Epstein, L. G. and S. Zin, “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and
Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 1989, 57, 937–969.
Fama, Eugene F., “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1984, 14, 319–338.
and James D. MacBeth, “Risk and Return in Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1973, 71, 607–636.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Samuel P. Fraiberger, Xavier Gabaix, Romain Ranciere, and Adrien Verdelhan,
“Crash Risk in Currency Markets,” 2009. Working Paper.
Froot, Kenneth and Richard Thaler, “Anomalies: Foreign Exchange,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1990, 4, 179–192.
Gabaix, Xavier, “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in MacroFinance,” 2009. Working Paper.
Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Motohiro Yogo, “Durability of Output and Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117(5), 941–986.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Robert J. Hodrick, “Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors of Future
Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 1980, 88, 829–853.
Harvey, Campbell R., Bruno Solnik, and Guofu Zhou, “What Determines Expected International Asset
Returns?,” Annals of Economics and Finance, 2002, 3, 249–298.
Hodrick, Robert, The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures Foreign Exchange Markets,
Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1987.
24

Hollifield, Burton and Amir Yaron, “The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium: Real and Nominal Factors,”
2001. Working Paper Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang, “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of Expected
Returns,” The Journal of Finance, March 1996, 51 (1), 3–53.
and

, “An Asymptotic Theory for Estimating Beta-Pricing Models Using Cross-Sectional Re-

gressions,” Journal of Finance, 1998, 53, 1285–1309.
Jurek, Jakub W., “Crash-neutral Currency Carry Trades,” 2008. Working Paper.
Kho, Bong-Chan, Dong Lee, and Renet’ M. Stulz, “U.S. Banks, Crises, and Bailouts: From Mexico to
LTCM,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90(2), 28–31.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When Risk
Premia Are Time-Varying,” The Journal of Political Economy, 2001, 109 (6), 1238–1287.
Lewis, Karen K., “Puzzles in International Financial Markets,” in G. Grossman and K. Rogoff, eds.,
Handbook of International Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V., 1995, pp. 1913–1971.
Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan, “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth Risk,” May 2005. Working Paper NBER 11104.
and

, “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth Risk,”

American Economic Review, March 2007, 97 (1), 89–117.
, Nick Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, “Common Risk Factor in Currency Returns,” 2008.
Working Paper.
Menkho, Lukas, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling, and Andreas Schrimpf, “Carry Trades and Global FX
Volatility,” April 2009. Working Paper.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 1987, 55 (3), 703–708.
Parker, Jonathan and Christian Julliard, “Consumption Risk and The Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” The Journal of Political Economy, February 2005, 113 (1), 185–222.
Ross, Stephen A., “The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing,” Journal of Economic Theory, December
1976, 13, 341–360.
Shanken, Jay, “On the Estimation of Beta-Pricing Models,” The Review of Financial Studies, 1992, 5 (2),
1–33.
and Guofo Zhou, “Estimating and Testing Beta Pricing Models: Alternative Methods and their
Performance in Simulations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 84, 40–86.
Yogo, Motohiro, “A Consumption-Based Explanation of Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance,
2006, 61 (2), 539–580.

25

Table IV: Estimation of Factor Loadings on Monthly Data

Durables
Nondurables
Market

Durables
Nondurables
Market

Durables
Nondurables
Market

Durables
Nondurables
Market

0.04
[0.05]
0.25
[0.26]
0.15***
[0.03]

0.04
[0.06]
0.41
[ 0.32]
0.17***
[0.05]

-0.02
[0.05]
0.21
[0.37]
0.07
[0.05]

0.01
[0.05]
0.15
[0.33]
0.10
[0.05]

0.16*
[0.09]
0.28
[0.36]
0.20***
[0.04]

0.09
[0.13]
0.63
[0.52]
0.22***
[0.07]

0.19**
[0.09]
0.35
[0.40]
0.17***
[0.05]

0.17
[0.13]
0.72
[ 0.61]
0.29***
[0.08]

Forward-Looking Betas
All Currencies Developed Currencies
6 minus 1
5 minus 1
Panel A: 1983.11–2009.6
-0.07
-0.04
[0.23]
[0.20]
1.03*
1.12
[0.63]
[0.88]
0.14**
0.19
[0.07]
[0.10]
Panel B: 1983.11–1995.12
-0.46
-0.28
[0.28]
[0.19]
0.89
0.93
[0.85]
[0.65]
-0.01
0.05
[0.08]
[ 0.08]
Panel C: 1996.1–2009.6
0.45**
0.28
[0.22]
[0.32]
1.11
1.25
[0.94]
[1.45]
0.25***
0.28**
[0.08]
[0.12]
Panel D: 2000.1–2009.6
0.44*
0.54
[0.25]
[0.36]
1.33
2.32
[1.05]
[1.59]
0.25***
0.44***
[0.09]
[0.13]

Industry Return Betas
All Currencies Developed Currencies
6 minus 1
5 minus 1
0.08***
[0.02]
0.11**
[0.04]
0.15***
[0.03]

0.10***
[0.03]
0.14**
[0.05]
0.17***
[0.05]

0.02
[0.04]
0.07
[0.04]
0.07
[0.05]

0.03
[0.04]
0.09
[0.05]
0.10*
[0.05]

0.12***
[0.03]
0.16**
[0.06]
0.20***
[0.04]

0.14**
[0.05]
0.22**
[0.09]
0.22***
[0.07]

0.11***
[0.03]
0.08
[0.09]
0.17***
[0.05]

0.16***
[0.05]
0.32**
[0.12]
0.29***
[0.08]

Notes: The left panel reports contemporaneous betas; the middle panel reports forward-looking betas; the right panel reports non-durable and durable goods industry betas (10 industry
portfolios downloadable from French’s web site). Results reported for monthly currency portfolio returns from Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008), updated through June 2009.
Standard errors are reported in brackets. Following Andrews (1991), we use Newey–West heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors with an optimal number of lags to estimate the
spectral density matrix. We use one asterisk to denote significance at the 10% level, two for 5%, and three for 1%. Section A in the separate appendix contains a detailed description of the
monthly consumption data.

26

Betas
All Currencies Developed Currencies
Portfolios
6 minus 1
5 minus 1

Table V: Estimation of Market Loadings on Daily Data — Three Case Studies

Port f olio
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
6 minus 1

αim
β im
R2
Panel A: 26 May 1998
−0.83
−0.06
0.63
[0.73]
[0.15]
−0.52
−0.04
0.39
[1.03]
[0.17]
∗∗∗
∗
−1.29
0.19
11.35
[0.42]
[0.10]
−1.67∗∗∗
0.33∗∗
7.13
[0.59]
[0.14]
−3.13∗∗
0.58∗∗
15.44
[1.50]
[0.27]
−3.68∗∗∗
1.03∗∗∗
40.47
[1.08]
[0.23]
−2.85∗∗∗
1.08∗∗∗
53.36
[0.63]
[0.16]

αim

β im
R2
Panel B: 31 Aug 2007
0.18
−0.14∗∗∗
13.52
[0.37]
[0.05]
0.15
0.22∗
28.11
[0.36]
[0.06]
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
0.72
0.18
29.72
[0.26]
[0.05]
0.29
0.21∗∗∗
39.76
[0.26]
[0.04]
0.46∗∗
0.15∗∗∗
43.24
[0.15]
[0.04]
0.60
0.51∗∗∗
54.47
[0.43]
[0.11]
0.42
0.64∗∗∗
67.39
[0.37]
[0.08]

αim
β im
R2
Panel C: 30 Jun 2009
0.37
0.31∗∗∗
60.69
[0.45]
[0.03]
0.47
0.22∗∗∗
54.97
[0.33]
[0.03]
∗∗∗
0.14
0.33
49.16
[0.78]
[0.06]
0.62
0.29∗∗∗
52.48
[0.54]
[0.05]
0.87
0.43∗∗∗
59.35
[0.76]
[0.07]
0.74
0.45∗∗∗
71.19
[0.77]
[0.09]
0.37
0.13∗∗
20.04
[0.67]
[0.08]

Notes: This table reports estimates of the CAPM betas during crises. The sample period is 129 days (6 months) before and
including the mentioned date in each panel. The table reports the intercept αim , slope coefficient βim , and R2 in a regression
of each portfolio i’s currency excess returns on a constant and the U.S. stock market return. The intercept αim and the R2 are
reported in percentage points. The Newey–West standard error correction is computed with 20 lags. We use one asterisk to
denote significance at the 10% level, two for 5%, and three for 1%. We use the daily currency portfolios from Lustig, Roussanov,
and Verdelhan (2008), updated through June 2009 and the MSCI return on the U.S. stock market.

Table VI: Estimation of Factor Loadings on Monthly Data — Three Case Studies
Betas
6 minus 1
All Currencies
Durables
Nondurables
Market

Durables
Nondurables
Market

Durables
Nondurables
Market

0.38
[0.51]
0.99
[2.14]
0.34*
[0.19]

−0.01
[0.49]
1.53*
[0.95]
0.46***
[0.16]
0.91*
[0.56]
1.73**
[0.68]
0.26***
[0.10]

Industry Return Betas
5 minus 1
6 minus 1
5 minus 1
Developed Currencies
All Currencies
Developed Currencies
Panel A: May 1998
0.21
0.15
−0.10
[0.27]
[0.24]
[0.11]
1.98**
0.43**
0.03
[0.95]
[0.17]
[0.11]
-0.07
0.34*
−0.07
[0.13]
[0.19]
[0.13]
Panel B: August 2007
−1.15
0.29*
0.30*
[0.77]
[0.18]
[0.22]
3.76***
0.55**
0.47*
[1.42]
[0.14]
[0.26]
0.27
0.46***
0.27*
[0.18]
[0.16]
[0.18]
Panel C: June 2009
1.79**
0.11**
0.22***
[0.81]
[0.04]
[0.08]
2.07**
0.29***
0.65***
[1.05]
[0.12]
[0.19]
0.54***
0.26***
0.54***
[0.12]
[0.10]
[0.12]

Notes: Table entries are regressions on the 18 months preceding the event, including the month itself. Following Andrews (1991), we use
Newey–West heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors with an optimal number of lags to estimate the spectral density matrix. We use one
asterisk to denote significance at the 10% level, two for 5%, and three for 1%. The left panel reports actual betas for consumption and the
market returns. The right panel reports non-durable and durable goods industry betas (10 industry portfolios downloadable from French’s
web site).

27

The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Consumption Growth Risk: A Reply
- Supplementary Online Appendix NOT FOR PUBLICATION
This separate appendix complements the paper “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia
and Consumption Growth Risk: A Reply”. We report additional results on:
• Durable consumption growth betas of returns and exchange rates: see Table VII and VIII
• Estimation on dollar-neutral portfolios: see Tables IX and X (with and without a constant), and
GMM estimates in Table XI
• GLS estimation of linear factor models: see Table XII and XIII
• FMB estimation of linear factor models and preference parameters: see Table XIV
• Estimation of linear factor models without a constant but with an additional factor: see Table XV
• Principal components of currency portfolio returns: see Table XVI
• Estimation of the CAPM and conditional CAPM: see Table XVII
This separate appendix first details our data in Section A. We focus on the quantity of risk and
report in Section B additional regression results on durable consumption growth betas. This additional
evidence addresses Burnside’s first claim. We then turn to the market prices of risk in Section C. We
address Burnside’s second claim and presents robustness checks on the model’s estimation. We show
how to extract risk factors from exchange rates at quarterly frequency in Section D. Finally, we report
evidence on time-varying equity prices of risk in Section E.

A

Appendix: Data

Deutsche Bank Carry Trade Return Index The Deutsche Bank G10 Currency Harvest Index consists
of long futures contracts on the three G10 currencies associated with the highest interest rates and short
futures contracts on the three G10 Currencies associated with the lowest interest rates. This index reevaluates interest rates quarterly and, based on the evaluation, reweights the futures contracts it holds.
Immediately after each reweighting, the index will reflect an investment on a 2 to 1 leveraged basis in
1

the three long futures contracts and in the three short futures contracts. The index is available online at
http://www.dbfunds.db.com/Dbv/index.aspx and starts in 1993. The PowerShares DB G10 Currency Harvest
Fund (symbol: DBV), which replicates the Deutsche Bank index, has been listed on the NYSE since
18 September 2006. As a result, the recent returns and losses that we report were accessible to many
investors.

LRV Carry Trade Returns Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008) use monthly data on one-month
forward and spot exchange rates to construct currency portfolio returns. We have updated these data
through June 2009. Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008) construct portfolios of currencies sorted by
their forward discounts. We construct six portfolios on the entire set of currencies, five for the developed
currencies. The data are available online in the Excel worksheet overview-data-monthly.

Monthly Consumption Data

The U.S. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) has recently

begun constructing monthly consumption series. We use the growth rate in real total consumption
expenditures. Because we do not have monthly data on the stock of durable consumption goods, we
cannot construct durable consumption growth. However, we check our results on the growth rate of
durable consumption expenditures. The monthly consumption data is from Table 2.8.1. (Percent Change
from Preceding Period in Real Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of Product, Monthly).
Line 1 is Personal Consumption Expenditures; we call this total consumption growth. Line 2 is Durable
goods; we call this durable expenditures. Line 3 is nondurables; we call this nondurable consumption.
We do not divide these series by the number of households. The monthly stock return is the real returns
on the CRSP-VW index.

Crises

Dates for the Tequila crisis and the Long Term Capital Management crisis were taken from Kho,

Lee, and Stulz (2000). Dates for the less-developed-country crisis are from the FDIC web site, available
on-line.

Annual Consumption Data

The annual personal consumption expenditures in dollars are obtained

from Table 2.3.5. (Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of Product), and the price series
are obtained from Table 2.3.4. (Price Indexes for Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of
Product). The nondurable consumption series is constructed as the sum of nondurable goods (line 6)
2

deflated by its price index (line 6 in Table 2.3.4), services (line 13) deflated by its price (line 13), housing
services (line 14) deflated by its price (line 14), and clothes and shoes (line 8) deflated by its price (line
8).
What enters the average investor’s utility function is the service flow provided by the stock of
durables, not the expenditures on durable consumption goods. The stock is our measure of the service flow provided by the durables. Following Yogo (2006), we measure durable consumption growth
as the change in the stock of consumer durables D. Instead of constructing our own measure (using
the perpetual inventory method) to extend the sample, we simply used the fixed asset tables, which are
available only at annual frequency. For the 1953–2002 sample, our measure is very close to Yogo’s. We
use two different measures of durable consumption growth.
Our baseline measure of durable consumption growth, denoted ∆d1 , is the log change in the deflated
current cost stock of consumer durables (line 13 from Fixed Assets Table 1.1: Current-Cost Net Stock of
Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods) divided by the number of U.S. households. We also use
a second measure, ∆d2 ; it is the log change in the quantity index for consumer durable goods (line 13
from Fixed Assets Table 1.2: Chain-Type Quantity Indexes for Net Stock of Fixed Assets and Consumer
Durable Goods). We divide these series by the number of households.

Return Factors

SMB and H ML are obtained from Kenneth French’s web site. These are listed as

Fama-French factors. SMB goes long in a basket of small stocks and short in a basket of long stocks.
The momentum factor is also downloadable from Kenneth-French’s web site; it goes long in a portfolio
of winners and short in a portfolio of losers.

B Appendix: Durable Consumption Growth Betas of Returns and Exchange
Rates
In this section, we focus on the quantity of risk. Table VII reports durable consumption growth betas
of returns on currency portfolios. Durable consumption growth betas are higher for higher interest rate
currencies. For the most comprehensive sample of currencies, which includes developing countries, we
find that the durable consumption growth betas (i.e., the factor loadings on ∆d1 ) increase from 0.70 for
the first portfolio to 1.37 for the last portfolio. We find similar results using the second measure; the
loadings on ∆d2 increase from 0.51 to 1.44. The variation in betas increases in the post–Bretton Woods
3

sample: the loadings on ∆d1 increase from 1.19 on the first portfolio to 2.19 on the sixth portfolio,
declining to 1.64 on the last portfolio; the loadings on ∆d2 range from 0.83 to 1.60. For the sample of
developed currencies, the spreads in loadings are even larger. The loading increases from 0.44 on the
first portfolio to 1.46 on the last portfolio for our baseline measure, ∆d1 , and from 0.46 to 1.11 for ∆d2 .
In the post–Bretton Woods sample, the loadings increase from 0.68 to 2.83 on the sixth portfolio, and
then decreases to 2.27 on the last portfolio; from 0.67 to 1.83 to the fifth portfolio.
What is the source of this covariance between currency returns and consumption growth: interest
rates or exchange rates? We can disentangle the contribution of changes in exchange rates and interest
rates to the factor loadings of returns that we have reported. To do so, we run a simple time-series
regression of the annual exchange rate changes in portfolio j (averaged over all the currencies in this
portfolio) on durable consumption growth. The results of this time-series regression are reported in
Table VIII. For developed currencies, all of the consumption exposure is a consequence of the exchange
rate exposure; for less developed currencies, some of the exposure is due to interest rates. High interest rate currencies depreciate when U.S. durable consumption growth is low and appreciate when
consumption growth is high.
Table VIII reports durable consumption growth betas of exchange rates. We start with developed
currencies. The top panel reports the results for long positions in each portfolio. The bottom panel
reports the results for short positions in the first portfolio and long positions in the other portfolios. For
∆d1 , the loadings of exchange rate changes increase from .52 on the first portfolio to 2.76 on the sixth
portfolio; the loadings on the last portfolio is 2.35. These loadings are statistically different from zero at
the 5 % level, except for the loadings on portfolio 1 and portfolio 4. For ∆d2 , the loadings of exchange
rate changes increase from .64 on the first portfolio to 1.91 on the fifth portfolio; the loadings on the last
portfolio is 1.75. These loadings are statistically significantly different from zero, except for the ones on
portfolios 1 and 4. We also tested whether these loadings differ significantly across portfolios by looking
at the loadings of zero-cost portfolios of currencies that go long in the high interest rate portfolio and
short in the low interest rate portfolio. For the first factor ∆d1 , the loadings are significantly different
from zero at the 10 % level for all portfolios except for portfolios 4 and 7. The loadings are larger in the
post-Bretton-Woods sample, as one would expect. When we include the less developed currencies, the
loadings on the higher interest rate portfolios are less precisely estimated. Moreover, they sometimes
are smaller for the higher interest rate portfolios. For these currencies, the interest rates themselves
4

contribute significantly to the loadings of returns on durable consumption growth (i.e., higher interest
rate differences with the US when US durable consumption growth is high).

C

Appendix: Prices of Currency Risk

In this section, we focus on the prices of aggregate risk. We first focus on Burnside’s second claim and
then report several robustness checks on the model’s estimation that were left out from our main paper.

.1 What Is the Price of Dollar Risk?
We start with Burnside’s second claim. Burnside stresses that the constant in the second stage of our
regression is large and negative. He then argues (a) that a risk-based explanation can be discounted
because our model overpredicts the returns on all eight currency portfolios and (b) that our R2 overstates
the fit of the model because it includes this constant.
The constant measures the risk price of variations in the dollar (relative to all other currencies)
that cannot be attributed to consumption growth. In Section D below, we show that the first principal
component of currency returns is a dollar factor. All currency portfolios have essentially the same
loadings on this factor.10 As a result, our cross-section of currency portfolios is not informative about
the price of dollar risk. In order to estimate the price of dollar risk, currencies need to be sorted by their
exposure to the dollar risk factor, not by interest rates.
The constant in the second stage of our regression (λ0 ) is −2.9% for the benchmark EZ-DCAPM
model. This implies that a zero-beta asset yields a negative excess return of 290 basis points. In other
words, the model overpredicts the returns on all eight currency portfolios by 290 basis points. The
uncorrected standard error on the intercept is 80 basis points. The Shanken-corrected standard error
is 220 basis points, but in this case Burnside highlights only the uncorrected standard errors. In the
bootstrapping exercise, we find a standard error of 175 basis points. This clearly shows that the intercept
is not significantly different from zero.
To confirm that the constant actually measures the price of dollar risk, we test the model’s performance on currency carry trade strategies that go long in the high interest rate currency portfolios and
short in the first low interest rate portfolio. The returns on this strategy are given by the return on the
j

high interest rate currency portfolio less the return on the lowest interest rate portfolio: Rt − R1t . The
10

It is important to note that this is typically not true for stock portfolios and the loadings on the market return.

5

Euler equations should also be satisfied for these zero-cost strategies, but the returns are not affected by
the fluctuations in the dollar. If our interpretation of the constant is correct, we should observe a smaller
intercept λ0 .

GMM Estimation

In Table XI we report the GMM estimates obtained on these seven test assets. The

factors are de-meaned. The consumption risk prices are 2.8 and 4.8, respectively, and these values
are statistically significant. Again, the benchmark EZ-DCAPM model explains about 80% of the crosssection.
Another way to avoid this “dollar problem” is to include the average excess return on all eight
portfolios as a separate factor and then estimate the model on all eight portfolios. This additional factor
RX FX absorbs the effect of the dollar variation in returns; there is no variation in the betas of this factor
across portfolios, because all have the same dollar exposure. In this case, the model can be estimated
on all eight test assets without a constant. The resulting risk price estimates are much like the ones we
obtained on the same test assets without this additional factor but including a constant. These results
are reported in Table XV.
As a result, the EZ-DCAPM model overpredicts the average (dollar) excess return on foreign currency
investments by 290 basis points in our sample, but it has no trouble explaining the spread between high
and low interest currency returns. This is what the forward premium puzzle and our previous paper
are about.

FMB Estimation

As a robustness check, Table IX reports the results for the Fama–MacBeth (1973)

estimation of the linear factor models using these test assets. In the benchmark EZ-DCAPM (column 5),
the constant λ0 drops 350 basis points (from 290 to -60 basis points), and is not significantly different
from zero. The R2 is 81%. This measure is based on the regression with a constant, yet without a constant
is (the case considered in the next paragraph) the R2 “drops” to 79 %. The risk prices of consumption
are estimated precisely. The DCAPM in column 3 also has a small intercept (λ0 ) of about 60 basis points.
This model accounts for 60% of the variation in the returns across these portfolios, and we find similar
results for the second subsample. Once you eliminate the effect of swings in the dollar by going long in
high and short in low interest rate currencies, the intercept is essentially zero.
6

Measures of Fit Finally, Burnside argues that our definition of the cross-sectional regression’s R2 overstates the fit of the model because we include the constant, even though this is the standard measure
reported in the literature. So let us turn again to those test assets that go long in high interest rate currency portfolios and short in the first portfolio. We redo the estimation without a constant, and hence use
Burnside’s preferred measure of fit. Table X reports the results. The price of nondurable and durable
consumption risk are significantly different from zero, and the model accounts for 79% of the variation
in these returns. Figure 2 compares the models estimated with and without the constant plotting the
benchmark model’s predicted excess return (horizontal axis) against the realized excess return for these
seven test assets. On the left panel, we include a constant; on the right panel, we do not. There is hardly
any difference in the fit. The pricing errors on the first and seventh portfolios are close to zero in both
cases.
Our paper is not about dollar risk. We agree with Burnside that consumption risk does not explain
the average returns earned by U.S. investors on a basket of all foreign currencies, and we have never
claimed that it did. Our focus is on the returns obtained by going long in high interest rate currencies
and short in low interest rate currencies for this is how the carry trade is defined.

.2 Robustness checks
Having checked the quantities of risk and the role of the constant, we turn now to the prices of carry
risk. We now compare the evidence in Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) on risk price estimates against
Burnside’s claim. In our previous paper we report bootstrapped standard errors, Shanken-corrected
standard errors, and GMM standard errors. In this appendix we add GLS standard errors.

Notation

For the reader’s convenience, we briefly review the notation and methodology of our previ-

ous paper. We keep the same notation in this reply. Starting from the Euler equation, one can derive
a linear factor model whose factors are nondurable U.S. consumption growth ∆ct , durable U.S. consumption growth ∆dt , and the log of the U.S. market return rtm . The U.S. investor’s unconditional Euler
equation (approximately) implies a linear three-factor model for the expected excess return on portfolio
j:






j,e
j,e
j,e
E[ R j,e ] = b1 cov ∆ct , Rt + b2 cov ∆dt , Rt + b3 cov rtw , Rt+1 .
7

(1)

Our benchmark asset pricing model, denoted EZ-DCAPM, is described by equation (1). This specification nests as special cases the CCAPM with ∆ct as the only factor, the DCAPM with factors ∆ct and ∆dt ,
the EZ-CCAPM, with factors ∆ct and rtm , and the CAPM. This linear factor model can be restated as a
beta pricing model, where the expected excess return E[ R j,e ] of portfolio j is equal to the factor price λ
multiplied by the amount of risk β j :
E[ R j,e ] = λ′ β j ,

(2)

where λ = Σ f f b, and Σ f f = E( f t − µ f )( f t − µ f )′ is the variance-covariance matrix of the factors. The
classic estimation proceeds in two stages. In the first stage, we estimate the betas (β j ) by running a
time-series regression of returns on the factors. In the second stage, we estimate the market prices of
risk for all the factors (λ) by running a cross-sectional regression of average returns on the betas.

Bootstrap

In panel B of Table 14, we report the standard errors in braces {·} obtained by bootstrapping

the whole estimation. These standard errors take into account the uncertainty in the first stage of the
estimation as well as the small sample size. They were generated by running the estimation procedure
on 10,000 samples constructed by drawing with replacement both from the observed returns and factors
under the assumption that returns and factors are not predictable. The first column reports the results with only currency portfolios as test assets. The market price of risk associated with consumption
growth in durables is highly significant for currency portfolios. The point estimate is 4.7, and the standard error is 1.7 (panel B, first column). If currency returns and consumption growth are independent,
as Burnside claims, then the bootstrapping exercise would have revealed this. Instead, it confirms that
our results are significant.

Shanken correction

Table 14 also reports the Shanken-corrected standard errors in parenthesis (·). The

Shanken correction (see Jay Shanken 1992), which is only valid asymptotically, produces substantially
larger standard errors than the ones we generated by bootstrapping. Ravi Jagannathan and Jiang Wang
(1998) show that the uncorrected Fama and MacBeth (1973) standard errors do not necessarily overstate
the precision of the factor price estimates in the presence of conditional heteroskedasticity. We show in
section III of our previous paper that conditional heteroskedasticity is the key to understanding these
currency betas.
8

Generalized Method of Moments In addition, panel A of Table 14 reports the two-stage linear GMM
estimates obtained on the same test assets. These standard errors also reflect the estimation uncertainty
for these betas. Again, the price of nondurable consumption risk is significant (3.2 with a standard error
of 0.9); likewise, the price of durable consumption risk is positive and significant (3.4 with a standard
error of 1.2). Burnside also discards the GMM evidence because he insists on estimating the mean of the
factors; adding three separate moments, he obtains different point estimates. This means that his GMM
estimates of the factor means differ from the sample means, which is not an appealing outcome. Yogo
(2006) encounters a similar problem and adjusts the weighting matrix to deal with it, as he explains in
an appendix (p. 575). Because of these issues, our approach of not estimating the mean of the factors is
actually more standard.11

Generalized Least Squares In Table XII of this paper, we report the GLS estimates that were left out of
the previously published version. We remark that GLS estimators are more efficient than OLS estimators
because they put more weight on the more informative moment conditions.12 Clearly, for the D-CAPM
and the EZ-DCAPM, the market price of durable consumption risk is significant at the 5% level, even
when we use the asymptotic Shanken correction upon which Burnside insists. The price of nondurable
consumption risk is about 3.2, with a Shanken-corrected standard error of 1.8 and bootstrapped errors
of about 1.2. The price of durable consumption risk is approximately 5.15, with a Shanken-corrected
standard error of about 2.3 and bootstrapped errors of about 1.7. The measures of fit are lower because
GLS does not simply minimize the squared pricing errors; it minimizes the weighted sum. Table XIII
reports similar results for the post–Bretton Woods subsample. Burnside’s claim that the risk prices are
not statistically different from zero does not hold for that sample either.
Table XIII reports results from a the GLS estimation on the post-Bretton Woods sample. Table XIV
reports the FMB estimation of linear factor models and preference parameters. Table XV presents the
estimation of linear factor models without a constant but with an additional, which is the average return
on currency markets.

11

For example, Martin Lettau and Sydney Ludvigson (2001) report results from a GMM estimation of their linear factor
model, yet do not to estimate the mean of the factors.
12 For a comparison of estimators for beta pricing models, see Shanken and Zhou (2007).

9

D Appendix: Extracting Risk Factors from Currency Returns
The current recession provides additional support for a risk-based explanation of exchange rates. The
number of recessions, however, remains limited. Not surprisingly, the standard errors on the estimates
of macroeconomic factor loadings are typically large. This is a well-known fact in the asset pricing
literature. To reduce the estimation uncertainty, an alternative strategy is to construct return-based
factors. These are much more precisely measured and thus deliver better estimates of the loadings and
the risk prices. The Arbitrage Pricing Theory developed by Stephen A. Ross (1976) provides a theoretical
underpinning for this methodology.
In Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008), we pursue this approach using monthly currency return
data constructed from one-month forward contracts (not T-bills) over the period from 1983.1 to 2008.12.
We find that these currency returns exhibit a clear factor structure. The first two principal components
of the returns account for most of the time-series variation in the returns on the currency portfolios. All
excess returns load approximately equally on the first principal component (PC1 ), which is close to the
mean of all currency returns. We call this the dollar factor. However, loadings on the second principal
component (PC2 ) increase monotonically with the interest rates. This is why we refer to it as the slope
factor. Exchange rates of various currencies covary in the right way when we sort these currencies by
their interest rates: high interest rate currencies move together, and so do low interest rate currencies.
This is a necessary condition for a risk-based explanation.
We show in this paper that our results extends to a longer sample of quarterly returns on the portfolios of foreign T-bills used in Lustig and Verdelhan (2007). The annual series are not as informative
about the covariance matrix and the factor structure of exchange rates. Starting either in 1953:I or in
1971:I, a clear factor structure emerges. The second principal component is a slope factor that explains
a large share of the cross-sectional variation in average returns on the currency portfolios.13 There is
much less estimation uncertainty when we use return-based factors. The market price of risk has a
t-statistic of 3.4. Table XVI reports the estimates we obtained on the currency portfolios. The left-hand
side of the table corresponds to our long sample (1953:I–2008:IV); the right-hand side corresponds to the
post–Bretton Woods sample (1971:I–2008:IV). In both cases, the risk factors are the first two principal
13 The

first principal component loads on all portfolios in the same way. On the 1953:IV–2009:II sample, its loadings are [0.12,
0.12, 0.13, 0.12, 0.12, 0.11, 0.11, 0.11]. The second principal component loads very differently on low and high interest rate
portfolios. On the same sample, its loadings are [−0.65, −0.45, −0.10, 0.13, 0.25, 0.22, 0.44, 0.20]. We obtain similar results on
the post–Bretton Woods sample.

10

components of the currency excess returns.

Cross-Sectional Regressions

The top panel of Table XVI reports estimates of the market prices of

risk λ, the adjusted R2 , the square root of mean-squared errors RMSE, and the p-values of χ2 tests (in
percentage points).
The dollar risk factor, PC1 , has an estimated risk price of 148 basis points. Its value is not precisely
estimated, which is not surprising because all the portfolios have similar betas with respect to this
dollar factor. As a result, this factor explains none of the cross-sectional variation in portfolio returns.
Although the dollar factor does not explain any of the cross-sectional variation in expected returns, it is
important for the level of average returns; it mimics a constant in the cross-sectional regression because
all of the portfolios have the same exposure to this factor.
This is the same issue mentioned in Section C. The intercept measures the price of that component of
dollar risk not explained by our risk factors (consumption growth and the market return). Why do we
call it “dollar risk”? The first principal component of all currency excess returns has the same loadings
on all currency portfolios. Hence, in the cross-sectional regression of average returns on factor loadings,
the dollar risk loadings behave as a constant. The risk price of this factor is hard to estimate precisely,
exactly because it affects all of the currencies in the same way. The cross-section of currency returns
is obviously not informative here. Suppose we eliminated the dollar risk factor from the regressions.
Then all of the alphas in panel II of Table XVI would increase by 148 basis points, but we would still be
explaining 65% of the cross-sectional variation.
The slope factor, PC2 , has a risk price of 293 basis points per annum. This means that an asset with a
beta of 1 earns a risk premium of 2.93% per annum.14 The FMB standard error is 83 basis points. The risk
price is more than 3 standard errors removed from zero and thus is highly statistically significant. The
lambdas indicate whether risk is priced, and the second principal component clearly captures aggregate
risk on currency markets. Overall, the pricing errors are small. The RMSE is around 63 basis points,
and the adjusted R2 is 63%. The null that the pricing errors are zero cannot be rejected, regardless of
the estimation procedure. All these results hold also in a smaller sample starting in 1971, as shown on
the right-hand side of Table XVI.
14 Because

the factors are returns, the absence of arbitrage implies that the risk prices of these factors should equal their
average excess returns. This condition stems from the fact that the Euler equation applies to the risk factor itself, which clearly
has a regression coefficient β of 1 on itself. In our estimation, this no-arbitrage condition is automatically satisfied because the
two risk factors are orthogonal; in this case, the risk prices exactly equal the factor means.

11

Time-Series Regressions The bottom panel of Table XVI reports the intercepts and the slope coefficients obtained by running time-series regressions of each portfolio’s currency excess returns on a
constant and risk factors. The returns and alphas are in percentage points per annum. The first column
reports alpha estimates, which are not statistically significant at the 5% significance level. The null that
the alphas are jointly zero cannot be rejected at either the 5 or either the 10% level.
The third column of the same panel reports the estimated betas for the second principal component.
These betas increase monotonically from -0.65 for the first portfolio to 0.44 for the seventh currency
portfolio, decreasing slightly to 0.20 for the last portfolio. These betas are estimated very precisely. The
first two portfolios have betas that are negative and significantly different from 0; the last five have betas
that are positive and significantly different from zero. The second column shows that betas for the dollar
factor are essentially all equal to 1. Obviously, this dollar factor does not explain any of the variation in
average excess returns across portfolios, but it helps to explain the average level of excess returns. These
results are comparable to the ones obtained using a shorter sample (reported on the right-hand side of
the table).

E

Appendix: Time Variation in Equity Risk Prices

On a long sample at annual frequency, we report in Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) that the CAPM accounts
for less than 5% of the cross-sectional variation in returns. Using monthly returns and a shorter sample
leads to more favorable results. But the CAPM is still not a good description of the currency returns.
The top panel of Table XVII reports CAPM results with 6 portfolios. The US stock market excess return
can account for a large share of the cross-sectional variation in returns. However, the estimated price of
US market risk is close to 29 percent, while the actual annualized excess return on the market is only 5.5
percent over this sample. The risk price is more than 5 times too large. The CAPM β’s vary from -.03 for
the first portfolio to .12 for the last one. Low interest rate currencies provide a hedge, while high interest
rate currencies expose US investors to more stock market risk. These β’s increase almost monotonically
from low to high interest rates, but they are too small to explain these excess returns. Therefore, the
cross-sectional regression of currency returns on market β’s implies market price of risk that are far too
high.
The bottom panel of Table XVII reports results obtained on 12 test assets (the original 6 currency
portfolios and the same ones multiplied by the lagged VIX index). Risk factors are the Fama-French
12

Rolling HML Betas
4

2

0

−3

−4
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

Rolling HML Correlations
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
1985

1990

1995

2000

Figure 6: HML Consumption Correlations and Betas
We plot the 18-month nondurable consumption growth betas of HML (upper panel) and 18-month correlations of nondurable consumption
growth and HML (lower panel). The red solid line is for all currencies; the blue dotted line is for developed currencies. Monthly currency
portfolios from Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2008) are updated through May 2010. The shaded areas are NBER recessions and the LDC
crisis, the Tequila crisis, and the LTCM crisis.

value-weighted stock market excess return R M and R M z, which is R M multiplied by the lagged value
of the VIX index (scaled by its standard deviation). We find that the market price of risk increases
significantly in bad times (when the stock market volatility index VIX is high). However, taking into
account such time-variation is not enough to justify the CAPM: market prices of risk are still too high.

13

Table VII: Durable Consumption Growth Betas of Returns
All Currencies
Portfolios

1

2

3

4

5

Developed Currencies
6

7

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1.90∗∗

1.56∗

0.62

1.04

1.69∗∗

1.90∗∗

1.85∗∗

[0.80]
[0.86]
0.31
1.23∗
[0.59]
[0.69]
[0.58]
Long–Short in 1
0.75
1.68∗∗∗
[0.67]
[0.65]
0.90∗
0.92
[0.52]
[0.56]
Panel B: 1971–2008
1.22
0.37
2.81∗∗
[1.08]
[1.20]
[1.12]
1.29∗
0.47
1.68∗
[0.82]
[0.90]
[0.77]
Long–Short in 1
0.55
2.44∗∗∗
[0.98]
[0.78]
0.73
1.21
[0.65]
[0.78]

[0.93]
1.02
[0.76]

[0.59]
0.68
[0.54]

[0.85]
0.99
[0.65]

[0.77]
1.11∗
[0.59]

[0.78]

[0.81]

1.59∗∗

1.41∗∗

[0.68]

[0.62]

1.33∗
[0.81]
0.71
[0.65]

0.39
[0.58]
0.37
[0.48]

0.82
[0.64]
0.68
[0.51]

1.47∗
[0.82]
0.80
[0.66]

1.67∗∗

1.62∗∗∗

[0.73]
1.28∗∗
[0.61]

1.10∗∗

2.50∗∗

0.99

1.72

2.77∗∗∗

2.98∗∗∗

2.85∗∗∗

[1.23]
1.51
[1.00]

[0.85]
0.94
[0.73]

[1.18]
1.52∗
[0.83]

[0.98]

[1.01]

[1.08]

1.73∗∗

2.33∗∗∗

2.06∗∗∗

[0.71]

[0.80]

[0.76]

2.13∗∗

0.62

1.35

2.40∗∗∗

2.61∗∗∗

2.49∗∗∗

[1.03]
1.04
[0.91]

[0.87]
0.47
[0.68]

[0.84]
1.06
[0.67]

[0.97]
1.26
[0.84]

[0.82]

[0.63]

1.86∗∗∗

1.60∗∗

[0.71]

[0.63]

Panel A: 1953–2008
0.37

0.73∗

Durables (2)

[0.50]
0.33
[0.40]

[0.33]

Durables (1)
Durables (2)

0.91∗∗

1.15∗

0.90

1.08∗

1.57∗∗∗

[0.39]

[0.43]

0.91∗∗

1.10∗∗

[0.37]

[0.58]
0.67
[0.47]

[0.57]

0.69∗∗

[0.66]
0.90∗
[0.51]

[0.60]

0.68∗∗

[0.49]

[0.47]

0.36
[0.37]
0.35
[0.29]

0.54
[0.36]
0.36
[0.31]

0.78
[0.48]
0.56
[0.35]

0.53∗
[0.27]
0.33
[0.27]

0.71∗
[0.42]
0.58
[0.36]

1.20∗∗∗

1.56∗∗∗

2.21∗∗∗

1.66∗∗

1.82∗∗

2.38∗∗∗

[0.83]

[0.80]

1.45∗∗

1.53∗∗

[0.59]

[0.64]

[0.41]
0.77∗∗
[0.37]

Durables (1)

0.67

1.11∗

[0.71]
0.57
[0.52]

[0.57]

[0.48]

[0.73]

Durables (2)

0.96∗∗

1.10∗∗

1.52∗∗

[0.45]

[0.48]

[0.60]

[0.78]
1.13∗
[0.60]

Durables (1)

0.44

0.89∗

1.54∗∗∗

0.99∗∗

1.15∗∗

1.71∗∗∗

[0.50]
0.39
[0.38]

[0.50]
0.53
[0.41]

[0.56]
0.95∗∗

[0.41]
0.56
[0.39]

[0.58]

Durables (2)

0.89∗∗

[0.61]
0.96∗
[0.53]

[0.43]

[0.45]

1.12

[0.73]

1.24∗∗

0.23

[0.55]
[0.48]

Notes: Results obtained on annual currency portfolio returns. The returns are from Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), updated through 2008; standard errors are reported in brackets. Following
Andrews (1991), we use Newey–West heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors with an optimal number of lags to estimate the spectral density matrix. We use one asterisk to denote
significance at the 10% level, two for 5%, and three for 1%. The first measure, denoted Durables (1), is the log change in the deflated current cost stock of consumer durables; the second
measure, Durables (2), is the log change in the quantity index for consumer durable goods. The Data Appendix contains a detailed description of our variables.

14

Durables (1)

Table VIII: Estimation of Durable Consumption Growth Betas of Exchange Rates
All Currencies
Portfolios

1

2

3

4

5

Developed Currencies
6

7

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1.32∗
[0.78]
0.89
[0.62]

0.42
[0.49]
0.55
[0.45]

0.79
[0.71]
0.84
[0.55]

1.57∗∗
[0.66]

1.74∗∗
[0.70]

1.62∗∗
[0.63]

1.05∗∗
[0.50]

1.52∗∗∗
[0.58]

1.26∗∗
[0.51]

1.30
[0.84]
0.68
[0.67]

0.39
[0.61]
0.34
[0.50]

0.76
[0.70]
0.63
[0.54]

1.54∗
[0.90]
0.84
[0.72]

1.71∗∗
[0.86]

1.59∗∗
[0.68]

1.30∗
[0.72]

1.05∗
[0.58]

2.08∗∗
[1.01]

1.31
[0.99]
1.30∗∗
[0.70]

2.57∗∗∗
[0.83]

2.71∗∗∗
[0.91]

2.55∗∗∗
[0.90]

1.27
[0.81]

0.65
[0.85]
0.72
[0.67]

1.62∗∗∗
[0.60]

2.20∗∗∗
[0.71]

1.90∗∗∗
[0.62]

2.02∗
[1.09]
0.95
[0.95]

0.59
[0.91]
0.40
[0.72]

1.25
[0.89]
0.98
[0.70]

2.50∗∗
[1.04]

2.65∗∗∗
[0.99]

2.49∗∗∗
[0.75]

1.30
[0.92]

1.88∗∗
[0.84]

1.58∗∗
[0.71]

Panel A: 1953-2008
Durables (1)
Durables (2)

−0.03
[0.38]
0.09
[0.33]

Durables (1)
Durables (2)

15
Durables (1)
Durables (2)

Durables (1)
Durables (2)

0.07
[0.58]
0.22
[0.46]

0.43
[0.39]

0.73∗∗
[0.35]

1.00∗
[0.52]

0.36
[0.47]

0.64
[0.49]

0.77
[0.60]

0.50
[0.35]

0.56∗∗
[0.28]

0.71∗
[0.43]

0.22
[0.37]

0.58
[0.43]

0.39
[0.53]

0.46
[0.38]
0.41
[0.30]

0.76∗∗
[0.33]

1.02∗∗
[0.47]

0.47
[0.30]

0.62∗
[0.37]

0.39
[0.31]
0.14
[0.28]

0.67
[0.45]
0.49
[0.39]

0.80
[0.61]
0.30
[0.55]

0.64
[0.59]
0.67
[0.50]

1.22∗∗
[0.50]

1.76∗∗∗
[0.68]

0.85∗∗
[0.36]

1.19∗∗
[0.53]

0.85
[0.70]
0.51
[0.51]

1.23∗
[0.69]
1.06∗∗
[0.51]

1.34
[0.82]
0.68
[0.70]

1.14∗∗
[0.48]

1.69∗∗∗
[0.62]

0.63
[0.43]

0.97∗∗
[0.49]

0.78∗
[0.46]
0.29
[0.41]

1.16∗
[0.60]
0.84∗
[0.51]

1.26
[0.87]
0.46
[0.77]

0.57
[0.53]
0.45
[0.38]

Long
0.03
1.74∗∗
−0.60
[0.90]
[0.77]
[0.73]
−0.51
0.21
1.13∗∗
[0.84]
[0.58]
[0.57]
Long-Short in 1
−0.57
1.72∗∗
[0.67]
[0.89]
−0.60
0.92
[0.77]
[0.61]
Panel B: 1971-2008
Long
−0.05
0.06
2.50∗∗∗
[0.92]
[1.15]
[0.97]
0.05
0.32
1.48∗∗
[0.93]
[0.80]
[0.73]
Long-Short in 1
−0.12
2.44∗∗∗
[0.96]
[0.84]
−0.18
1.16
[0.89]
[0.83]

Results obtained on annual currency portfolio returns. The returns are from Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), updated to 2008. The standard errors are reported in brackets. We use Newey-West
heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors with an optimal number of lags to estimate the spectral density matrix following Andrews (1991). We use one asterisk to denote significance
at the 10 % level, two for 5%, three for 1%. The first measure, denoted ∆d1 , is the log change in the deflated current cost stock of consumer durables. The second measure, ∆d2 , is the log
change in the quantity index for Consumer durable goods. The Data Appendix contains a detailed description.

Table IX: Long in High and Short in Low Interest Rate Currency Portfolios: FMB

CCAPM

DCAPM

EZ-CCAPM

EZ-DCAPM

2.406

0.694

2.417

−0.641

[0.901]
(1.135)
{0.999}

[0.869]
(1.946)
{1.213}

[0.845]
(1.062)
{1.263}

[0.848]
(2.382)
{1.691}

Factor Prices
Constant

Nondurables

1.123

1.735

1.116

2.450

[1.074]
(1.369)
{1.305}

[1.065]
(2.394)
{1.398}

[0.949]
(1.211)
{1.434}

[0.818]
(2.307)
{1.542}

Durables

4.129

5.144

[1.225]
(2.758)
{1.819}

[1.042]
(2.941)
{2.217}

Market

1.757

4.699

[7.978]
(10.336)
{12.598}

[8.190]
(23.144)
{12.751}

Parameters
γ

52.274

90.704

44.392

123.622

[50.004]
(90.065)

[55.429]
(121.554)

[46.192]
(57.576)

[38.382]
(104.774)

0.167

−0.035

[0.887]
(1.106)

[0.035]
(0.096)

σ

α

1.140

1.124

[0.613]
(1.344)

[0.487]
(1.334)

Stats
MAE
R2
p − value

1.699
0.081
0.038

0.703
0.620
0.620

1.698
0.081
0.023

0.348
0.812
0.510

Notes: This table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimates of the risk prices (in percentage points) using 7 annually re-balanced currency portfolios
as test assets. These test assets go long in the n-th currency portfolio and short in the first portfolio. The sample is 1953-2002 (annual data).
The factors are demeaned. The OLS standard errors are reported between brackets. The Shanken-corrected standard errors are reported in ().
The boostrapped errors are in {}. The last three rows report the mean absolute pricing error (in percentage points), the R2 and the p-value for
a χ2 test.

16

Table X: FMB Estimation: Dollar-Neutral Currency Portfolios, 1953-2002, No Constant

CCAPM

DCAPM

EZ-CCAPM

EZ-DCAPM

Factor Prices
Nondurables

4.617

2.302

4.021

2.016

[1.060]
(3.509)
{1.881}

[0.848]
(2.325)
{1.617}

[1.005]
(3.103)
{1.905}

[0.915]
(2.233)
{1.524}

Durables

5.244

4.385

[1.175]
(3.221)
{2.097}

[1.117]
(2.729)
{2.093}

Market

24.470

2.383

[10.191]
(31.500)
{17.883}

[7.401]
(18.151)
{12.965}

1.538
−0.602
0.012

0.451
0.792
0.483

Stats
MAE
R2
p − value

1.654
−0.700
0.018

0.672
0.578
0.613

Notes: This table reports the FMB estimates of the risk prices (in percentage points) using 7 annually re-balanced currency portfolios as test
assets. No constant included. These test assets go long in the n-th currency portfolio and short in the first portfolio. The sample is 1953-2002
(annual data). The factors are demeaned. The OLS standard errors are reported between brackets. The Shanken-corrected standard errors are
reported in (). The boostrapped errors are in {}. The last three rows report the mean absolute pricing error (in percentage points), the R2 and
the p-value for a χ2 test.

17

Table XI: GMM Estimation: Dollar-Neutral Currency Portfolios, 1953–2002

CCAPM

DCAPM

EZ-CCAPM

EZ-DCAPM

4.073
[1.785]

2.917
[1.363]

3.839
[2.031]

2.757
[1.306]

Factor Prices
Nondurables
Durables

4.886
[2.128]

Market

4.864
[1.866]
0.171
[0.141]

0.261
[10.834]

514.39
[452.25]

139.53
[63.22]

−1.912
[2.839]

−0.009
[0.026]

Parameters
γ

193.44
[84.77]

147.45
[67.01]

σ

0.767
[0.420]

0.626
[0.522]

α
Stats
MAE
R2
p-value

1.654
−1.392
0.962

0.672
0.568
0.968

1.538
−0.916
0.818

0.451
0.790
0.674

Notes: This table reports the two-stage GMM estimates of the factor prices (in percentage points) using seven annually rebalanced currency
portfolios as test assets. These test assets go long in the nth currency portfolio and short in the first portfolio. The sample is 1953–2002.
The data are annual, from Lustig and Verdelhan (2007). In the first stage, we use the identity matrix as the weighting matrix, in the second
stage, we use the optimal weighting matrix (no lags). Standard errors are reported in brackets. The factors are de-meaned. The pricing errors
correspond to the first-stage estimates. The last two rows report the mean absolute pricing error (in percentage points) and the p-value for a
χ2 test.

18

Table XII: GLS Estimation of Linear Factor Models, 1953–2002

CCAPM

DCAPM

EZ-CCAPM

EZ-DCAPM

−2.765

−3.414

−2.939

−3.390

[0.784]
(1.850)
{1.521}

[0.805]
(2.215)
{1.656}

[0.797]
(1.990)
{1.691}

[0.809]
(2.212)
{1.996}

3.134

3.004

3.290

2.953

[0.659]
(1.570)
{1.237}

[0.660]
(1.829)
{1.236}

[0.672]
(1.691)
{1.334}

[0.680]
(1.871)
{1.348}

Factor Prices
Constant

Nondurables

Durables

5.153

5.125

[0.860]
(2.384)
{1.557}

[0.864]
(2.382)
{1.783}

Market

−1.817

−3.650

[5.907]
(14.958)
{11.420}

[5.933]
(16.421)
{11.480}

4.449
−0.033
0.559

0.732
0.728
0.991

Stats
MAE
R2
p-value

4.657
0.110
0.561

0.855
0.678
0.996

Notes: This table reports the generalized least squares (GLS) estimates of the risk prices (in percentage points) using eight annually rebalanced
currency portfolios as test assets. The sample is 1953–2002. The data are annual, from Lustig and Verdelhan (2007). The factors are demeaned.
The OLS standard errors are reported in brackets; the Shanken-corrected standard errors in parentheses, and the boostrapped errors are in
braces. The last three rows report the mean absolute pricing error (in percentage points), the R2 , and the p-value for a χ2 test.

19

Table XIII: GLS Estimation of Linear Factor Models: 1971-2002

CCAPM

DCAPM

EZ-CCAPM

EZ-DCAPM

−2.853

−3.251

−2.833

−3.167

[1.089]
(2.295)
{1.852}

[1.111]
(2.430)
{2.016}

[1.103]
(2.339)
{2.108}

[1.117]
(2.535)
{2.336}

Factor Prices
Constant

Nondurables

3.060

3.043

3.081

3.191

[0.682]
(1.467)
{1.182}

[0.682]
(1.520)
{1.276}

[0.708]
(1.529)
{1.248}

[0.710]
(1.638)
{1.383}

Durables

3.431

3.517

[0.703]
(1.576)
{1.250}

[0.712]
(1.653)
{1.339}

Market

6.895

5.975

[6.154]
(13.448)
{10.182}

[6.173]
(14.383)
{11.045}

5.666
0.117
0.893

1.902
0.482
0.947

Stats
MAE
R2
p − value

5.689
0.095
0.782

2.452
0.337
0.931

Notes: This table reports the GLS estimates of the risk prices (in percentage points) using 8 annually re-balanced currency portfolios as test
assets. The sample is 1971-2002 (annual data). The factors are demeaned. The OLS standard errors are reported between brackets. The
Shanken-corrected standard errors are reported in (). The bootstrapped errors are in {}. The last three rows report the mean absolute pricing
error (in percentage points), the R2 and the p-value for a χ2 test.

20

Table XIV: Estimation of Linear Factor Models and Preference Parameters: 1953-2002

CCAPM

DCAPM

EZ-CCAPM

EZ-DCAPM

−0.693

−3.057

−0.525

−2.943

[0.954]
(1.582)
{1.538}

[0.839]
(2.049)
{1.659}

[1.046]
(1.809)
{1.743}

[0.855]
(2.209)
{1.751}

Factor Prices

Nondurables

1.938

1.973

2.021

2.194

[0.917]
(1.534)
{1.369}

[0.915]
(2.245)
{1.343}

[0.845]
(1.476)
{1.460}

[0.830]
(2.154)
{1.360}

Durables

4.598

4.696

[0.987]
(2.430)
{1.653}

[0.968]
(2.518)
{1.695}

Market

8.838

3.331

[7.916]
(13.917)
{12.336}

[7.586]
(19.754)
{11.216}

92.757
[41.869]

111.107
[38.910]

−0.008
[0.460]

−0.032
[0.037]

Parameters
γ

90.191
[42.676]

102.778
[54.374]

σ
1.104
[0.530]

α

1.147
[0.555]

Stats
MAE
R2
p − value

2.041
0.178
0.025

0.650
0.738
0.735

1.989
0.199
0.024

0.325
0.869
0.628

Notes: This table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimates of the risk prices (in percentage points) using 8 annually re-balanced currency portfolios
as test assets. The sample is 1953-2002 (annual data). The factors are demeaned. The OLS standard errors are reported between brackets. The
Shanken-corrected standard errors are reported in (). The last three rows report the mean absolute pricing error (in percentage points), the R2
and the p-value for a χ2 test.

21

Table XV: Estimation of Linear Factor Models: No Constant but Additional Factor

CCAPM

DCAPM

EZ-CCAPM

EZ-DCAPM

1.083
[0.889]

1.166
[0.890]

1.283
[0.782]

1.543
[0.775]

Factor Prices
Nondurables
Durables

4.856
[1.221]

Market
RX FX

5.267
[1.144]
11.379
[8.143]

0.057
[8.071]

0.362
[0.830]

0.201
[0.829]

0.359
[0.830]

0.168
[0.828]

1.287
0.125
0.000

0.846
0.600
0.143

1.358
0.189
0.000

0.560
0.799
0.087

Stats
MAE
R2
p − value

Notes: This table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimates of the risk prices (in percentage points) using 8 annually re-balanced currency portfolios
as test assets. The sample is 1953-2002 (annual data). The factors are demeaned. We did not include a constant in the regression of average
returns on β’s. RX FX -the additional factor- is the average excess return on all eight portfolios. The OLS standard errors are reported between
brackets. The last three rows report the mean absolute pricing error (in percentage points), the R2 and the p-value for a χ2 test.

22

Table XVI: Asset Pricing — Principal Components

1953:IV–2009:II

1971:IV–2009:II
Panel I: Risk Prices

FMB

Mean

PC1

PC2

R2

RMSE

1.48
[0.98]
(0.98)

2.93
[0.86]
(0.86)

66.54

0.63

1.48

2.93

χ2

PC1

PC2

R2

RMSE

1.80
[1.44]
(1.44)

2.82
[1.26]
(1.26)

47.09

0.87

9.08
11.32

1.80

2.82

χ2
13.58
15.54

Panel II: Factor Betas
Intercept

PC1

PC2

R2

Intercept

PC1

PC2

R2

1

−0.52
[0.47]

1.04
[0.04]

−0.65
[0.05]

87.92

−0.79
[0.68]

1.05
[0.04]

−0.65
[0.05]

88.40

2

0.80
[0.55]

1.06
[0.05]

−0.45
[0.06]

85.69

0.94
[0.78]

1.06
[0.05]

−0.45
[0.06]

86.01

3

−0.24
[0.49]

1.20
[0.05]

−0.10
[0.04]

86.73

0.04
[0.69]

1.20
[0.05]

−0.08
[0.05]

87.43

4

−0.26
[0.57]

1.07
[0.05]

0.13
[0.04]

80.84

−0.24
[0.78]

1.08
[0.05]

0.14
[0.04]

82.18

5

−1.03
[0.63]

1.07
[0.05]

0.25
[0.07]

81.40

−1.67
[0.83]

1.07
[0.05]

0.27
[0.07]

83.08

6

0.45
[0.71]

1.03
[0.06]

0.22
[0.07]

70.74

0.51
[0.98]

1.01
[0.06]

0.14
[0.07]

75.08

7

−0.02
[0.49]

1.03
[0.04]

0.44
[0.05]

84.72

0.15
[0.68]

1.03
[0.04]

0.46
[0.04]

85.97

8

0.94
[0.42]

0.98
[0.04]

0.20
[0.04]

83.93

1.17
[0.60]

0.98
[0.04]

0.20
[0.04]

84.75

7.37

49.74%

6.65

57.47%

Port f olio

All

Notes: Panel I reports results from GMM and Fama–MacBeth asset pricing procedures. Market prices of risk λ, the adjusted
R2 , the square root of mean-squared errors RMSE, and the p-values of χ2 tests on pricing errors are reported in percentage
points. Excess returns used as test assets and risk factors take into account bid–ask spreads. All excess returns are multiplied
by 4 (annualized). Shanken-corrected standard errors are reported in parentheses. We do not include a constant in the second
step of the FMB procedure. Panel II reports OLS estimates of the factor betas. The R2 s and p-values are reported in percentage
points. The standard errors in brackets are Newey and West (1987) standard errors computed with the optimal number of
lags according to Andrews (1991). The χ2 test statistic α′ Vα−1 α tests the null that all intercepts are jointly zero. This statistic
is constructed from the Newey–West variance-covariance matrix (one lag) for the system of equations (see Cochrane 2001, p.
234). Data are quarterly, from Global Financial Data. The sample includes only developed countries. Portfolios are rebalanced
every quarter. The sample period is 1953:IV–2009:II for the left panel and 1971:IV-2009:II for the right panel. The alphas are
annualized and reported in percentage points.

23

Table XVII: Estimation of Linear Factor Model Risk Prices: CAPM

Market

Market − V IX

R2

RMSE

χ2

Panel A: Unconditional CAPM
FMB

27.00

70.50

1.08

[14.60]

9.80

(16.21)

18.77

Mean

5.67

FMB

29.91

Panel B: CAPM with VIX as conditioning variable

Mean

75.46

69.64

2.07

[11.75]

[29.51]

25.57

(13.80)

(34.22)

55.13

5.04

10.53

Notes: This table reports results from Fama-McBeth asset pricing test. Market prices of risk λ, the adjusted R2 , the square-root
of mean-squared errors RMSE and the p-values of χ2 tests are reported in percentage points. In the top panel, the risk factor
is the Fama-French value-weighted stock market excess return Rm . In the bottom panel, the risk factors are the value-weighted
stock market excess return Rm and Rm V IX, which is Rm multiplied by the lagged value of the VIX index (scaled by its standard
deviation). The portfolios are constructed by sorting currencies into six groups at time t based on the interest rate differential
at the end of period t − 1. Portfolio 1 contains currencies with the lowest interest rates. Portfolio 6 contains currencies with the
highest interest rates. In the bottom panels, we use 12 test assets: the original 6 portfolios and 6 additional portfolios obtained
by multiplying the original set by the conditioning variable (VIX). Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (Datastream).
The sample is 11/1983–6/2009 for the top panel and 02/1990–6/2009 for the bottom panel. Standard errors are reported in
brackets. Shanken-corrected standard errors are reported in parentheses. We do not include a constant in the second step of
the FMB procedure.

24

