                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CHOICE, PRICE COMPETITION AND COMPLEXITY IN MARKETS FOR HEALTH
                               INSURANCE

                                           Richard Frank
                                          Karine Lamiraud

                                        Working Paper 13817
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13817


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the AHRQ (P01-HS10803), the Alfred P Sloan
Foundation, the Swiss National Science Foundation (Fellowships and Exchange Programmes) and
the Franco-American Fulbright program. We thank Jacob Glazer, Sherry Glied, Tom McGuire, Joe
Newhouse, Mike Grossman, Friedrich Breyer, an anonymous referee, the editor and seminar participants
at the CUNY-Columbia NBER Health Economics Seminar, the NBER 2007 Summer Institute, the
London School of Economics Social Policy seminar, the European Health Economics Workshop (EHEW)
in Magdeburg and the HEC-DEEP seminar at the University of Lausanne. **Karine Lamiraud was
visiting Harvard University as a Fulbright fellow when the research was initiated. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Richard Frank and Karine Lamiraud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Choice, Price Competition and Complexity in Markets for Health Insurance
Richard Frank and Karine Lamiraud
NBER Working Paper No. 13817
February 2008
JEL No. I11

                                              ABSTRACT

The United States and other nations rely on consumer choice and price competition among competing
health plans to allocate resources in the health sector. A great deal of research has examined the efficiency
consequences of adverse selection in health insurance markets, less attention has been devoted to other
aspects of consumer choice. The nation of Switzerland offers a unique opportunity to study price competition
in health insurance markets. Switzerland regulates health insurance markets with the aim of minimizing
adverse selection and encouraging strong price competition. We examine consumer responses to price
differences in local markets and the degree of price variation in local markets. Using both survey data
and observations on local markets we obtain evidence suggesting that as the number of choices offered
to individuals grow their willingness to switch plans given a set of price dispersion differences declines
allowing large price differences for relatively homogeneous products to persist. We consider explanations
for this phenomenon from economics and psychology.


Richard Frank
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
frank@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Karine Lamiraud
University of Lausanne
Faculty of Business and Economics
Institute of Health Economics and Management
Extranef - Dorigny, 1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
karine.lamiraud@unil.ch
          I. Introduction

       The U.S. and other nations rely on consumer choice and price competition

among competing health insurance plans to allocate resources in the health sector.

There is an efficiency impulse to offer larger numbers of choices and greater variety

of health insurance products. Expanded choices also carry efficiency problems in the

form of adverse selection even if choices in health plans also result in price

competition (Cutler and Reber, 1998). The nation of Switzerland offers a unique

opportunity to study price competition in health insurance markets. Switzerland

requires all residents to have health insurance. The government regulates the terms

of competition so as to encourage price competition and minimize adverse selection.

This is accomplished by defining a standard benefit for the mandated individual

coverage, prohibiting insurers from turning away potential enrollees, providing

extensive public information on prices, and risk adjusting payments to insurers.

Households face the full price of coverage and may also purchase supplementary

coverage and many do. Swiss residents all face opportunities to purchase coverage

from at least 35 different sellers. In principle such a set of market arrangements

might be expected to lead to active price competition. Yet Swiss health insurance

markets are characterized by large and persistent price differences in local markets

and little consumer switching between plans offering different prices. This has been

the case even during a period of expanding choice in local health insurance markets.

       These market outcomes contrast sharply from simple models of consumer

behavior and competitive markets. We therefore explore several explanations of

consumers’ health plan switching behavior. Specifically, we focus on the response

of consumers to an expanding health insurance choice set. We make use of panel




                                                                                        3
data based on Swiss health insurance markets and a survey of insured individuals to

explore switching behavior and consumer satisfaction with health insurance.

         The paper is organized into six sections. Following the introduction, the

second section describes the market for health insurance in Switzerland and reports

some basic facts about the market with respect to the amount of choice, consumer

mobility and price patterns. The third section explores explanations for the apparent

disconnect between what the standard competitive model would lead one to expect

and the observed outcomes. The fourth section describes the empirical analysis

aimed at producing evidence to assess the proposed explanations. Results are

reported in the fifth section. Concluding remarks are made in the final section of the

paper.

         II. Background

                A.     Swiss Health Insurance Markets: Regulatory Framework

         Switzerland, a country of 7.4 million inhabitants, is divided into 26 Cantons.

The organization of the health care system is the responsibility of individual Cantons,

The health care system is regulated by the Federal Law on Social Health Insurance

(LAMal). The LAMal has been in force since 1996 after it was ratified in a popular

referendum in 1994.

         The main regulatory features of Swiss health insurance markets are as

follows. 1) An individual mandate requires all residents to have health insurance

coverage.1. 2) A standardized basic benefit package that is very comprehensive

covering outpatient and inpatient care, and services such as nursing home care. The

level of cost sharing (deductible, coinsurance of 10% up to an annual ceiling) is

defined by the law and is invariant across insurers. 3) Premiums are community-


1
    Note that each family member must contract on an individual basis.


                                                                                          4
rated. That is, premiums can differ between health plans but, an insurer must offer

uniform premium for people in the same age groups (0-18, 19-25, and >25), in the

same geographic area (78 regions, ie 3 per Canton), with the same type of

coverage. Four types of basic health insurance are available. In 2003 the most

frequent choice was for ordinary deductible health insurance (49.7%) followed by

insurance plans with higher deductibles (42.0%). Insurance with limited choice of

providers (HMO-contracts) accounts for 8.2% of enrollees. Federal and Canton

subsidies are available to low-income residents. In some Cantons means-tested

subsidies are granted to over 40% of the population. 4) Health insurers must accept

every applicant for basic insurance. There is an open enrollment opportunity every

six months (June and December) in which individuals can switch insurance

providers. 5) Premiums paid to health plans are risk adjusted. Risk adjustment is

based on location, gender and age.

       There is a clear-cut regulatory separation between basic statutory coverage

and optional supplementary insurance. One can get basic and supplementary

insurance from two different providers or from the same health insurance.

Supplementary insurance is not regulated by LAMal. Insurance Contract Law (LCA)

regulates it. In the supplementary insurance market, insurers may refuse bad risks

and offer risk-rated premiums.

       These features suggest that changing health insurers for basic coverage

involves very low switching costs. Indeed, the basic insurance coverage is virtually

identical from one health insurer to the other, and the enrollee generally can remain

with the same physician or hospital. Furthermore, the actual switching procedure is

simple: it requires the individual to write a letter (prototypes are downloadable from a

well known website) to their health insurer. Search costs are low. All premiums are



                                                                                        5
officially published every year by the Federal Office for Public Health (OFSP) and

distributed to households that request them. Furthermore, the most competitive

premiums can be easily found on the Internet and in newspapers.

      In a health insurance market with community-rated premiums for each health

plan, homogenous benefits, open enrollment and low switching costs, individuals

would be expected to migrate toward the insurance plans offering the lowest

premiums. Premium differences across insurance plans would be expected to be

very small. The observed facts depart from these expectations.

      B. Stylized Facts on Market Performance

      i. Market Structure

      In the aggregate the number of health insurers (all non profit) that offer

mandatory health care insurance decreased over the past decade. In 1994 there

were 178 authorized health insurers operating; by 2004, there were only 92 insurers

(Statistics in Health Insurance, OFSP, 2004, Table 8.01).

      At the Canton level where the competition takes place, the individual choice

set has increased over the same period (Table 1). In 1998 the mean number of

health plans per Canton was 39 (range: 36 – 49); Consumers could choose among

more than 40 health plans in only 2 Cantons. The mean number of health plans per

Canton rose to 52 in 2003 (range: 41 – 70); in 8 Cantons, more than 55 insurers

were providing individuals with basic insurance.2




2
  A look at the 6 largest health plans reveals that the group as a whole was stable
from 1998 to 2004. About 61% of enrollees were enrolled with these 6 companies in
1998. After a slight decline between 1998 and 2004, the 6 largest firms regained
market share in 2005.



                                                                                      6
       ii. Price Variability Over Time

       Price variability was high in 2004 (Figure 1). Figure 1 shows monthly price

variability by Canton, the maximal difference in basic premiums for adults over 26

(for full coverage and in a single geographical cell) was 2952 Swiss francs per year

or about 80% of the average. In 2004, the average gain of switching for an enrollee

insured with the biggest company CSS amounted to 621 Swiss Francs over the year

(which constitutes an average 20% discount).

       We measure price variation by examining the mean differences across

cantons of the average premium minus the minimum and the maximum minus the

minimum premium. These are reported on Table 2 for the years 1997-2004. Table

2 shows little evidence of price convergence over time as competition at the Canton

level has intensified.

              iii. Switching Behavior

       Annual switching percentages are relatively low given the price differentials

for identical benefit packages. Health insurance switching rates were 4.8% in 1997,

5.4% in 1998, 2.7% in 1999 and 2.1% in 2000 according to household survey data

(OFAS, 2001). Yearly switching rates have recently stabilized at around 3% (Le

Temps, 2005).

       III. Explanations

              A. The Expected Utility Model

       In assessing the low rates of switching in the presence of substantial

opportunities to realize lower premiums for what appear to be homogeneous health

plans, we begin by considering how standard market models address such facts.

The standard economic model of consumer choice under uncertainty assumes that

consumers maximize their expected utility. Given a set of N choices an individual



                                                                                       7
will choose a health plan if its expected utility is greater than that of each of the

alternatives. To reach normative conclusions the theory additionally requires that

consumers can secure reliable information about the quality of each of the

alternatives.

       Once a plan is chosen a consumer may experience a change in health state

or other personal circumstances (e.g. reduced income) or face a new set of premium

choices due to health plan entry. These altered circumstances may result in the

individual reassessing the expected utility of their health plan relative to available

alternatives. Standard theory recognizes that consumer search is costly. Rational

consumers search individually until the costs of additional searching outweigh its

expected benefits. Deciding to switch therefore requires the beneficiary to learn

about the alternatives, and if plans look potentially more attractive, the beneficiary

must anticipate needing to learn about each plan’s policies and procedures.

         Switching costs can produce a relationship between increased competition

in the form of an increased number of sellers and price dispersion if an increase in

the number of sellers causes an increase in consumer search costs and results in

fewer searches. This would happen within an industry that sells differentiated

products. Janssen and Moraga-Gonzales (2004) show that the impact of an increase

in the number of sellers depends on the consumers’ search intensity. When

consumers search with low intensity, an increase in the number of firms reduces

search, does not affect expected price and leads to greater price dispersion.

Alternatively when consumers search with high intensity, increased numbers of

competitors results in more searching and lower prices if the number of competitors

in the market is low to begin with. However, if the number of firms is initially large

increased numbers of firms causes less search and higher prices.



                                                                                         8
         Price variability may also increase with the number of sellers in settings

where there is heterogeneity among consumers (informed versus uniformed, price

sensitive versus less price sensitive consumers). Varian (1980) examines a setting in

which the demand is driven by two classes of buyers: informed and uninformed

consumers. The Varian model predicts that the range of prices is greater when the

number of sellers is higher. However, this model does not necessarily imply less

switching.

         Finally, there is another line of literature that generates price dispersion

based on models of price discrimination (Borenstein and Rose, 1994). The

institutional context in Swiss health insurance markets limits the applicability of the

price discrimination approach.

       In Switzerland during the period observed (1997-2000) the size of the choice

set in local markets grew, the population aged and dissemination of information on

price and quality improved. All of these changes might be expected to result in

switching between health plans. During a period of expanding choice, the likelihood

that there is a preferable alternative to an individual’s existing health plan increases

as do potential search costs. In the Swiss context, search costs may be less

important than elsewhere because insurance product characteristics are closely

regulated and price information is widely available. In addition one source of

switching cost common in the U.S. the link between one’s health plan and one’s

physician is essentially non-existent in Switzerland where only 8% of people are in

health plans that restrict provider choice (Niepp and Zeckhauser, 1985). In fact one

recent study of consumer mobility in Europe found that switch costs are rather low in

Switzerland (Laske-Alderschof et al, 2004). Thus if there is an increase in the choice




                                                                                           9
set alongside substantial price variation and relatively low search costs it is

somewhat surprising to see low and declining switching rates.

         The Swiss regulatory structure and the fee for service-indemnity insurance

serve to reduce many aspects of service quality variation. Some quality variation no

doubt remains. One variable dimension of quality may be the reliability of the health

plans. Health plans have entered and left the market in recent years. Research on

choice of health plans in American health insurance markets shows quite limited

effects on choice or switching of measured (but unregulated) quality differences

between health plans

         The implications of the expected utility model for empirical analysis of

switching behavior is that right hand side variables would include measures of

relative premiums, enrollee health status and personal circumstances, and

potentially some measures of plan characteristics, their administrative effort and

financial stability.

                B. Decision Overload

         The standard model faces the most challenges when applied to complex,

high-stakes choices such as those involving health care and investment decisions.

.Research in economics and psychology questions whether more choice is always in

consumers’ interests. Too much choice can inhibit consumers from making any

choice. Particularly when choice involves health and money – and both are

obviously part of choice of health insurance – consumers facing many choices may

revert to the status quo even if superior options are available (Kunreuther et al,

2002).

         Two underlying forces have been suggested as explanation for increased

choice inhibiting consumer switching. These are related to the limited ability of


                                                                                      10
individuals to process information and to regret or the fear of making errors in what

are seen as high stakes decisions. The information or cognitive overload theory

argues that as the choice set grows there are increasing costs to an individual of

processing information (Eppler and Mengis, 2003). This happens if individuals

continue to consider all alternatives as the choice set expands. Even if short cuts

are used (elimination of the worst alternative) information processing costs grow with

the choice set. This leads to the hypothesis that consumers can be overwhelmed by

“too much” choice (Huffman and Kahn 1998; Iyengar and Lepper, 2000.) The result

is an expected relationship between the size of a choice set and the quality of

decision-making that is an inverted U. The second psychological force concerns the

fear of making an incorrect choice or regret. In situations where decisions are

complex, consequential and uncertain there is often fear of making the wrong

decision and later suffering regrets. One set of responses to such decision-making

circumstances that have been observed in both experimental and observational

studies is a tendency towards decision avoidance by either opting for the status quo

or walking away from the decision entirely (Samuelson and Zeckhauser 1988;

Schwartz, 2005; Shafir, Simonson and Tversky, 1993)

      One set of experimental results by Iyengar and Lepper (2000) show that as

the number of choices expands people will be less likely to take action and, say,

make a purchase. This result is consistent with other research showing that a type of

“analysis paralysis” takes hold when information and choices becomes very complex

(Bawden, 2001, Cowan, 2001).One set of studies that is particularly relevant to the

Swiss Health insurance context come from studies of 401(k) plans. Iyengar,

Huberman and Jiang (2004) show that participation in 401(k) plans increases

significantly when the number of funds offered decreases from 60 to less than thirty



                                                                                        11
and again when fund offerings fall below 10. In the health insurance context a study

by Elbel and Schlesinger (2006) studied insurance choice in the U.S. Medicare

program. In that program there are increasing numbers of choices and the choices

are highly heterogeneous. Using survey data from Medicare beneficiaries, Elbel and

Schlesinger studied the impact of the number of plans on the likelihood that

individuals would leave the traditional Medicare program in favor of private health

plans (paid for by the government). They found that switching is more likely as the

number of choices rises up to four and then it begins to decline. They also showed

that, after four choices, beneficiaries put no further effort into considering health plan

options. The implication is that more choice and greater complexity of choice after a

point will inhibit action and reduce the quality of decisions that are made.

              C. Status Quo Bias

       Thaler (1980) identified a general tendency of people to exaggerate the value

of an item they possess (selling price) relative to what they would value the same

item if they did not own it (buying price). This has been termed the endowment effect

and it stems from the idea of loss aversion (Tversky and Kahneman 1991). Loss

aversion has also been associated with an attachment to the status quo. In an

environment of uncertainty and decision complexity it is hypothesized that there is a

tendency to exaggerate the disadvantages of departing from current arrangements

and to understate potential gains. Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) have explored

this phenomenon in the context of health insurance markets and report support for

what they term status quo bias in decision making. They studied health plan choices

as new health insurance products were introduced into the Harvard University

employee benefit plan. They argued that traditional consumer theory suggests that,

ceteris paribus, newer faculty (holding constant age) and those with longer tenures



                                                                                        12
should display a similar pattern of choices. Yet the data showed that established

faculty members were more likely to enroll in health plans that had existed prior to

the new offerings than faculty with shorter periods of attachment to any health

insurance plan. They interpreted this as support for the existence of a status quo

bias. 3

                D. Distinguishing Between Explanations

          If search costs are low then the number of choices available to consumers in

the market would typically not explain much about switching behavior in the

expected utility model. In the expected utility model with low search costs the

number of choices works primarily through premium and quality. A model based on

ideas about decision overload and regret would include a measure of the number of

choice available to consumers. The decision overload hypothesis suggests a

negative relation between switching and the number of choices above a certain

number of choices (the inverted U). The experiences in the 401(k) market suggest

that as choices grow beyond 10 and also beyond 30-60 there are reductions in

consumer responses. The evidence from Medicare suggests a lower threshold albeit

with heterogeneous products. In practice, since service quality is likely to be

incompletely measured, a negative relationship between switching rates and number

of choices could occur because the number of choices may serve as a proxy for the

ability of consumers to find better preference-quality-price matches. In an expected

utility model, if prices are well measured and most variation in quality is either

eliminated by regulation or measured by indicators of plan administrative effort or


3
 More recently Strombom, Buchmueller and Feldstein (2002) showed that the health
plan switching in response to price changes was lower for incumbent enrollees of
health plans other factors constant. They also interpreted this finding as evidence in
support of a status quo bias.



                                                                                       13
financial reserves then the number of choices to add little explanatory power to a

model of switching behavior.

       The expected utility model allows for some learning about how health plans

serve consumers, which might result in switching behavior. These learning effects

might be expected to occur within a year or two of enrollment. Beyond that the

expected utility framework would not include tenure of enrollment to explain health

plan switching. The status quo bias model implies that longer tenures of enrollment

should continuously reduced the likelihood of switching other things equal.

          IV- Empirical Implementation

       We empirically examine the roles of price, information overload and status

quo bias in explaining the switching rates between insurance plans operating in

individual Swiss insurance markets.

              A. Overview of Analysis Strategy

       Information overload may stem from the large number of competing health

plans. Even if health plans can be assessed easily and quickly due to publicly

available information on prices the large number of alternatives is likely to make the

choice process more burdensome. In our context, status quo bias is present when

enrollees prefer their current plans to lower cost alternatives of comparable quality

even when tangible switching costs are low.

       To examine these issues, we conduct the following specific analyses. We

examine: (i) factors associated with switching of health plans/ and the intent to switch

plans (ii) plan distributions of old/ new enrollees and (iii) stated reasons for being

enrolled with current health plans

       In our empirical analysis of plan switching, we focus on three main

explanatory factors. First, we examine the monetary gains from plan switching or the


                                                                                         14
influence of price differentials. Second, we assess the impact of the number of

competing health plans on health plan switching. The variability in the number of

choices across Cantons over time allows us to test whether more choice increases

or decreases the likelihood that individuals will switch health plans. A finding that

suggests that individuals facing larger numbers of alternative health plans are less

likely to switch plans, other factors equal, would be most consistent with notions of

information overload. That is, the number of plans is unlikely to be correlated with

unmeasured quality differentials. We also control for the complexity of choice by

controlling for the purchase of a supplementary insurance policy in addition to the

basic package.4 Third, we study the relationship between the duration of enrollment

and switching behaviors in order to assess whether individuals stick with their current

health plans though presumably superior alternatives (with respect to price) are

available.

       The health plan choices of new enrollees (switchers) will be compared to plan

choices of those who have maintained their previous plans (non switchers).

Switchers should be relatively unencumbered by status quo bias. If the pattern of

plan choices for these two groups differ significantly this would be consistent with the

presence of status quo bias (Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988, Strombom,

Buchmueller and Feldstein, 2002).

       Studying the stated reasons of enrollment in health plans at a point in time in

surveys of health plan enrollees offers another window into factors that influence

observed patterns of enrollment. Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) have

emphasized that “anchoring” or “psychological commitment” underlying status quo


4
 There may also be a perception that it is advantageous to hold basic and
supplemental coverage from the same insurer. We have not found any tangible
evidence of such gains.


                                                                                        15
bias are likely to result from tradition, habit, sufficient satisfaction (as opposed to

optimal choice), uncertainty toward alternatives, misperceptions or false beliefs

concerning health plan characteristics. Sample surveys of Swiss health plan

enrollees ask some questions related to the importance of such factors as reasons

for health plan enrollment.

              B. Data

       We make use of two sources of data, a survey of individuals focusing on

health plan choices in Switzerland and publicly reported information related to health

insurance plans including premiums, number of enrollees and financial indicators

(the level of reserves, and administrative costs).

       The OFAS Survey

       The survey that we use was conducted by the Federal Office for Social

Insurance (OFAS) as part of the general assessment of the Law on Sickness

Insurance (Art. 32 OAMal). The corresponding dataset was obtained from the Swiss

Information and Data Archive Service (SIDOS). It includes observations from a

sample of 2152 households representative of the Swiss population. One adult was

interviewed by telephone in each household during the summer of 2000.

       This survey provides extensive information on health plan choice at the

individual level. Respondents were requested to name their current health insurance

plans for the basic and supplementary health insurance separately and to define

their criteria for choosing plans. The options they chose (e.g. higher deductibles,

HMO) for basic insurance and the composition of the supplementary benefit package

were also reported. People were asked whether they had changed any of their

health insurance contracts during the four previous years (1997 - 2000) and when

they made changes. Consequently, switching behaviors were retrospectively



                                                                                          16
reported over a four-year period. Note also that reporting of consumer choices

started one year after the new health insurance policy was put into effect. In

addition, information on the intent to switch in the future as well as general

satisfaction with their health insurance plans was collected. Knowledge, beliefs,

attitudes and perceptions towards LAMal and health plans were also investigated.

Socio-demographic characteristics as well as subjective health status were obtained

in the survey. A detailed descriptive analysis of these data is available in the OFAS

report (2001) and in Colombo (2001). The data are structured as a panel dataset of

switching behaviors including one observation per enrollee per year, over a four-year

period. All variables except respondent gender, location, and educational attainment

vary over time.

       The insurer database

       Our empirical models make use of information that describes health insurance

markets over the period 1997-2000. This includes information on the number of

enrollees (denoted nict) and monthly adult premiums (Pict) that are reported at three

levels: insurer (i), Canton (c) and year (t). Financial characteristics of the health

plans such as the amount of reserves (rit) and the level of administrative spending

(ait) are measured for each insurer by year.

       The number of enrollees per health plan is reported at the Canton level even

though there are Cantons that consist of two or three different premium regions. To

address this issue we use the (unweighted) average premium per health insurer for a

Canton. In addition, the number of enrollees per health plan is not provided by type

of contract even though there are discount for high deductible plans that differ from

one health insurer to another. The premium for full coverage (ordinary deductible) is

used as a proxy variable for the adult premium.



                                                                                        17
         The number of insured people in each plan was directly obtained from the

Federal Office for Public Health (OFSP); yearly premiums are available on the OFSP

website (http://www.bag.admin.ch/kv/statistik/f/index.ht). Financial characteristics of health

plan are published yearly. We have a total of 4685 observations on insurers (one

observation per insurance company, per Canton, per year).

         For our purposes, this insurer information is used to compute the number of

health plans by Canton-year, the number of enrollees, the average premium as well

as indicators of premium variability. We make the connection between the OFAS

survey and this insurer information by matching each individual health plan reported

in the survey with the corresponding market information (premium, number of

enrollees, reserves, administrative costs, market share) referring to the relevant year

and Canton and by adding the data that we computed at the Canton level (number of

operating funds, number of enrollees, premium variability).

                   C. Estimation

         Estimation of a switching model

         We estimate a health plan-switching model. We denote y nt the binary

variable defined by y nt = 1 if the individual n has switched during year t and y nt = 0

when he/she has not switched. The following basic model is estimated on the latent

variable y nt* :

                          y nt* = x nt' β + (dp )nt η + Ont γ + S nt λ + yeart α + c n ρ + ε nt

         The decision to switch is given by:
         y nt = 1 if y nt* ≥ 0.

         x nt' is a vector of both time-varying and time-invariant individual characteristics

(age, gender, household size, education level, urban location, health status). The




                                                                                                  18
vector yeart represents a set of time fixed effects to account for expanded entry over

time across Cantons among other trends.

       Ont denotes the choice set facing an individual in year t (number of health

plans in a Canton). Three main specifications were used: 1) A continuous variable

representing the number of choices; 2) A vector of dummy variable measuring

ranges in number of plans (eg. 35-49 plans, 50-55, 56-60, 61-71) which represents a

more flexible functional form; 3) A single dummy variable with takes on a value of

one for markets with 55 or more choices. As we discussed above an enrollee may

deal with large choice sets by creating subsets of options. This is a form of cognitive

short cut that might be used to reduce information processing costs (Cowan 2001).

An enrollee may not be considering all options. As local markets are quite

concentrated, a large number of insurers are likely to be fringe players that may not

figure into the decisions of many consumers. We allow for this form of segmentation

through an alternative specification that includes two plan count variables Ont1 and Ont2

. Ont1 , denotes the plans that have more than a 10% market share and Ont2 the

number of plans with less than 10% (Table 1b). We also replaced the number of

plans by the inverse of the Herfindahl index that indicates the “size equivalent”

number of firms in the market (Table 1c). Choice overload is consistent with the

inverse of the Herfindahl index being negatively associated with the probability of

switching.

       We also treat the number of choices to be endogenous. If health plan are able

to observe factors affecting switching not observable to the researcher and make

entry choices accordingly then entry is endogenous. Canton fixed effects are

included to capture unobserved time invariant heterogeneity. We also estimated an

instrumental variables model of switching for the case of the continuous measure of


                                                                                       19
plan choice. Instruments included the population of the Canton, the average income

of the canton and the average premium in the canton during the prior year.

       (dp ) nt represents the potential gains from switching health plans. We measure

(dp ) nt as the (weighted) standard deviation in health plan premiums within a Canton.

This represents the expected difference in price one would experience if the typical

person switched to the mean plan in a Canton. This is one measure of potential

financial gains from plan switching (Table 2).5 We also estimate a model

specification that includes interaction terms between the choice environment

indicators, and the measure of price dispersion (dp) n . This enables us to examine

differential price response in the five choice environments. We also estimate models

that include a measure of the number of new plans available to consumers during

each period to allow both levels and changes in plan choice to affect switching

behavior.

       S nt takes on the value 1 when the individual has contracted a supplementary

health insurance contract, a more complex choice situation. Furthermore, it is

important to control for this variable because it might also capture the risk-selection

practices that are still reported despite the existing regulation. In particular, it was

highlighted that underwriting practices for supplemental policies might create an

impediment to switch funds (Paolucci et al., 2007). In order to get rid of this effect,

we run additional models excluding people with supplemental insurance.

       As the impact of vector Ont on switching behavior might depend upon whether

the individual has purchased supplementary insurance, the interaction between both

variables will also be tested in additional models. The standard errors and


5
  We are grateful to Tom McGuire for discussion of this approach to specifying the
“price” measure.


                                                                                           20
significance associated with the interaction terms in non-linear models will be

computed according to the approach of Ai and Norton (2003). However, note that

the idea that those with supplemental insurance face a more complicated decision

assumes that the decision to purchase supplemental insurance is independent of the

decision of which basic and supplemental plan to purchase. In an additional

specification, we test this assumption using a bivariate probit model that jointly

estimates the factors affecting the decision to switch basic health plans and to

subscribe to a supplementary contract.

       The structure of the data complicates the estimation of any status quo bias

because the duration of enrollment is only known for the current health plan and not

for any prior health plans. As a result we estimate models, where we use the

declared intention to switch in the future as a dependent variable. Because attitudinal

questions, such as intent to switch were only asked as prospective questions, the

corresponding regressions were run a subsample of the dataset where t = 2000. In

that case the vector x n' also includes the duration of enrollment in each respondent’s

current health plan.

       ε nt is a random disturbance that is assumed to follow a logistic distribution.

Logit estimations are run on the cross section of 8608 observations. We also run

random effects logit models (Greene, 2001), thus taking into account the panel

structure of the data (each individual being present during four periods).

          V- Results

       The main descriptive features of the survey are summarized in Table 3. 2152

individuals took part in the survey. Of this sample, 73.8% of the respondents lived in

areas with more than 50 competing health plans in 2000. During the period 1997-

2000, 15.2% switched from one health plan to another for the basic package. Except



                                                                                         21
for six individuals, switchers switched only once during the period of analysis. In the

year 2000, 9.9% reported intent to switch in the future.

       Switching rates proved to be significantly higher in areas with fewer plans

than in the higher choice areas over the 4-year period. A similar pattern was

observed for the intent to switch outcome. The logit estimates for the plan switching

models are reported on Table 4. The first five columns of Table 4 report a series of

specifications using five different approaches to measuring the number of plans in a

consumer’s choice set. Column one reports estimates for the switching model where

the total number of health plans is measured as a continuous variable. That

estimate indicates that cantons with more choices have significantly lower switching

rates ceteris paribus. Column two measures choice set size with a dummy variable

for cantons offering 55 or more health plan choices. The coefficient estimate is

negative and significantly different from zero at conventional levels (p<0.05). The

magnitude of the estimate implies that people in cantons with more than 55 choices

have relative odds of 0.65 of switching compared to those with fewer choices.

Column three specifies a set of dummy variables measuring different choice set

sizes. Those results show a monotonically declining likelihood of switching with

more choices. The estimated coefficient for the dummy for 30-49 choice is positive

and significantly different from zero compared to the reference group (50-55

choices). The coefficient dummy for 61 or more choices relative to the reference

group was negative and significantly different from zero.

       Column four reports estimates from a model that allows consumers to view

firms with a relatively large presence in the market differently from smaller fringe

firms. In this model both measures are continuous. Note that both coefficient

estimates are negative but only the coefficient estimate for the number of fringe firms



                                                                                       22
is significantly different from zero. Finally, we include the inverse Herfindahl index as

our choice set size measure in column five. The estimate coefficient for that variable

is negative and significant at conventional levels.6

       Two other sets of coefficient estimates in columns 1-5 are important to note.

The coefficient for the variable measuring relative price (dp) is consistently positive

and significant suggesting that the larger the price differential between one’s own

plan and other options the more likely a consumer is to switch their health plan. The

coefficient estimates while quite stable across specifications are not very precisely

estimated in a number of models.

       Columns 6-11 of Table 4 report a series of models that take account of

potential threats to the basic specifications in columns 1-5. Column six reports the

results of a re-estimation of the model in column 1 when people with supplementary

coverage are dropped from the analysis file. The estimated coefficient for the

number of plans remains negative and significant. The magnitude of the coefficient

increased from -0.02 to -0.03. Columns 7 treat the choice set measures from

columns 1 and 2 as endogenous. Using the F test proposed by Staiger and Stock

(1997) we show that the instruments used in our IV models are not weak.7 The

results in columns 7 show that both coefficients for the choice set size measures

6
  Since there was some instability in entry involving insurers with very low levels of
enrollment (see Tables 1a and 1b) in two Cantons (GR and VS) the use of the
Herfindahl index allows us to test the sensitivity of our findings taking to account
enrollment size. We also re-estimated the models dropping the two Cantons and the
results did not change materially (estimates available upon request).
7
  In order to assess the strength of the instruments that we use in type IV probit
model, we estimated the corresponding IV linear probability model through 2SLS,
thus being able to refer to the results that were developed for linear models (Staiger
and Stock, 1997) (such results have not been worked out for IV probit yet). Staiger
and Stock (1997) suggest that the F statistics from the first stage regression should
be computed. An F statistics of 10 is the threshold for the strength of instruments.
In our case, F=210, suggesting that our instruments meet the criteria for strong
instruments of Staiger and Stock (1997).


                                                                                          23
continue to be negative and significantly different from zero. Columns 8 - 12 offer

additional sensitivity analyses. The resulting coefficient estimates for the size of the

choice set remain quite stable showing a negative and significant effect of more

choices on the likelihood of switching health plans. Column 8 incorporated the

household size as a covariate. Column 9 indicates that when an individual holds

supplemental insurance, more choice reduces the probability of switching health

plans. Furthermore the bivariate probit model (joint estimation of the propensities to

switch and to hold a supplementary contract) reported in column 11 suggests that we

cannot reject exogeneity of supplemental coverage in the switching equation. The

coefficient for supplemental coverage is never significant at conventional levels.

Column 12 shows that the number of new plans decreases the likelihood of

switching (holding constant the general time trend).8

       We tested whether people that switched plans paid lower premiums than

those that stayed in the same plan. Our estimates show that the adjusted monthly

premium for switchers was 181 SF compared to 214.18 SF for those staying with the

same plan. The difference of 33.18 or 15.9% was significant at conventional levels

(t=6.05). This suggests that by not switching, consumers “left money on the table”.

       Table 5 reports results of several specifications of the logit model on a

individual’s intent to switch health plans. The estimated coefficients for the vector of

dummy variables measuring the size of the choice set in each Canton showed a

similar pattern of results to those found on Table 4. In these models the coefficient

estimates were more precise. In general larger choice sets (above 50 choices) were

8
  Note that in all random effects logit specifications of the switching model, the
likelihood ratio test of rho = 0 suggests that individual unobserved heterogeneity is
not significant. Consequently the panel data set is run as a cross section on a four-
year period in the regressions reported in Table 4.



                                                                                        24
associated with a significantly reduced likelihood of expressing intent to switch health

plans. The estimated coefficient on the duration of enrollment in one’s current funds

was negative and significant in all specifications. This suggests that the longer one

has been enrolled in a plan holding constant age and health status etc, the less likely

one is to report an intent to switch health plans.. The results on price differences

(dp ) were similar magnitude and in some cases a bit less precisely estimated than in

the switching regressions of Table 4.

         We consider whether indicators of health plan “quality” affected the results on

intent to switch. We included measures of administrative costs, and the size of the

plan reserves. Neither of these variables had coefficient estimates that were

significantly different from zero. Nor did we find any evidence that the estimated

coefficients for the number of choices were affected by including these variables9.

         We do, however, find some descriptive evidence from an analysis of switchers

that is suggestive of some quality differences affecting choice behavior. Health plans

with high reserves may seem more secure. Thus, it is not surprising to find that 29%

of switchers have opted for funds having reserves below the required level versus

12% of non switchers (p<0.001).

         We investigate the impact of choice further by modeling the intent to switch

among consumers expressing dissatisfaction with their health plan. Consumers

facing large numbers of health plan choices were less likely to express an intention

to switch health plans even when they expressed dissatisfaction with their current

health plan. Indeed, out of those who were very dissatisfied (answers 1-5 on a 1-10

scale) 33.7% intended to switch plans in areas with less than 50 choices versus

21.9% in areas with more than 50 choices (p<0.01, Chi2).

9
    Results are available from the authors


                                                                                        25
       Patterns of health plan choices among more recent choosers and the overall

populations show that the distributions of plan choices differ significantly between

switchers and non switchers. Table 6 reports the distributions over the 12 biggest

sickness funds in 2000. and shows 59% of non-switchers compared to 23.7% of

switchers were enrolled with one of the five major national plans (helsana, css,

visana, konkordia, swica). Distributions of health plan choices by age groups show

(Table 7), similar patterns with 61.2% of older non-switchers versus 21.1% of older

switchers enrolling in large plans. For respondents younger than 35, the percentages

are respectively 50.3% versus 26.5%. Switchers refer to people exercising choice

and not those changing health plans exits.10

       What are the reasons reported by enrollees for the observed patterns of

enrollment? Table 9 reveals that 40% of people choose a health plan following their

parents’ and friends’ choices, and what they see as tradition. Furthermore, as many

as 25% individuals declare that they do not strive to pick the health insurance plan

with the lowest premium. A substantial number of people explicitly report staying with

their health plan based on habit (13.5%) or because they are satisfied with their

arrangement (79%)(Table 8).. As a test of whether people are possibly not searching

for the lowest price we compare the prices obtained by those using an “agent”

versus all others. We find that those using agents pay on average 9% less for

coverage (p<0.05) than all other enrollees.

       There appears to be considerable misunderstanding about what the basic

rules of the health insurance markets are for consumers. For instance, 29% of

individuals think that health plans charge different premiums to different age groups

among adults for the basic package; 10% of individuals believe that sickness funds

10
  Specifically, our results are not the result of the fact that Visana stopped
operations in 8 Cantons in 1998


                                                                                       26
can cream skim; 15% of individuals believe that they must purchase supplementary

and basic insurance from the same carrier; and 10% think that they are allowed to

change health plans only when the premium rises.

       VI. Concluding Observations

       The Swiss market for health insurance might be one where one would find

high levels of price competition and active movement among health plans by

consumers interested in securing the lowest prices for a standardized basic benefit

package. Yet one observes low rates of switching persistently with high variation in

premiums. These facts present a challenge to simple market models of health

insurance. In this paper we raise the possibility that factors such as decision

overload and status quo biases in decision making contributes to the observed

behavior.

       We make use of data on consumer choice in Swiss health insurance markets

to explore decision overload and status quo bias as explanations for behavior in

those health insurance markets. Our findings offer a mixed picture of the impact of

expanded choice on price competition in Swiss health insurance markets. We

explored a variety of ways of characterizing the size of the choice set. Results from

the various model specifications point to a consistent finding that more choice serves

to inhibit switching of health plans. In one specification we allowed consumers to

respond to fringe firms differently from those that were more significant actors in the

local market. There our results suggest that switching rates are largely driven by the

number of “fringe” firms in the market. These results are quite consistent with the

literature on 401(k) plans that show substantial effects on participation as the choice

set grows to over 30 funds.




                                                                                       27
       Our econometric results indicate that people with longer periods of attachment

to a particular health plans were less likely to express an intention to switch plans.

Moreover, people making new health plan choices (switchers and those new to the

market) chose to enroll in different health plans than those who had not switched in

some time. Finally, when people are asked about why they have chosen their current

plan –reasons related to habit, family tradition, and adequate performance by the

health plan were noted. All of these reasons are consistent with inertia associated

with status quo bias.

       The results for price response show strong consumer responses to price

dispersion. That is, where price dispersion is larger and the gains from switching

health plans are greatest consumers are most likely to switch. These results are

consistent with standard market models.

       We uncover some evidence suggesting that consumers are making errors.

First, we show that consumers that switch health plan pay 15% to 16% less in health

insurance premiums per month holding ceteris paribus. Second, we show that

among consumers expressing dissatisfaction with their health plans those in markets

with fewer choices are more likely to express intent to switch. Finally, consumers

that used an agent to help them purchase insurance consistently paid significantly

lower premiums. This set of results suggests that “mistakes may have been made”.

       One implication of these results is that expanding choice to very large

numbers is likely to reduce the effectiveness of consumer decision-making which in

turn may result in larger mark-ups by health insurers. This is because expanded

choice will weaken the relationship between enrollment in an individual health plan

and the price concessions offered to consumers (Perloff and Salop 1985). This is




                                                                                         28
consistent with our finding on the link between number of choices and variation in

prices.

          At a moment in history when elderly Americans are facing large numbers of

choices in private health plans and prescription drug plans our findings may offer

some cautions regarding the need for decision support and mechanisms that simplify

such health insurance choices.




                                                                                      29
      References

     Ai, C.R., Norton, E.C., 2003. Interaction terms in logit and probit models.
Economics Letters 80(1):123—129.

      Bawden, D., 2001. Information and digital literacies: A review of concepts.
Journal of Documentation 57 (2), 218-259.

        Borenstein, S., Rose, N., 1994. Competition and Price Dispersion in the U.S.
Airline Industry. The Journal of Political Economy 102 (4), 653 - 683.

       Colombo, F., 2001. Toward more choice in social protection ? Individual
choice of insurer in basic mandatory health insurance in Switzerland. Occasional
papers N°53, Labour Market and Social Policy, Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD).

      Cowan, N., 2001. The magical number 4 in short-term memory. A
reconsideration of mental storage capacity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (1),
87-114.

      Cutler, D., Reber, S., 1998. Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeoff
Between Competition and Adverse Selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics
113(2), 433-466.

      Elbel, B., Schlesinger, M., 2006. How Much Choice? Nonlinear Relationships
Between the Number of Plan Options and the Behavior of Medicare Beneficiaries.
Working Paper, Yale University.

      Eppler, M.J., Mengis, J., 2003. A Framework for Information Overload
Research in Organizations. Insights from Organization Science, Accounting,
Marketing, MIS. Paper #1/2003 Università della Svizzera italiana.

      Greene, W., 2001. Fixed and Random Effects in Nonlinear Models. New York
University, Leonard N. Stern School Finance Department Working Paper Series 01-
01, New York University, Leonard N. Stern School of Business-.

      Huffman, C., Kahn, B.E., 1998. Variety for Sale: Mass customization or Mass
Confusion? Journal of Retailing 74(4), 491-513(23).

       Iyengar, S.S., Huberman, G., Jiang, W., 2004. How Much choice is Too
Much? Contributions to 401(k) Retirement Plans, in OS Mitchell and S Utkus (eds)
Pension Design and Structure: Lessons form Behavioral Finance Oxford University
Press, 83-95.

      Iyengar, S.S., Lepper, M.R., 2000. When Choice is Demotivating: Can One
Desire Too Much of a Good Thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79,
995-1006.

       Griffiths, W., Judge, G., 1992. Testing and estimating location vectors when
the error covariance matrix is unknown. Journal of Econometrics 54, 121-138


                                                                                      30
       Janssen, M., Moraga-Gonzales, J.L., 2004. Strategic pricing, consumer
 search and the number of firms. Review of Economic Studies 71, 1089 – 1118.

        Kunreuther, H., Meyer, R., Zeckhauser, R.P., et al., 2002. High Stakes
 Decision-Making: Normative, Descriptive and Prescriptive Considerations. Marketing
 Letters, 13(3), 259-268.

       Laske-Aldershof, T., Schut, E., Beck, K., Gress, S., Shmueli, A., Van de
 Voorde, C., 2004. Consumer mobility in health insurance markets: a five-country
 comparison. Applied Health Economics and Health Policy 3(4), 229 – 241.

       Le Temps, 2005. Berne semonce les caisses: il est illégal de repousser les
 assurés qui coûtent cher, October 18 2005.

       Neipp, J., Zeckhauser, R., 1985. Persistence in the Choice of Health Plans. In
 R. Scheffler and L. Rossiter, eds. Biased Selection in Health Care Markets.
 Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

       OFAS, 2001. Auswirkungen des Krankenversicherungsgestzes auf die
 Versicherten, Forschungsbericht Nr.3/01, OFAS.

         OFSP, 2004. Statistics in Health Insurance.
 http://www.bag.admin.ch/kv/statistik/

        Paolucci, F., Schut, E., Beck, K., Gress, S., Van de Voorde, C., Zmora, 2007.
 Supplementary health insurance as a tool for risk-selection in mandatory basic
 health insurance markets. Health Economics, Policy and Law 2 (2), 173-192.

       Perloff, J.M., Salop, S.C., 1985. Equilibrium with product differentiation.
 Review of Economic Studies 52, 107-120.

       Samuelson, W., Zeckhauser R., 1988. Status Quo Bias in Decision Making.
 Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1(1), 7 – 59.

       Schwartz, B., 2005. The paradox of Choice: Why More is Less, New York:
 Harper-Collins.

         Shafir, E., Simonson, I., Tversky, A., 1993. Reason-Based Choice. Cognition
49(1-2), 11-19.

       Strombom, B.A, Buchmueller, T.C., Feldstein, P.J., 2002. Switching Costs
 and Health Plan Choice. Journal of Health Economics 21(1), 89-116.

        Staiger, D., Stock, J.H., 1997. Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
 Instruments. Econometrica 65, 557-586.

       Swiss Information and Data Archive Service (SIDOS). www.sidos.ch.
 Datensatz 2001 AG : Die Leistungen von Krankenkassen aus Sicht der Versicherten
 – 2000.



                                                                                     31
      Thaler, R., 1980. Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice. J. Economic
Behavior and Organization 1(1), 39-60.

     Tversky, A., Kahneman, 1991. Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference
Dependent Model. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106,1039-1061.

      Varian, H., 1980. A Model of Sales,” American Economic Review 70, 651-659.




                                                                              32
Graph 1: Box plots of monthly premium by canton (2004)



  600
  500
  400
  300
  200
  100




        AG AI ARBEBLBSFRGEGLGRJULUNENWOWSGSHSOSZTG TI URVDVSZGZH




                                                               33
Table 1a: Number of health plans per canton over 1997- 2004

canton           1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   % enrollees
                                                                              (2004)
AG (Aargau)       39     39     52      59    55     58     59     60          7.7%
AI                34     36     35      37    34     40     41     55          0.2%
AR                38     39     42      46    44     45     45     54          0.7%
BE (Bern)         38     39     54      59    57     59     59     57         13.0%
BL                38     39     49      51    50     51     54     56          3.6%
BS                39     39     49      52    51     51     54     56          2.4%
FR                39     39     51      55    54     53     53     54          3.4%
GE                38     39     49      50    48     48     49     50          5.4%
GL                38     39     45      46    45     48     51     57          0.5%
GR                71     49     59      56    54     53     56     61          2.6%
JU                37     38     42      44    45     45     43     49          0.9%
LU                38     39     51      54    56     56     58     58          4.8%
NE                38     39     45      49    46     47     48     49          2.3%
NW                38     37     42      41    42     42     44     56          0.5%
OW                38     39     44      45    44     45     47     55          0.5%
SG (St Gallen)    39     39     53      54    52     56     56     58          6.3%
SH                39     39     44      46    43     47     49     55          1.0%
SO                39     39     51      55    54     54     56     58          3.4%
SZ                39     39     49      51    50     53     54     59          1.8%
TG                39     39     48      50    46     47     51     54          3.1%
TI                38     38     46      50    50     53     53     51          4.3%
UR                37     36     39      42    42     42     44     57          0.5%
VD (Vaud)         39     38     51      52    51     51     51     50          8.7%
VS                74     49     73      75    73     70     70     70          4.0%
ZG                38     39     47      50    50     51     55     56          1.4%
ZH (Zurich)       39     39     61      61    63     63     64     62         17.0%
MIN               34     36     35      37    34     40     41     49
MAX               74     49     73      75    73     70     70     70
MEAN              40     39     49      51    50     51     52     56
MEDIAN            38     39     49    50.5    50     51     53     56




                                                                                34
Table 1b: Number of large firms and of fringe firms per canton over 1997 - 2000
                          1997                        1998                        1999                      2000
canton           nlarge       nfringe        nlarge       nfringe        nlarge       nfringe      nlarge       nfringe
AG (Aargau)               3             36            3             36            3          49             3             56
AI                        3             31            3             33            3          32             3             34
AR                        3             35            3             36            3          39             3             43
BE (Bern)                 2             36            2             37            2          52             2             57
BL                        5             33            4             35            4          45             3             48
BS                        3             36            2             37            1          48             1             51
FR                        2             37            1             38            1          50             1             54
GE                        2             36            2             37            2          47             4             46
GL                        3             35            3             36            3          42             3             43
GR                        2             69            2             47            3          56             3             53
JU                        3             34            3             35            2          40             2             42
LU                        3             35            3             36            3          48             3             51
NE                        3             35            3             36            2          43             2             47
NW                        3             35            3             34            3          39             3             38
OW                        3             35            3             36            3          41             3             42
SG (St Gallen)            3             36            3             36            3          50             3             51
SH                        4             35            5             34            5          39             5             41
SO                        3             36            4             35            4          47             3             52
SZ                        3             36            3             36            3          46             3             48
TG                        3             36            3             36            3          45             3             47
TI                        4             34            3             35            3          43             3             47
UR                        3             34            3             33            3          36             3             39
VD (Vaud)                 3             36            4             34            4          47             5             47
VS                        3             71            2             47            2          71             2             73
ZG                        3             35            3             36            3          44             3             47
ZH (Zurich)               4             35            2             37            2          59             2             59
MIN                       2             31            1             33            1          32             1             34
MAX                       5             71            5             47            5          71             5             73
MEAN                      3             38            3             36            3          46             3             48
MEDIAN                    3             35            3             36            3         45.5            3             47




                                                                                                                          35
Table 1c: Inverse of Herfindahl index over 1997- 2000

canton           1997    1998     1999    2000
AG                8.58    8.51     8.57    8.80
AI                5.47    5.51     5.41    5.45
AR                6.15    6.43     6.14    6.33
BE                5.27    5.62     7.16    7.99
BL               10.53   10.94    11.10   11.48
BS                4.45    4.45     4.55    4.69
FR                7.67    7.52     6.86    7.04
GE               14.98   14.70    13.87   13.72
GL                6.64    6.63     6.54    6.78
GR               11.98    7.28     6.23    5.04
JU                5.38    5.30     4.17    4.19
LU                5.59    5.47     5.26    5.27
NE                8.32    9.33    12.40   12.46
NW                6.68    6.46     6.10    6.06
OW                5.72    5.61     5.40    5.50
SG                7.08    7.04     6.81    6.93
SH                8.67    9.26     9.98   10.07
SO                8.90    9.65     9.74    9.65
SZ                6.04    5.79     5.55    5.53
TG                8.39    8.60     7.50    8.29
TI                7.95    8.25     8.47    8.77
UR                4.95    4.80     4.63    4.66
VD               11.72   11.36    11.64   11.84
VS                9.60    9.42     9.29    9.44
ZG                7.43    7.32     7.16    7.24
ZH                9.48    9.86    10.34   10.88




                                                        36
Table 2: Monthly premium differences by year


                Mean premium - minimum     Maximum - minimum premium
      Year    Swiss francs         Euros    Swiss francs        Euros
      1997          51.19         32.18          103.97         65.36
      1998          47.66         29.96           88.84         55.85
      1999          44.71         28.11           95.01         59.73
      2000          41.67         26.20           90.00         56.58
      2001          45.14         28.38           97.14         61.07
      2002          51.77         32.55          110.97         69.76
      2003          49.39         31.05          128.34         80.68
      2004          47.29         29.73          140.00         88.01




                                                                        37
Table 3: Descriptive statistics of the OFAS survey (2000)

                                                                            %
                                                                     (n=2152)
Age: [18,26]                                                             3.81
Age: [27,35]                                                            17.38
Age: [36,50]                                                            35.73
Age: [51,65]                                                            25.14
Age: >65                                                                17.94
Gender: male                                                            46.89
Education level: primary school                                         11.24
Education level: secondary school                                       52.05
Education level: apprenticeship                                         11.28
Education level: professionnal tertiary education                       14.10
Education level: university completed                                   11.28
Urban setting                                                           78.73
Very good subjective health status                                      35.59
Bad subjective health                                                   16.40
Has opted for a high deductible (either 1200 or 1500 Swiss francs)      14.64
Has a supplementary health insurance                                   71.98
Has a supplementary health insurance
(except for "division commune Suisse entière")                         62.96
Has subscribed to 2 or more health insurance contracts                 35.04
Has subscribed to 3 or more health insurance contracts                 12.04
Has basic and supplementary coverage
from 2 different providers                                              7.00
Has switched between 1996 and 2000                                      15.2
Intents to switch in the future                                          9.9
Lives in overwhelming choice (>55) areas in 2000                       38.06




                                                                                38
Table 4: Logit Switching Model Estimates (Switch = 1)
                                    Column 1    Column 2    Column 3   Column 4                  Column 5       Column 6    Column 7        Column 8       Column 9   Column 10            Column 11      Column 12
                                    Coef     z Coef      z Coef      z Coef      z               Coef     z     Coef      z Coef     z      Coef      z    Coef     z Coef      z          Coef      z    Coef       z
number of plans (choices)           -0.02 -4.4                                                                   -0.03 -4.5 -0.03 -3.9       -0.02 -4.4                                    -0.02 -4.8     -0.01   -3.8
number of plans > 55                           -0.43 -3.8
choice: [30 - 49]                                           0.11  2.1                                                                                       0.24    2.0     0.20     1.9
choice: [50 - 55]                                            ref  ref                                                                                        ref    ref      ref     ref
choice: [56 - 60]                                          -0.22 -1.2                                                                                      -0.12   -1.4    -0.60    -1.8
choice: [61 - 70]                                          -0.37 -2.2                                                                                      -0.51    2.2    -0.64    -2.8
number of large firms                                                   -0.01 -0.2
number of fringe firms                                                  -0.02 -4.3
inverse of herfindahl index                                                                      -0.07   -2.0
age [18-26]                          0.19     1.4    0.19    1.4    0.19    1.4    0.19 1.4       0.19    1.4    0.28    1.4  0.19 1.4       0.20    1.5    0.20    1.5     0.19     1.4    0.26    1.3    0.19    1.4
age [27-35]                          0.24     3.3    0.24    3.3    0.24    3.3    0.24 3.3       0.24    3.3    0.23    1.9  0.24 3.3       0.25    3.4    0.24    3.3     0.24     3.3    0.29    2.4    0.24    3.3
age [36-50]                           ref     ref     ref    ref     ref    ref     ref ref        ref    ref     ref    ref   ref   ref      ref    ref     ref    ref      ref     ref     ref    ref     ref    ref
age [51-64]                         -0.12    -1.5   -0.11   -1.5   -0.12   -1.5   -0.12 -1.5     -0.12   -1.5    0.03    0.2 -0.12 -1.5     -0.12   -1.5   -0.11   -1.5    -0.12    -1.5   -0.12   -1.5   -0.12   -1.5
age 65 +                            -0.30    -3.1   -0.31   -3.1   -0.31   -3.1   -0.30 -3.1     -0.30   -3.1   -0.26   -1.7 -0.30 -3.1     -0.29   -2.9   -0.31   -3.1    -0.31    -3.1   -0.25   -1.7   -0.29   -3.1
male                                <0.01     0.0   <0.01    0.0   <0.01    0.0   <0.01 0.01     <0.01    0.1    0.11    1.2 <0.01 <0.01    <0.01    0.0   <0.01    0.0     0.00     0.0    0.00    0.1   <0.01    0.0
completed university                -0.01    -0.2   -0.01   -0.2   -0.01   -0.1   -0.01 -0.2     -0.02   -0.2    0.09    0.6 -0.01 -0.1     -0.01   -0.1   -0.02   -0.2    -0.01    -0.1   -0.04   -0.4   -0.01   -0.2
urban                               -0.13    -1.9   -0.14   -1.9   -0.13   -1.9   -0.13 -1.9     -0.13   -1.8   -0.15   -1.3 -0.13 -1.9     -0.13   -1.8   -0.13   -1.9    -0.13    -1.9   -0.12   -1.8   -0.13   -1.9
poor health                         -0.08    -0.9   -0.08   -1.0   -0.08   -0.9   -0.08 -1.0     -0.08   -1.0   -0.03   -0.2 -0.08 -0.9     -0.08   -0.9   -0.08   -0.9    -0.08    -0.9   -0.06   -0.6   -0.08   -0.9
high deductible                      0.15     2.1    0.15    2.0    0.15    2.0    0.15 2.1       0.15    2.1    0.24    1.9  0.15 2.0       0.15    2.0    0.16    2.1     0.15     2.0    0.14    1.7    0.16    2.1
dp1                                  0.02     1.9    0.04    3.6    0.03    2.9    0.02 1.8       0.03    3.1    0.01    1.4  0.02 1.9       0.02    2.0    0.03    2.9     0.03     1.6    0.02    4.1    0.02    1.9
has supplementary insurance2         -0.09   -1.6 -0.09     -1.6 -0.09     -1.6   -0.09   -1.6   -0.09   -1.6                  -0.09 -1.6   -0.09   -1.6   -0.18   -1.4    -0.09    -1.6   -0.08   -1.4   -0.09   -1.6
Year 1997                              ref    ref   ref      ref   ref      ref     ref    ref     ref    ref     ref    ref     ref  ref     ref    ref     ref    ref      ref     ref     ref    ref     ref    ref
Year 1998                             0.08    1.0 0.10       1.4 0.09       1.2    0.09    1.1    0.08    1.1    0.21    1.7    0.10 1.5     0.07    1.0    0.09    1.2     0.08     1.1    0.10    1.5    0-09    1.2
Year 1999                            -0.36   -1.9 -0.16     -1.5 -0.35     -2.3   -0.35   -1.9   -0.22   -2.3   -0.32   -1.3   -0.04 -0.3   -0.36   -1.9   -0.35   -2.3    -0.38    -2.5   -0.09   -0.9   -0.21   -2.3
Year 2000                            -0.53   -2.4 -0.26     -2.0 -0.58     -2.8   -0.53   -2.4   -0.36   -3.2   -0.89   -2.5   -0.14 -1.1   -0.53   -2.4   -0.58   -2.8    -0.62    -2.9   -0.20   -1.7   -0.35   -3.3
household size                                                                                                                               0.03    0.8
supp * [30 - 49]                                                                                                                                            0.09   1.9
supp * [50 - 55]                                                                                                                                            0.05   1.3
supp * [56 - 60]                                                                                                                                            0.04   1.3
supp * [61 - 70]                                                                                                                                             ref   ref
dp * [30 - 49]                                                                                                                                                            <0.01     0.3
dp * [50 - 55]                                                                                                                                                                ref   ref
dp * [56 - 60]                                                                                                                                                              0.08    1.9
dp * [61 - 70]                                                                                                                                                              0.09    3.1
Number of new funds                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.01   -2.5
Constant                               -1.66 -5.0 -2.66 -11.1 -1.86        -4.5   -1.68 -4.5     -2.24 -4.8     -1.41 -2.3     -1.52 -5.5   -2.46 -5.9     -1.96   -4.7    -1.62    -3.1   -1.82   -3.2   -2.31   -5.2
canton dummies are included but are not reported in this table
1
  dp = the standard deviation in health plan premium within a canton
2
  except for "division commune suisse entière"

Column 1: the number of choice is represented by a continuous variable
Column 2: the number of choice is represented by one dummie variable ( > 55 plans)
Column 3: the number of choices is represented by dummies (Choice: [30 - 49],[50 - 55], [56 - 60], [61 - 70])
Column 4: distinguishes the number of big firms and fringe firms
Column 5: uses the inverse of the Herfindahl index
Column 6: is run on the subsample of those who have not subscribed to a supplementary health insurance contract
Column 7: Instrumenting the continuous number of fund variable by the population of the canton, the average income of the canton and the average premium
Column 8: the household size is incorporated as a covariate
Column 9 : interaction terms between the choice set and holding a supplementary contract
Column 10: interaction terms between the choice set and dp
Column 11 : Bivariate probit model (the second equation explains the probability of subscribing a supplementary insurance contract)
Column 12 : incorporates the number of new funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         39
Table 5: Logit Intent to Switch Estimates(Intent to Switch =1)
                                         1                 2                  3
Choice: [35 - 45]                    1,49     1,45     1,53       1,48    1,35     1,35
Choice: [46 - 50]                     ref      ref       ref       ref      ref     ref
Choice: [51 - 55]                   -0,30    -1,87    -0,31      -1,81   -0,23    -1,57
Choice: [56 - 60]                   -0,36    -2,11    -0,35      -2,11   -0,32    -1,96
Choice: [61 - 70]                   -0,23    -2,14    -0,23      -2,12   -0,22    -1,84
age 18-26                            0,75     2,43     0,96       3,02    0,77     2,49
age 27-35                            0,25     1,32     0,35       1,81    0,28     1,45
age 36-50                             ref      ref      ref        ref     ref      ref
age 50-65                           -0,45    -2,12    -0,29      -1,31   -0,46    -2,15
Age 65+                             -1,87    -4,27    -1,61      -3,60   -1,87    -4,28
male                                 0,23     1,48     0,26       1,65    0,24     1,55
completed university                 0,45     2,12     0,43       2,06    0,44     2,10
urban                                0,27     1,28     0,35       1,63    0,22     1,04
Subjective very good health         -0,24    -1,50    -0,26      -1,64   -0,24    -1,50
dp                                   0,02     2,22     0,03       2,12    0,02     2,32
Has a supplementary insurance       -0,09    -0,61    -0,09      -0,56   -0,09    -0,58
Duration in plan                    -0,02    -3,24    -0,02      -3,04   -0,02    -3,16
Household size                                         0,17       2,78
Number of new plans 1997 - 2000                                          -0,05    -1,60
constant                            -1,49    -3,49    -2,19      -4,37   -0,79    -1,29




                                                                                    40
Table 6: Distribution of health plan choices (over the 12 major companies in 2000)

                                     Survey 2000               CH 2000       p*
                             Old enrollees    New enrollees
                          (non switchers)        (switchers)
                                (n = 1743)         (n = 312)
helsana zürich                       18.93              3.85    15.55%   <0,001
css luzern                           15.03              9.29    14.99%
visana bern                           9.98              3.21     7.67%
konkordia luzern                      8.09              3.53     7.51%
swica winterthur                      7.17              3.85     6.52%
kpt bern                              4.76              4.81     5.33%
sanitas zürich                        4.76              7.69     5.29%
intras carouge                        3.96             13.14     4.20%
supra lausanne                         3.9              2.24     2.93%
wincare winterthur                    3.73              0.64     3.93%
Ökk-versicherungen                    3.04              4.49     1.75%
assura pully                          2.64              9.94     3.48%
Cum                                  85.99             66.68    79.14%
* non switchers vs switchers




                                                                                  41
Table 7: Distribution of health plan choices by age groups

                                          Survey 2000
                               Age <35                     Age > 35
                     Old enrollees New enrollees Old enrollees New enrollees
                         (n = 326)     (n = 113)    (n = 1417)      (n = 199)
helsana zürich               14.11          3.54         20.04           4.02
css luzern                    13.8          7.08         15.31          10.55
visana bern                   5.21          4.42         11.08           2.51
konkordia luzern               8.9          6.19           7.9           2.01
swica winterthur              8.28          5.31          6.92           3.02
kpt bern                      3.68          3.54          5.01           5.53
sanitas zürich                 9.2          9.73          3.74           6.53
intras carouge                3.99         12.39          3.95          13.57
supra lausanne                2.76          1.77          4.16           2.51
wincare winterthur            2.15          0.88          4.09            0.5
Ökk-versicherungen            3.37          1.77          2.96           6.03
assura pully                  3.99          6.19          2.33          12.06




                                                                                42
Table 8: Stated reasons for maintain the current insurer

Stated reasons for not switching                             %
Habit, tradition                                        13.45%
Personal knowledge of the fund manager/representative    0.44%
Remain because of previous use, for solidarity           0.40%
Proximity                                                0.22%
Comfort                                                 10.06%
It would be the same elsewhere                           3.79%
Average sickness fund                                    1.46%
Satisfied with current solution                         35.16%
Good performance                                        11.51%
Good ratio cost/benefits                                 8.82%
Good customer service                                    3.66%
Convenient premiums                                      2.87%
Slight increase in premiums                              1.41%
The current fund provides a different offer              0.31%
Cannot switch                                            1.76%
Cannot switch due to health problems                     1.28%
Other                                                    3.40%




                                                                 43
Table 9: Reasons for being insured at the current insurer



Reasons for being insured at the current Lamal Insurer        %
Parents have always been there                           29.04%
Relationships/ friends advice                            11.58%
Agent advice                                              5.31%
Convenient premium                                       16.84%
Employer advice                                          14.69%
Information obtained from the media                       1.24%
Other                                                    21.29%




                                                                  44
