                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INCOME MAXIMIZATION AND THE SELECTION AND SORTING OF INTERNATIONAL
                            MIGRANTS

                                          Jeffrey Grogger
                                         Gordon H. Hanson

                                        Working Paper 13821
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13821


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




We thank for comments Eli Berman, George Borjas, Gordon Dahl, Frederic Docquier, Larry Katz,
Hillel Rapoport, Dean Yang, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago, the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta, Harvard, LSE, Princeton, UCSD, UC Irvine, UC Berkeley, UCL, Yale, the University
of Virginia, the University of Colorado, the University of Lille, Bar Ilan University, the AEA meetings,
and the NBER Summer Institute. Any errors are ours alone. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jeffrey Grogger and Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Income Maximization and the Selection and Sorting of International Migrants
Jeffrey Grogger and Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 13821
February 2008, Revised October 2010
JEL No. F22,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

Two prominent features of international labor movements are that the more educated are more likely
to emigrate (positive selection) and more-educated migrants are more likely to settle in destination
countries with high rewards to skill (positive sorting). Using data on emigrant stocks by schooling
level and source country in OECD destinations, we find that a simple model of income maximization
can account for both phenomena. Results on selection show that migrants for a source-destination
pair are more educated relative to non-migrants the larger is the absolute skill-related difference in
earnings between the destination country and the source. Results on sorting indicate that the relative
stock of more-educated migrants in a destination is increasing in the absolute earnings difference between
high and low-skilled workers. We use our framework to compare alternative specifications of international
migration, estimate the magnitude of migration costs by source-destination pair, and assess the contribution
of wage differences to how migrants sort themselves across destination countries.


Jeffrey Grogger
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu

Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
                                                  1


1. Introduction

        International migration is a potentially important mechanism for global economic

integration. As of 2005, individuals residing outside their country of birth accounted for

3% of the world’s population. Most of those migrants left home bound for rich nations.

The UN estimates that in 2005, 40.9% of the global emigrant population resided in just

eight rich economies,1 with 20.2% living in the U.S. alone. In major destination

countries, the number of foreign born is rising, reaching 12.5% of the total population in

the U.S., 11.2% in Germany, 10.5% in France, and 8.2% in the U.K.

        One striking feature of international labor flows is that the more educated are

those most likely to move abroad. Using data from Docquier and Marfouk (2006) on

emigration by schooling group, Figure 1 plots the share of tertiary-educated emigrants

against the share of tertiary-educated non-emigrants by source country. Emigrants are

generally positively selected in terms of schooling; that is, that they are more educated

than their non-migrant counterparts. This observation has renewed interest in the impact

of brain drain on developing economies.2

        A second – and perhaps less appreciated – feature of international migration is the

sorting of emigrants across destinations. Countries with high rewards to skill attract a

disproportionate share of more-educated emigrants. Table 1, also based on data from

Docquier and Marfouk (2006), gives the share of international migrants residing in

OECD countries by major destination region. The U.S. and Canada, where skill-related

wage differences are relatively large, receives 51 percent of the OECD’s immigrants, but


1
  These countries are the US, Germany, France, Canada, the UK, Spain, Australia, and Italy. Freeman
(2006) notes that Russia and several Middle Eastern countries also receive large numbers of immigrants.
2
  Recent empirical work on brain drain includes Adams (2003), Beine, Docquier and Rapoport (2001, 2007,
2008), Docquier and Rapoport (2007), and Kapur and McHale (2005).
                                                  2

66 percent of its immigrants with tertiary schooling. Europe, where skill-related wage

differences are relatively small, receives 38 percent of the OECD’s immigrants, but only

24 percent of its tertiary-schooled immigrants. Europe’s failure to receive educated

migrants may explain its recent efforts to attract skilled foreigners.3

        In this paper, we develop and estimate a simple model of migration based on the

Roy (1951) income maximization framework. The Roy model, which is the foundation

for a large body of migration research (Borjas, 1999), implies that the selectivity of

migrants and their sorting across destinations should depend on cross-country differences

in the reward to skill. Our version of the model predicts that an increase in the reward to

skill in a destination should cause immigration from source countries to rise and the mix

of migrants to become more skilled.

        The model delivers estimating equations for the scale of migration, the selection

of migrants in terms of schooling, and the sorting of migrants across destinations by

schooling. While the three equations estimate a common coefficient on earnings, they

differ in terms of the data they require and the assumptions one must impose regarding

migration costs. The scale regression requires data on earnings by schooling level in the

source and destination and an assumption that the determinants of fixed migration costs

are observable. The selection regression differences out fixed migration costs. The

sorting regression does so as well, and also controls for source-specific determinants of

migration, including source-country earnings. We analyze newly available data from

Beine, Docquier and Rapoport (2007) on the stock of migrants by education level from

192 source countries residing in OECD destination countries as of 2000.


3
 See “Not the Ace in the Pack: Why Europe Loses in the Global Competition for Talent,” The Economist,
October 25, 2007.
                                                3

        To preview the findings, the data strongly support income maximization. In the

scale regression, migration is increasing in the level earnings difference between the

destination and the source, although the estimated effect of earnings appears to be

attenuated due to omitted fixed costs of migration. In the selection and sorting

regressions, which difference out fixed costs, the relative stock of more-educated

migrants is larger in destinations with greater skill-related earnings differences. We also

find post-tax earnings are a stronger correlate of migration than pre-tax earnings,

consistent with migrants weighing tax treatment. Further results address the role of

language, distance, migration policy, historical relationships, and lagged migration.

        One contribution of our paper is to address conflicting results on migrant

selectivity. In seminal work, Borjas (1987) develops a version of the Roy model which

predicts that migrants who move from a country with high returns to skill to a destination

with low returns to skill should be negatively selected. Although the Borjas (1987)

framework performs well in explaining migration from Puerto Rico to the U.S. (Ramos,

1992; Borjas, 2006), it does less well elsewhere. Migrants from Mexico to the U.S. are

drawn from the middle of the skill distribution, even though returns to skill are higher in

Mexico than the US. 4 Figure 1 shows that OECD-bound migrants are positively selected,

even though many are from countries where returns to skill exceed those in the OECD.

        Our results suggest that one explanation for positive selection is that migrants are

influenced by skill-related differences in wage levels, rather than relative returns to skill,

which is consistent with cross-country differences in labor productivity being a dominant

factor in why labor moves across borders. In a world where wage level differences


4
 See Chiquiar and Hanson (2005), Orrenius and Zavodny (2005), McKenzie and Rapoport (2006),
Ibararran and Lubotsky (2005), and Fernandez-Huertas (2006).
                                                    4

matter, high-skill workers from low-wage countries may have a strong incentive to

migrate, even if returns to skill are high in the source country. We also estimate an

alternative version of the income maximization model in which relative returns, rather

than wage level differences, influence migrant selectivity.5 The data reject this model.

        Our results on scale and selection are consistent with Rosenzweig (2007), who

examines legal migration to the U.S. and finds that source-country emigration rates are

decreasing in source-country labor productivity. This is comparable to our finding that

migration is increasing in the destination-source earnings difference by skill group.6

Relative to his work, we extend the analysis to multiple destinations, which enables us to

analyze sorting as well as scale and selectivity and to account for the relative contribution

of earnings and migration costs to international migration. We use our scale regression to

estimate the fixed costs of migration between 102 source countries and 15 destination

countries, finding that these costs are large, often an order of magnitude greater than

source-country earnings for low-skilled workers. We use our selection regression to

decompose emigrant selectivity into components attributable to wages differences and

components attributable to migration costs by source region and income level.

        A second contribution of the paper is to establish the independence of migrant

selection and migrant sorting. While the selectivity of migration by skill depends on the

reward to skill in the source country, among other factors, the sorting of migrants by skill

does not. Positive sorting is a general implication of income maximization. We provide

the first evidence on the sorting of international migrants across destinations; previous

5
  Other work on bilateral migration tends to use log per capita GDP to measure wages often with controls
for income inequality. See Volger and Rotte (2000), Pedersen, Pytlikova, and Smith (2004), Hatton and
Williamson (2005), Mayda (2005), and Clark, Hatton, and Williamson (2007).
6
  In related work, Rosenzweig (2006) finds that the number of students who come to the U.S. for higher
education and who then stay in the U.S. are decreasing in labor productivity in the source country.
                                                        5

studies of sorting focused on internal US migration (Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo 1992;

Dahl 2002). We use our sorting regression to decompose differences in immigrant skills

across destination countries into components due to wage differences, language, distance,

and other factors. Skill-related wage differences are the dominant factor in explaining

why the U.S. and Canada receive more skilled immigrants than other OECD destinations.

        In section 2, we present a simple model of international migration and derive the

estimating equations. In section 3, we describe our data. In section 4, we give the

estimation results. Section 5 offers concluding remarks.



2. Theory and Empirical Specification

A. A Model of Scale, Selection and Sorting in Migration

        Consider migration flows between many source countries and many destination

countries. To be consistent with our data, assume that workers fall into one of three skill

groups, corresponding to primary, secondary, or tertiary education. Let the wage for

worker i with skill level j from source country s in destination country h be7

           j
(1)      Wish = exp(μ h + δ 2h D is2 + δ 3h D 3is ) ,

where exp(μh) is the wage paid to workers with primary education, δ2h is the return to

secondary education, δ3h is the return to tertiary education, and Disj is a dummy variable

indicating whether individual i from source s has schooling level j.

              j
        Let C ish be the cost of migrating from s to h for worker i with skill level j, which

we assume to have two components: a fixed monetary cost common to all individuals

7
 In (1), we do not allow for unobserved components of skill that may affect wages, which are of central
concern in Borjas (1987, 1991). Since our data on migrant stocks are aggregated by skill group and source
country, it is not possible to address within group heterogeneity in skill.
                                                     6

                                                                         j
who move from s to h, fsh; and a component that varies by skill group, g sh (which may be

positive or negative), such that

           j
(2)      C ish = f sh + g1sh D1i + g sh
                                     2 2        3 3
                                        D i + g sh Di .

Migration costs are influenced by the linguistic and geographic distance between the

source and the destination and by destination-country immigration policies. The impacts

of these characteristics may depend on the migrant's skill due to time costs associated

with migration or skill-specific immigration policies in the destination.

        Our primary interest is in a linear utility model where the utility associated with

migrating from country s to country h is a linear function of the difference between

                                                                        j
wages and migration costs as well as an unobserved idiosyncratic term ε ish such that

           j
(3)      U ish = α( Wihj − C ish
                             j         j
                                 ) + ε ish ,

where α > 0. We think of (3) as a first-order approximation to some general utility

function, with the marginal utility of income given by α. One of the “destinations” is the

source country itself, for which migration costs are zero.

        Assuming that workers choose whether and where to emigrate so as to maximize

                                   j
their utility, and assuming that ε ish follows an i.i.d. extreme value distribution, we can

write the log odds of migrating to destination country h versus staying in the source

country s for members of skill group j as8


8
  The specification of the disturbance in equation (3) embodies the assumption that IIA applies among
destination countries. In the empirical analysis, the sample of destination countries is limited to OECD
members. To use (4) as a basis for estimation, we need only that IIA applies to the OECD countries in the
sample. The analysis is thus consistent with more complicated nesting structures, in which we examine
only the OECD branch of the decision tree (one such structure would be in which individuals first choose
to migrate or not migrate, migrants then choose either OECD or non-OECD sets of destination countries,
and sub-migrants then choose among destinations within these sets). Alternatively, one might imagine that
                                                        7

                j
              E sh
(4)      ln          = α( Whj − Wsj ) − αf sh − αg sh
                                                   j
              E sj

       j
where Esh is the population share of education group j in s that migrates to h, Esj is the

                                                                                          j
population share of education group j in s that remains in s, and Whj = eμh +δh (McFadden

1974). Equation (4) speaks to the scale of migration. It says that income maximization,

together with our assumptions about utility and the error terms, implies that the skill-

group-specific log odds of migrating to h from s should depend positively on the level

difference in skill-specific wages between h and s and negatively on migration costs.

        To analyze emigrant selection, take the difference of equation (4) between

tertiary- and primary-educated workers to yield:

           E3      E3
(5)      ln sh − ln s = α[( Wh3 − Ws3 − g sh
                                          3
                                             ) − ( Wh1 − Ws1 − g1sh )] .
            1       1
           E sh    Es

The first term on the left side of (5) is a measure of the skill distribution of emigrants

from source s to destination h, which we refer to as the log skill ratio. The numerator is

the share of tertiary-schooled workers in s who migrate to h, and the denominator is the

share of primary-schooled workers in s who migrate to h. The second term on the left of

(5) is the log skill ratio for non-migrants in s, meaning the full expression on the left of

(5) is the difference in skill distributions between emigrants (from s to destination h) and

non-migrants for source country s.

        If the left side of (5) is negative, emigrants are negatively selected; if it is positive,

they are positively selected. Since α > 0, equation (5) indicates that emigrants should be

positively selected if the wage difference between the source and destination countries,

there are multiple branches of the decision tree even among OECD destinations, such that IIA fails. In the
estimation, we test for this possibility, following the logic of Hausman and McFadden (1984).
                                                      8

net of skill-varying migration costs, is greater for high-skill workers. Emigrants should

be negatively selected if the net source-destination wage difference is greater for low-

skill workers. Note that fixed costs fsh do not appear in the selection equation (5).

Differencing between skill groups has eliminated them from the expression.

        To analyze the model’s implications for how emigrants should sort themselves

across destinations, collect those terms in (5) that vary only by source country to yield

             E 3sh
(6)     ln           = α( Wh3 − Wh1 ) − α(g 3sh − g1sh ) + τ s
             E1sh


where τ s = ln(E 3s / E1s ) − α( Ws3 − Ws1 ) . Fixed costs do not appear in the sorting equation

(6) because they are absent from the selection equation (5).

        Equation (6) expresses the key implication of utility maximization in the presence

of multiple destinations. Since α > 0, emigrants from a given source country should sort

themselves across destinations by skill according to the rewards to skill in different

destinations. If the (net) rewards to skill are higher in destination h than in destination k,

then destination h should receive a higher-skilled mix of emigrants from source country s

than should destination country k. Put differently, higher skill-related wage differences

should give destination countries an advantage in competing for skilled immigrants.



B. Relationship to Earlier Research

        The model summarized in (4), (5), and (6) highlights the role of fixed costs and

level wage differences in influencing the scale, selectivity, and sorting of migration

flows. In contrast, much of the literature focuses on relative returns to skill and assumes
                                                                9

migration costs are proportional to income (see Borjas, 1991 and 1999). It is useful to

compare these two models theoretically and empirically.

        To do so, consider a log utility model where wages and migration costs are as

before, but utility is given by

          j              j λ
(7)      Uish = (Wihj − Cish        j
                             ) exp(υish )

                 j
where λ > 0 and υish follows an i.i.d. extreme value distribution. The analogues to the

scale, selection and sorting equations in (4), (5), and (6) for this model are given by

               j
              Esh
(8)      ln             = λ(ln Whj − ln Wsj ) − λmsh
                                                  j
              Esj

              E3sh             E3s
(9)      ln             − ln         = λ (δ3h − δ3s ) − λ (m3sh − m1sh )
              E1sh             E1s

              E 3sh
(10)     ln             = λδ3h − λ (msh
                                     3
                                        − m1sh ) + ρs
              E1sh

       j
where msh          j
                    (
          = fsh − gsh                )
                      / Whj and ρs = ln(Es3 / E1s ) − λδs3 .9 In the log utility model, the

scale of migration is influenced by the relative wage difference between the source and

destination countries (see (8)), and selectivity and sorting are functions of returns to skill,

as given by the δ terms, rather than skill-related level wage differences (see (9) and (10)).

        In the log utility model, differencing between skill groups does not in general

eliminate either fixed or skill-varying migration costs from the selection or sorting

equations in (9) and (10). In the special case where skill-varying costs are proportional to

                   j
wages, such that g sh = πsh Whj , differencing between skill groups eliminates skill-varying


9
 In deriving (8), we use the approximation that ln(W-C) ≈ lnW – C/W for sufficiently small C/W.
Equation (9) follows from the fact that lnW3h - lnW1h = δ3h.
                                                 10

costs, but not fixed costs. Since much of the literature has focused on models where

skill-varying costs are assumed to be proportional to wages and fixed costs are assumed

to be zero, it represents a case of special interest.

        Examining conditions for migrant selectivity provides a useful way of comparing

our linear utility model with fixed migration costs to the more standard log utility model

with proportional migration costs. To analyze our linear utility model, substitute the

definition of Whj into the right side of (5), rearrange terms, and make use of the fact that

e δ − 1 ≈ δ . Our linear utility model then predicts that emigrants should be negatively

selected in terms of skill if

              ⎡ 1⎛                    −1
         δs3    Wh ⎜          3
                            g sh    ⎞ ⎤
(11)        > ⎢      1+             ⎟ ⎥.
          3   ⎢  1⎜        3     1 ⎟ ⎥
         δh     W       ( Ws − Ws ) ⎠
              ⎣⎢ s ⎝                     ⎦⎥

                            3
In the special case where g sh = 0 , as would occur if fixed migration costs were

independent of skill, the condition for negative selection reduces to δs3 δ 3h > Wh1 Ws1 .

Now consider the log utility model where fixed costs are zero and skill-varying costs are

proportional to wages. Under these conditions, equation (9) shows that negative selection

will obtain if δs3 / δ3h > 1 , as in Borjas (1987).

        The two models make similar predictions about migrant selectivity in the context

of typical north-to-north migration, where similar productivity levels between the source

and the destination imply that low-skill wages are also similar, such that Wh1 ≈ Ws1 . In

that case, both models predict that emigrants who move from a source with high returns

to skill to a destination with low returns should be negatively selected. However, the

models make different predictions in the context of much south-to-north migration, where
                                                      11


differences in productivity imply that Wh1 >> Ws1 . Here, our linear utility model predicts

negative selection only when the relative return to skill in the source country ( δs3 / δ 3h )

exceeds the relative productivity advantage of the destination country ( Wh1 / Ws1 ).10

         The evidence suggests that returns to schooling tend to be higher in developing

countries than in the U.S. or Europe (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2004; Hanushek and

Zhang, 2006), so the log utility/proportional cost model implies that emigrants from

developing countries should tend to be negatively selected. This prediction is clearly at

odds with Figure 1. However, the linear utility model could be consistent with Figure 1,

so along as productivity differences across countries dominate differences in the returns

to schooling (or skill-specific migration costs are higher for low-skill workers).

         While many studies have tested for the selectivity of migrants, fewer analysts

have examined migrant sorting across multiple destinations. Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo

(1992) develop a theoretical model that predicts sorting on the basis of destination returns

to skill. They and Dahl (2002) estimate empirical models of sorting using data on

internal migration in the U.S. There have been no studies of migrant sorting in the

context of international labor flows.

         One point that seems to have escaped the theoretical literature is that selection and

sorting are logically independent. In terms of our model, sorting between destinations h

and k depends on the sign of

Δ hk = [Wh3 − Wh1 − (g3sh − g1sh )] − [Wk3 − Wk1 − (g3sk − g1sk )] ,


10
   Factoring in skill-specific migration costs makes predictions about selection even more ambiguous in the
linear utility/fixed cost model. Recall that skill specific costs in (11), g3sh, may be positive or negative. If
more skilled workers tend to have higher (lower) costs, the likelihood of negative selection would be higher
(lower) than the base case of no skill-specific costs.
                                                       12

whereas from (5), selection to destination h depends on the sign of

Δ h = (Wh3 − Ws3 − gsh
                    3
                       ) − (Wh1 − Ws1 − g1sh ) .

Since selection depends on source-country wages, whereas sorting does not, sorting is

independent of selection. If Δhk > 0 , then destination h should receive more highly

skilled migrants than destination k. This should hold whether emigrants from s to both h

and k are positively selected ( Δh > 0, Δk > 0 ), negatively selected ( Δh < 0, Δk < 0 ), or

even bimodally selected ( Δh < 0 and Δk > 0 or vice-versa).



C. Estimation

         Although the discussion until now has been cast in terms of population

magnitudes, it is straightforward to derive an estimating equation which can be used to

test for income maximization. Let xsh be a vector of characteristics of the source-

destination pair, such as geographic and linguistic distance, and let skill-varying costs be

           j
given by g sh = x sh θ j .11 The empirical version of the scale equation is

                 j
              Ê sh
(12)     ln           = α( Whj − Wsj ) + x shβ + I( j = 3) ⋅ x shβ 3 + ηsh
                                                                        j
              Ê sj

where β 3 = −αθ3 ; I(A) is the indicator function such that I(A)=1 if A is true and I(A)=0

                                                       j           j                    j
otherwise; hat notation denotes statistical averages; ηsh = ln( Ê sh / Ê sj ) − ln( E sh / E sj ) is

an error term reflecting sampling error; and we have assumed that − αf sh = x shβ . The

empirical selection and sorting equations are given by



11
   The analysis is partial equilibrium in nature and cannot be used to examine how bilateral migration
flows affect the wage structure in destination countries.
                                                       13


            Ê 3    Ê 3
(13)      ln sh − ln s = α[( Wh3 − Wh1 ) − ( Ws3 − Ws1 )] + x sh γ + η′sh ,
            Ê1sh   Ê1s

              Ê3sh
(14)     ln           = α(Wh3 − Wh1 ) + x sh γ + τs + ηsh ,
              Ê1sh

where γ = − α( θ3 − θ1 ) , η′sh = ηsh
                                   3                            3
                                      − η1sh , and ηsh = ln( Ê sh / Ê1sh ) − ln( E sh
                                                                                     3
                                                                                        / E1sh ) .

        The key hypothesis to be tested in each regression is that α > 0, as utility

maximization requires. Indeed, if the models are properly specified, all three equations

should yield similar estimates of α. However, an important difference among these

specifications is the treatment of fixed costs. To estimate the scale equation (12) we must

assume fixed costs are a function of observable characteristics. If that assumption fails,

the scale equation may be misspecified. In contrast, fixed costs are differenced out of the

selection and scale equations, so they should provide a more robust basis for inference.

        The scale and selection equations require data on both source and destination

wages. This limits the sample, since reliable wage data are not available for all potential

source countries. The sorting equation requires only destination-country wage data,

increasing the number of source countries that can be used to estimate the model.

Additionally, measurement error may be lower in the destination countries, comprised of

OECD members, than in source countries, which include the developing world.

        Finally, we estimate the log-utility model so as to provide a direct comparison

with the linear-utility model. In the important special case where fixed costs are zero and

                                                           j       j
skill-varying costs are proportional to wages, such that λmsh = −λgsh / Whj = −λπsh , the

empirical counterparts of (8), (9), and (10) are
                                                           14

               j
             Êsh
(15)    ln            = λ(ln Whj − ln Wsj ) + x sh θ + ηsh
                                                        j
                                                           ,
             Êsj

             Eˆ 3sh      Eˆ s3
(16)    ln          − ln       = λ (δ3h − δ3s ) + η′sh ,
             ˆE1         ˆE1
               sh           s


             Ê 3sh
(17)    ln            = λδ3h + ρs + ηsh ,
             Ê1sh

where we have assumed that −λπsh = x sh θ . As above, a test for income maximization

amounts to a test for λ > 0, and if the models are properly specified, all three equations

should yield similar estimates of λ.


3. Data and Empirical Setting

       In the introduction we presented data on skill-specific migration rates which

showed evidence of positive selection. They also showed evidence of sorting across

multiple destinations of the type predicted by income maximization. Those data are from

Docquier and Marfouk (2006). We base our regression analysis on an updated version of

these data from Beine, Docquier, and Rapoport (2007; hereafter, BDR).

       BDR tabulate data on stocks of emigrants by source and destination country. In

collaboration with the national statistical offices of 20 OECD countries, they estimate the

population in each OECD country of immigrants 25 years and older by source country

and education level. In some of the OECD destinations, these counts are based on census

data, whereas in others they are based on register data. BDR classify schooling levels

into three categories: primary (0-8 years), secondary (9-12 years), and tertiary (13 plus

years). Because education systems differ so much among countries, it is nearly

impossible to categorize schooling in a comparable manner at a finer level of detail.
                                             15



A. Measurement of Emigrant Stocks

       Aggregating data from multiple destination countries raises several comparability

issues. The first involves the definition of immigrants. Some countries, such as

Germany, define immigrants on the basis of country of citizenship rather than country of

birth. This causes some of the foreign born to be excluded from BDR’s immigrant counts

in these countries. We check the robustness of our regression results by dropping such

countries from some of the specifications.

       Measuring education levels poses several problems. In Belgium and Italy, the

statistical office reports aggregate immigrant counts but does not disaggregate by

education level. BDR impute the skill distribution of immigrants in such cases using data

from household labor-force surveys, but in light of the role that education plays in our

analysis, we drop Belgium and Italy from the sample of destinations.

       National statistical offices differ in how they classify educational attainment.

Some countries' classification systems have no attainment category that distinguishes

whether a person who lacks a secondary-school qualification (such as a high school

diploma) acquired any secondary education, or whether their schooling stopped at the

primary level (grade 8 or below). This could result in inconsistencies in the share of

primary-educated immigrants across destination countries. In our regressions we control

for whether the destination country explicitly codes primary education.

       Some immigrants may have acquired their tertiary schooling in the destination

country. By implication, they might have obtained less schooling had they not migrated.

BDR provide some evidence on this point in the form of immigrant counts (for those with

tertiary education) that vary by the age at which migrants arrived in the destination
                                             16

country (any age, 12 years or older, 18 years or older, 22 years or older). They find that

68% of tertiary migrants arrive in the destination country at age 22 or older, and 10%

arrive between ages 18 and 21, suggesting the large majority of tertiary emigrants depart

sending countries at an age at which they would typically have acquired at least some

post-secondary education. Reassuringly, the correlations in emigration rates by age at

migration range from 0.97 to 0.99. In section 4.2 we provide additional checks on the

importance of tertiary schooling acquired in the destination country.

       Finally, although our theoretical framework treats migration as a permanent

decision, many migrants do not remain abroad forever. There is considerable back-and-

forth migration between neighboring countries (Durand, Massey, and Zenteno, 2001),

which we address by controlling for source-destination proximity. Furthermore, some

migrants are students who will return to their home countries after completing their

education. These migrants may have been motivated by educational opportunities in

destination countries, as well as wage differences (Rosenzweig, 2006). BDR partially

address this issue by restricting the foreign born to be 25 years and older, a population

that should have largely completed its schooling. In 2000 in the United States, the share

of foreign-born individuals 25-64 years old with tertiary education who stated they were

not in school was 86.4%. In section 4.2 we attempt to control for differences in

educational opportunities between source and destination countries.

       Tables 1 and 2 describe broad patterns of migration into OECD countries. As

noted in section 1, Table 1 shows that North America receives disproportionately high-

skilled migrants, whereas Europe's' immigrants are disproportionately low-skilled. Table

2 shows the share of OECD immigrants by country of origin for the 15 largest source
                                                   17

countries. Source countries tend to send emigrants to nearby destinations, as is evident in

Turkish migration to Europe, Korean migration to Australia and Oceania, and Mexican

and Cuban migration to the United States. Yet, most of the source countries in Table 2

send migrants to all three destination regions. Finally, Figure 2 plots the log odds of

emigration for the tertiary educated against the log odds of emigration for the primary

educated. Nearly all points lie above the 45-degree line, indicating that the log odds of

emigration is higher for the more educated, as is consistent with emigrants being

positively selected in terms of schooling.



B. Wage Measures

        The key explanatory variables in our regression models are functions of skill-

group-specific wages in the source and destination countries. Ideally, we would estimate

wages by broad education category from the same sources used by DM. Since such data

are not available to us, we turn to different sources.

        Our first source is the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS, various years), which

collects microdata from the household surveys of 30 primarily developed countries

worldwide. This includes most of the destination countries in the BDR data, with the

exceptions of Finland, Greece, New Zealand, and Portugal. The intersection of the 13

countries for which BDR and LIS provide useful data (Australia, Austria, Canada,

Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, the UK,

the US) were host to 91 percent of immigrants in the OECD in 2000.12 We use data from

waves 4 and 5 of the LIS, which span the years 1994-2000.


12
  We exclude Switzerland from the destinations because the LIS provides no data on the country after
1992. In 2000, Switzerland had 2.5 percent of the foreign-born population residing in OECD countries.
                                                      18

         Although the LIS attempts to “harmonize” the data from different countries, a

number of comparability issues arise. One limitation is that the LIS’s constituent

household surveys sometimes classify educational attainment differently than the national

statistical office of the corresponding country. This adds the problem of within-country

comparability to the already difficult problem of between-country comparability.

Ultimately, it proved impossible for us to map education categories between the BDR and

the LIS data in a manner in which we had full confidence.

         Therefore, instead of using education-specific earnings to measure skill-related

wages, we use quantiles of each country’s earnings distribution. We use the 20th

percentile as our measure of low-skill wages and the 80th percentile as our measure of

high-skill wages.13 We average across 1994 to 2000 for each country in the LIS.14,

         Although the cross-country comparability of the LIS is a desirable feature, we can

only use the LIS to estimate our sorting regressions. The reason is that it provides wage

data only for our destination countries, whereas the scale and sorting regressions require

comparable wage data for the source countries as well. To the best of our knowledge,

there is no study that provides micro-level data for a large sample of source countries.15

We rely on two sources of aggregate data to construct the source-destination wage

difference measures needed to estimate the scale and sorting regressions.



13
   In a previous version of this paper (Grogger and Hanson, 2007), we experimented with alternative
measures of wage differences based on various measures of low-skill wages and different measures of the
return to skill (the standard deviation of income, the ratio of income in the 80th to 20th percentiles, and the
Gini coefficient). All alternatives we considered generated results similar to those we report in this paper.
14
   The years corresponding to each country are as follows: Australia (1995, 2001), Austria (1994, 1995,
1997, 2000), Canada (1994, 1997, 1998, 2000), Denmark (1995, 2000), France (1994, 2000), Germany
(1004, 2000), the Netherlands (1994, 1999), Norway (1995, 2000), Spain (1995, 2000), Sweden (1995,
2000), the UK (1994, 1995, 2000), and the US (1994, 1997, 2000).
15
   The IPUMS-International study provides samples of Census data for 26 countries, but many important
sources and destinations for migrants are not included.
                                                      19

         One source combines Gini coefficients from the WIDER World Income

Inequality Database with per capita GDP from the World Development Indicators

(hereafter, WDI). Under the assumption that income has a log normal distribution, Gini

coefficients can be used to estimate the variance of log income.16 Using per capita GDP

to measure mean wages, we can then construct estimates of the 20th and 80th percentiles

of wages (see note 17), which we are able to do for 102 source countries and 15

destination countries.17

         A second source uses data from Freeman and Oostendorp (2000; hereafter FO),

who have collected information on earnings by occupation and industry from the

International Labor Organization’s October Inquiry Survey. FO standardize the ILO data

to correct for differences in how countries report earnings. The resulting data contain

observations on earnings in up to 163 occupation-industries per country in each year,

from which FO construct deciles for earnings by country and year. For each country, we

take as low-skill wages earnings corresponding to the 10th percentile and as high-skill

wages earnings corresponding to the 80th percentile. We choose these deciles because

they give the highest correlations with 80th and 20th percentile wages in the LIS. Since

not all countries report data in all years, for each country we take the mean across the

period 1988 to 1997, creating a sample with 101 source countries and 12 destinations.




16
  Suppose log income is normally distributed with mean μ and variance σ. Given an estimate of the Gini
                                                                           ⎛ G +1 ⎞
coefficient, G, the standard deviation of log income is given by σ = 2Φ −1 ⎜      ⎟ . Note further that the
                                                                           ⎝ 2 ⎠
value of log income at the α quantile is given by μ exp(σz α − σ2 / 2) , where z α is the α quantile of N(0,1).
17
   We restricted attention to Gini coefficients computed from income data over the period 1990-2000,
where the underlying sample was drawn from the country’s full population. For each country, we averaged
over all Gini coefficients that satisfied those criteria. GDP per capita is averaged over the period 1990 to
2000 and expressed in constant 2000 dollars.
                                                     20

         Table 3 presents summary statistics of these wage measures. The top two panels

provide data for the destination countries. The top panel shows that the LIS produces

higher wages and larger skill-related wage differences than the other sources. Despite the

differences in scale, the correlation between skill-related wage differences in the LIS and

the WDI data is 0.86; between the LIS and the FO data it is 0.78.

         The second panel reports summary statistics for after-tax measures of destination-

country wages. We consider such measures since pre-tax wage differences overstate the

return to skill enjoyed by workers and since tax policy varies within the OECD (Alesina

and Angeletos 2002). To construct post-tax wage differences we employ average tax

rates by income level published by the OECD since 1996 (OECD, various years). To

20th percentile earnings we apply the tax rate applicable to single workers with no

dependents whose earnings equal 67 percent of the average production worker’s earnings.

To 80th percentile earnings we apply the tax rate applicable to a comparable worker with

earnings equal to 167 percent of the average production worker’s earnings.18 In both

cases, the tax rate includes income taxes net of benefits plus both sides of the payroll tax.

After-tax wage differences are only about half as large as pre-tax differences.

         The third panel provides data for the source countries. Only WDI and FO data are

shown, since the LIS provides no source-country data. Source country wages vary less

than destination-country wages between the two sources; the correlation between skill-

related wage differences is 0.91. Unfortunately, we have no tax data for most of our

source countries. Thus the scale and selection regressions below are estimated only from

pre-tax wage data, whereas we report sorting regressions for pre- and post-tax wages.

18
   Prior to averaging income across years, we match to each year and income group that year’s
corresponding tax rate. Since the tax data only go back to 1996, we use tax rates for that year to calculate
post-tax income values in 1994 and 1995.
                                                   21



D. Other Variables in the Regression Model

        Differences in language between source and destination countries may be

relatively more important for more-educated workers, since communication and

information processing are likely to be salient aspects of their occupations. We control

for whether the source and destination country share a common official language based

on data from CEPII (http://www.cepii.fr/). Similarly, English-speaking countries may

attract skilled emigrants because English is widely taught in school as a second

language.19 To avoid confounding destination-country skilled-unskilled wage differences

with the attraction of being in an English-speaking country, we control for whether a

destination country has English as its primary language.

        Migration costs are likely to be increasing in distance between a source and

destination country. Relatedly, proximity may make illegal immigration less costly,

thereby increasing the relative migration of less-educated individuals. We include as

regressors great circle distance, the absolute difference in longitude, and an indicator for

source-destination contiguity. Migration networks may lower migration costs (Munshi,

2003), benefiting lower-income individuals disproportionately (Orrenius and Zavodny,

2005; McKenzie and Rapoport, 2006). Networks may be stronger between countries that

share a common colonial heritage, for which we control using CEPII’s indicators of

whether a pair of countries have short or long colonial histories. We also control for




19
   English-speaking countries may also attract the more skilled because they have common-law traditions
that provide relatively strong protection of property rights (Glaeser and Schleifer, 2002).
                                                     22

migrant networks using lagged migration, measured as the total stock of emigrants from a

source country in a destination as of 1990.20

         Destination countries impose a variety of conditions in deciding which

immigrants to admit, many of which involve the education level of immigrants. One

indicator of the skill bias in a country’s admission policies is the fraction of visas it

reserves for refugees and asylees. Less-educated individuals may be more likely to end

up as refugees, making countries that favor refugees in their admissions likely to receive

more less-educated immigrants. We control for the share of immigrant inflows

composed of refugees and asylees averaged over the 1992-1999 period (OECD, 2005).21

The European signatories of the Schengen Agreement have committed to abolish all

border barriers, including temporary migration restrictions, on participating countries.

We control for whether a source-destination pair were both signatories of Schengen as of

1999. Similarly, some countries do not require visas for visitors from particular countries

of origin, with the set of visa-waiver countries varying across destination countries.

While visa waivers strictly affect only tourist and business travelers, they may indicate a

source-country bias that also applies to other immigrant admissions. We control for

whether a destination country grants a visa waiver to individuals from a source country as

of 1999. Clearly, other aspects of policy may influence migration as well.

Unfortunately, the existing data do not permit one to characterize immigration policy

very thoroughly in a manner that is comparable across destinations. As important as



20
   Because we are missing lagged migration for many observations in the sample, we add the variable only
in later specifications. All results are robust to its inclusion.
21
   Countries also differ in the share of visas that they reserve for skilled labor. Unfortunately, we could
only obtain this measure for a subset of destination countries. Over time, the share of visas awarded to
asylees/refugees and the share awarded to skill workers are strongly negative correlated (OECD, 2005),
suggesting policies on asylees/refugees may be a sufficient statistic for a country’s immigration priorities.
                                                    23

immigration policy may be, existing data simply do not permit a more detailed

characterization of the policy environment.

         Finally, note that the regressors used in the analysis vary either by destination or

source-destination pair. One might imagine that source-country-specific characteristics

could also affect international migration. Some, such as the state of the credit market or

the poverty rate, are observable and could be controlled for explicitly. Others, however,

are unobservable. Rather than controlling for a limited set of observable source-country

characteristics explicitly, we provide implicit controls for both observable and

unobservable source-country characteristics via the source-country fixed effects in the

sorting regression.22



4. Regression Analysis

A. Main results

         Our main regression analyses are based on the scale, selection, and sorting

regressions derived from the linear-utility model, equations (12), (13), and (14),

respectively. Our main results are based on wage measures constructed from the WDI

and LIS data. Estimates are reported in Table 4.

         In the scale equation reported in column (1), the unit of observation is the source-

destination-skill group cell, with one observation for the primary educated (j=1) and one

observation for the tertiary educated (j=3) for each source-destination pair. The


22
   In unreported results, we experimented with two source-specific variables. Private credit to the private
sector as a share of GDP is a measure of the financial development of the source country (Aghion et al.
2006), which may affect constraints on financing migration. The variable was statistically insignificant in
all specifications and its inclusion did not affect other results. The incidence of poverty in the source
country may also affect credit constraints. While data on poverty headcounts are not available for all the
countries in our sample, the share of agriculture in GDP tends to be highly correlated with poverty
measures. The inclusion of the agriculture share of GDP also leaves our core results unchanged.
                                                     24

dependent variable is the log odds of emigrating from source s to destination h for

members of skill group j, and the wage measure is the skill-specific difference in pre-tax

wages between the destination and source countries, Whj − Wsj . In the selection equation

reported in column (2), the unit of observation is the source-destination pair.23 The

dependent variable is the difference between the log skill ratio of emigrants from s to h

and the log skill ratio of non-migrants in source s.24 The wage measure is the difference

between the destination and the source in skill-related pre-tax wage differences,

( Wh3 − Wh1 ) − ( Ws3 − Ws1 ) . In the sorting equations reported in columns (3) through (6),

the unit of observation is again the source-destination pair, but the dependent variable is

the log skill ratio of emigrants from s to h. The key independent variable is the skill-

related wage difference of the destination country, ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) . Like the scale and

selection regressions, the sorting regressions in columns (3) and (4) are based on the WDI

data; column (3) is based on pre-tax data, whereas column (4) is based on post-tax data.

Columns (5) and (6) are based on pre- and post-tax data from the LIS.

         Because the dependent variables have a log-odds metric, the magnitude of the

regression coefficients does not have a particularly useful interpretation.25 As a result,

we focus in this section on the signs and significance levels of the coefficients. We

discuss applications below that provide information about the quantitative effects of key

variables on migration scale, selectivity, and sorting.


23
   In the WDI data, there are 15 destinations and 102 source countries. Since source countries do not send
emigrants to every destination country, the number of observations is less than 15 x 102 = 1530.
24
   Equivalently, the dependent variable can be seen as the difference in the log odds of migrating from
source s to destination h between the tertiary educated and the primary educated.
25
   Based on equation (4), one might think that the coefficient on the earnings difference would identify the
marginal utility of income. However, this would only be true if the variance on the idiosyncratic
component of utility in (3) is unity.
                                             25

       In addition to the variables shown, all of the regressions include a dummy

variable equal to one if the destination-country statistical office explicitly codes a primary

education category. This controls for systematic differences in our dependent variable

that arise from different coding schemes, as discussed in section 3. The scale regression

includes a dummy variable equal to one for observations corresponding to the tertiary-

educated skill group, denoted I(j=3), and interactions between that dummy and all other

regressors (these coefficients are not shown in order to save space). The sorting

regressions include a full set of source-country dummies. Standard errors, reported in

parentheses, are clustered by destination country.

       The wage coefficients in columns (1) through (3) are directly comparable because

they are all based on pre-tax data from WDI. In the context of our model, they each

provide estimates of the same parameter α, where income maximization implies α > 0.

Furthermore, if the regression models are properly specified, the coefficients from scale,

selection, and sorting regressions should be similar.

       In Table 4, all three wage coefficients are positive, as predicted by the theory.

Furthermore, the coefficients from the selection and sorting regressions are quite similar

and are both statistically significant. However, the coefficient in the scale equation is

smaller and insignificant. This may indicate that omitted fixed costs result in a

misspecified scale equation. In the scale equation, we assume that fixed costs are a

function of observable characteristics of the source-destination pair. In the selection and

sorting regressions, in contrast, fixed costs are differenced out. The difference in the

wage coefficients between the scale and selection regressions suggests that the scale
                                                     26

equation omits fixed costs that are negatively correlated with the difference in skill-

specific wage differences between destination and source countries.

         The wage coefficient in column (4) suggests that migrants sort more strongly on

post-tax wages than pre-tax wages, as one might expect. The estimates in columns (5)

and (6), based on wage data from the LIS, show a similar pattern. Both coefficients are

positive and significant, and the coefficient on post-tax wages in column (6) is larger than

the coefficient on pre-tax wages in column (5). Among the destination countries in the

sample, the U.S and Canada have relatively large pre-tax skill-related wage differences.

Since these countries also have less progressive tax systems, their relative attractiveness

to skilled migrants is enhanced by accounting for taxes.26

         The regressions also include variables reflecting geographic, linguistic, social, and

political relationships between source and destination countries. They show that

language plays an important role in international migration. The positive coefficient on

the Anglophone-destination dummy in column (1) shows that English-speaking countries

receive more immigrants than other countries, all else equal. The coefficient in the

selection regression (column (2)) shows that emigrants bound for English-speaking

destinations are more highly educated in relation to their non-migrant countrymen than

emigrants bound elsewhere. Finally, the coefficients in the sorting regressions (columns

(3) through (6)) show that English-speaking destinations attract higher-skilled immigrants

than other destinations, on average.

         The next variable is also language-related, indicating whether the source and

destination countries have an official language in common. Its coefficients are positive


26
  In the LIS data, the U.S., the U.K, and Canada are first, fourth and fifth among destinations in terms of
pre-tax wage differences and first, second, and third in terms of post-tax wage differences.
                                              27

and significant, like the Anglophone-destination coefficients. Emigration is greater

toward destinations that share a language with the source, and such emigrants are more

skilled than either their non-migrant counterparts or emigrants from the same source

bound to other destinations. This suggests that migrants perceive higher rewards to skill

in destinations where they can speak a language they know.

       The next three variables capture differences in geography between the source and

destination countries. Contiguity raises the scale of migration. However, it reduces the

skills of emigrants, all else equal, in relation both to non-migrants (as seen in the

selection regression) and to migrants to non-contiguous destinations (as seen in the

sorting regression), perhaps reflecting the relative ease of illegal migration between

neighboring countries. In the scale equation, the longitude-difference coefficient is

insignificant, but the log-distance coefficient is negative and significant. One

interpretation is that migration is lower, the greater the distance between the source and

the destination, but controlling for distance, the need to cross an ocean (which follows

from long longitudinal distances) has no independent effect. The same two coefficients

have different signs in the selection and sorting regressions. Emigrants to more distant

destinations are more skilled than non-migrants, all else equal, but less skilled than

emigrants to other destinations. The opposite is true of transoceanic emigrants.

       History affects migration, too. Both short- and long-term colonial relationships

increase the scale of migration, all else equal. At the same time, emigrants to the former

colonial power are less skilled than non-migrants and less skilled than emigrants to other

destinations. Recent literature suggests that economic and social networks between

industrialized countries and their former colonies contribute to bilateral migration flows,
                                                     28

much in the way such networks also appear to contribute to bilateral trade (Pedersen,

Pytlikova, and Smith 2004, Mayda 2005). Our empirical results are consistent with

these linkages disproportionately affecting migration of the less-skilled.

           There is also an important role for our limited measures of immigration policy.

The effect of asylum policy on the scale of immigration is insignificant, but generous

asylum policies reduce immigrant skills with relation to both non-migrants and migrants

to other destinations. This finding suggests destinations that allocate a higher share of

visas to asylees and refugees may limit opportunities for more-skilled migrants to gain

entry, producing a less skilled migrant inflow.27 Visa waivers are associated with higher

migration rates, although the effect is marginally significant. Visa waivers significantly

reduce the skills of emigrants in relation to non-migrants, but increase skill in relation to

emigrants who move to a destination with which the source country has no visa waiver.

The Schengen accord has had little effect on the scale of migration among signatory

countries, but it is associated with positive selection and positive sorting of migrants.



B. Results for Log Utility Model

           Table 5 reports results based on the scale, selection, and sorting regressions

derived from the log-utility model in equations (15), (16), and (17). The layout of Table

5 is similar to Table 4. The dependent variables in Table 5 are the same as those in the

corresponding columns of Table 4 and the units of observation are the same as well.

           The wage measures differ between the linear and log-utility models. In the scale

equation of the log-utility model, reported in column (1), the wage measure is the skill-

specific difference in pre-tax log wages between the destination and source countries,

27
     On asylee and refugee policy in Europe, see Hatton and Williamson (2004).
                                               29


ln Whj − ln Wsj . In the selection equation reported in column (2), the measure is the

difference between the destination and the source in the return to skill, ( δ3h − δ1s ) , where

the return to skill in a country is the log ratio of high-skill to low-skill wages. In the

sorting equations reported in columns (3) through (6), the wage variable is the return to

skill in the destination country, δ 3h . As in Table 4, columns (1) through (4) are based on

the WDI data, whereas columns (5) and (6) are based on LIS data . Returns to skill are

based on pre-tax data in columns (1), (2), (3), and (5) and on post-tax data in columns (4)

and (6). To focus on a case of special importance in the literature, we impose the

assumptions that fixed migration costs are zero and skill-varying costs are proportionate

to wages. This implies that in the scale regression, the regressors control for proportional

migration costs (see equation (15) and the surrounding discussion). It also means that the

only regressor in the selection regression is ( δ3h − δ1s ) , since proportional costs are

differenced out. Likewise it implies that the only regressors in the sorting regressions are

δ 3h and the source-country dummies.

        As in the linear-utility model, utility maximization implies that all of the

coefficients on log wages and returns to skill should be positive. Furthermore, if the

model is properly specified, the coefficients in columns (1) through (3) should be similar.

In fact, the wage coefficients in the scale and selection regressions are negative and

significant, whereas the sorting coefficients are both positive and significant.
                                                      30

         The assumptions that fixed costs are zero and skill-varying costs are proportional

to wages result in rather sparsely parameterized regressions.28 When we relax these

restrictions by assuming both fixed and skill-varying costs to be functions of observed

country-pair characteristics, the wage coefficients in the scale and selection regressions

remain negative and significant and the wage coefficients in the sorting regressions

remain positive and significant.29 Thus, the sign pattern of the coefficients in Table 5

holds whether or not other regressors are included in the estimation.

         We see two potential explanations for the difference between the linear-utility and

log-utility regressions. One concerns omitted variable bias due to weak controls for fixed

costs. Differencing the scale equation between skill groups eliminates fixed costs from

the selection and sorting regressions in the case of linear utility, but not in the case of log

utility. Fixed costs that were strongly negatively correlated with source-destination

differences in log wages and returns to skill could explain the negative coefficients in the

scale and selection regressions in Table 5.

         Perhaps more important is the lack of negative selectivity in the data, as seen in

Figure 1. Log-utility maximization requires that λ be positive. It also requires that for

source-destination pairs where δ3h − δs3 < 0, migrants be negatively selected. In the data,

we observe numerous cases where δ3h − δs3 < 0, but no negative selection. Inspection of

28
   Belot and Hatton (2008) find that the correlation between skilled migration rates and the skill-specific
difference in log wages between source and destination countries is sensitive to whether controls for
poverty rates in the source are included in the estimation. In unreported results, we find that the negative
coefficient on the returns to skill we estimate in the log utility selection regression obtains whether or not
controls for poverty rates are included in the estimation (see note 22).
29
   In the log utility model, if we assume that fixed migration costs are a function of the same variables as in
Table 4, allowing for fixed costs means including these variables as regressors, divided by the destination
country wage, as shown in the derivations of equations (8)-(10). Alternatively, one might imagine
including these regressors uninteracted with the destination wage. Under either specification – including
the same regressors as in Table 4 either on their own or divided by the destination wage – the log wage
variable enters with a negative sign in the scale and selection regressions.
                                                   31


equation (9) shows that such negative correlation between δ3h − δs3 and

      3
ln( E sh / E1sh ) − ln( E s3 / E1s ) will tend to result in a negative estimate of λ, contrary to the

requirements of the theory. In other words, the lack of negative selection in the data is at

odds with the joint assumptions that migrants maximize the log utility of net wages and

that migration costs are proportional to wages.

        A remaining question is why the wage coefficients in the log-utility sorting

regressions are positive, like their counterparts in the linear-utility sorting regressions.

Put differently, why do the sorting regressions fail to distinguish between linear and log

utility, when the selection regressions draw the distinction so clearly? The reason is that

the wage measure only varies among the 15 destination countries, and among countries

with relatively similar levels of labor productivity, sorting on log differences in wages

(i.e., returns to skill) looks similar to sorting on level differences in wages. Indeed, the

rank correlation between the log wage difference and the level wage difference across

destination countries is 0.68. In order to distinguish between linear and log utility on the

basis of the sorting regressions, one would need a sample that included destinations with

widely differing levels of productivity.30



C. Robustness Checks

        Tables 6 through 8 report results from a number of specifications designed to

check the robustness of our results. We restrict attention to the linear utility model in

light of its superior performance relative to the log utility model. We further restrict

attention to the selection and sorting regressions, since they are more robust in the

30
   The similarity of productivity levels among U.S. states may explain why log-utility models have yielded
evidence in favor of sorting among U.S. domestic migrants (Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo 1994; Dahl 2002).
                                                    32

presence of fixed migration costs. For the sorting regressions, we focus on specifications

that include the post-tax wage differences. All of the estimates reported in these tables

are taken from regressions that include all the variables reported in our baseline

specifications, shown in columns (2), (4) and (6) of Table 4. Here we present only the

wage coefficients in order to conserve space.

        Table 6 presents estimates based on alternative wage measures. The top panel

reports results based on WDI wages in which source wages are adjusted by source-

country PPP and destination wages are adjusted by destination PPP, to account for

differences in the cost of living across countries. Adjusting for PPP makes the coefficient

in the selection regression slightly larger and the coefficient in the sorting regression

slightly smaller and insignificant. In the second panel, we see that adjusting for PPP

using LIS wages yields wage coefficients that are positive and significant, as in Table 4.31

        The bottom two panels of Table 6 present results based on the Freeman-

Oostendorp wage data described in Section 3. Without adjusting for PPP, the wage

coefficients in both the selection and sorting regressions are positive. The selection

coefficient is significant, whereas the sorting coefficient has a t-statistic of 1.6. Adjusting

the Freeman-Oostendorp wages for PPP reduces the selection coefficient and raises both

the sorting coefficient and its significance. We conclude that the key results from the

linear utility model are fairly robust to alternative wage measures.32




31
   The sample size is smaller here than for other LIS-based regressions because of missing PPP data for a
few source countries.
32
   It would seem natural to treat the FO data as an instrument for the WDI data to deal with measurement
error. To be a valid instrument, the measurement errors associated with the two different data sources
would have to be uncorrelated with each other and with the true wage measures. Preliminary analysis
showed that the covariance between the two measures exceeded the variance of the FO wage measure,
which implies that the measurement errors are correlated with each other, with true wages, or both.
                                                    33

        In Table 7 we return to our original unadjusted, WDI and LIS-based wage

measures and report results obtained from alternative specifications. Columns (1)

through (3) address the problem that some emigrants may have obtained their tertiary

education in the destination country rather than the source country. If the cost of

acquiring tertiary education across destination countries were negatively correlated with

destination-country wage differences, then the effect on immigrant skill that we attribute

to wage differences could instead be due to differences in educational costs. To deal with

this issue we redefine the numerator of the skill ratios in the dependent variables to be the

sum of tertiary- and secondary-educated immigrants. This addresses the problem if we

can assume all tertiary-educated immigrants would have obtained at least a secondary

education in their source country. The coefficients in columns (1) through (3), where the

dependent variables are based on this alternative definition of the log skill ratio, are all

positive and significant and differ little from estimates in our baseline specifications.

        Columns (4) through (9) report the results of adding to our baseline specifications

two variables designed to capture other potential costs or benefits of migration that vary

by skill. Columns (4)-(6) add a relative university quality measure based on the world-

wide ranking of universities by Shanghai Jiao Tong University (http://ed.sjtu.edu.cn). It

is equal to the average rank of universities within the destination country (among top 250

universities worldwide), interacted with a dummy variable equal to one if the source

country has no ranked universities.33 We intend this as a proxy for the education-related

benefit of migrating relative to remaining in the home country. Relative university

quality has no effect on emigrant selectivity, as seen in column (4). The coefficients in


33
   Observations in which Ireland is the destination are dropped from these regressions because Ireland has
no universities in the top 250.
                                              34

the sorting regressions (columns (5) and (6)) are negative, as one might expect (higher-

ranked institutions have ranks closer to one), and significant. Higher ranked universities

appear to act as a draw for higher-skilled immigrants from countries with low-quality

education systems, consistent with Rosenzweig (2006). The wage coefficients in all three

regressions are similar to those from our baseline specifications.

       Columns (7) through (9) add the log total stock of emigrants from the source in

the destination as of 1990. We are missing this variable for about 30% of our sample,

which causes the number of observations to drop considerably. Nevertheless, the wage

variables have similar magnitudes and patterns of significance as in Table 4. In the

selection regression, the lagged migrant stock enters with a negative sign and is precisely

estimated. Larger past bilateral migration is associated with less-educated current

migration, consistent with migrant networks lowering migration costs disproportionately

for less-skilled individuals. Orrenius and Zavodny (2005) and McKenzie and Rapoport

(2006) obtain similar findings for Mexican migration to the U.S. In the sorting

regressions, lagged migration also enters negatively, indicating that the pull of an existing

migrant stock in a destination is stronger for less-skilled migrants, but the coefficient is

precisely estimated only in one of the two regressions.

       In columns (10) and (11), we present sorting regressions based on data from all

the available source countries, irrespective of whether we have wage data for them. This

highlights the advantage of the sorting regression, for which only destination-country

wage data is necessary. Estimates based on the larger sample are similar to those from

the smaller sample that includes only source countries with available wage data.
                                                    35

         Table 8 addresses the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) assumption

implicit in the conditional logit framework. IIA arises from the assumption that the error

terms in equation (3) are i.i.d. across alternative destinations. IIA may be violated if two

or more of our destinations are perceived as close substitutes by potential migrants.

Hausman and McFadden (1984) note that if IIA is satisfied, then the estimated regression

coefficients should be stable across choice sets. In the context of our application, this

means that the regression coefficients should be similar when we drop destinations from

the sample. To check for violations of IIA, we re-estimated our models 15 times, each

time dropping one of the 15 destinations. The resulting coefficients on the key wage

variables are reported in Table 8. In general, they are quite similar across samples,

suggesting that the IIA property is not violated in our data.34



D. Fixed Costs, Emigrant Selectivity, and the Sorting of Migrants by Skill Level

         In this section we use the estimates from our regression analysis to shed light on

different dimensions of international migration. These analyses provide insights into the

scale, selectivity, and sorting of migrants. The first issue we address concerns fixed

costs, which according to theory should play a role in determining the scale of migration.

Despite the importance of fixed costs, there is little information on the magnitude of these

costs in the literature. Our framework allows us to estimate fixed migration costs that are

specific to each source-destination pair.

         The estimates stem from the scale equation (4). If we include a dummy variable

for each source-destination pair in our sample, assuming as before that skill-varying costs

34
   We attempted to compute asymptotic chi-square statistics along the lines of Hausman and McFadden
(1984) to test for stability across choice sets in all the regression coefficients. For the most part, the
asymptotic covariance matrices were singular, a finite-sample problem that often arises in Hausman tests.
                                             36

               j
are given by g sh = x sh θ j , we obtain numerically identical estimates to those obtained by

estimating the selection equation (13). However, as a by-product, we obtain estimates of

-αfsh from the coefficients on the source-destination dummy variables. To recover an

estimate of fixed costs fsh, we divide those coefficients by our estimate of -α, where α is

the coefficient on wages. This provides estimates of fixed migration costs relative to an

omitted source-destination base pair, in thousands of 2000 U.S. dollars per year (the units

in which wages are measured). We choose the Mexico-U.S. pair as the base since it

involves the largest migration flow. Of course, these estimates reflect not only direct

monetary costs, but also the monetary value of psychic costs and source-specific

immigration policies imposed by the destination countries.

       Estimates for each source-destination pair in our sample are shown in an online

appendix. Table 9 presents estimates for the subset of source and destination countries

that appear in the 25 source-destination pairs with the largest stocks of migrants. Within

each source-destination cell, the first entry is the estimated fixed migration cost. The

second entry is the number of emigrants from the source to the destination.

       Table 9 illustrates a number of points. The first is that fixed costs matter. The US

is the low-cost destination for all the Western Hemisphere source countries except

Jamaica, and it receives more emigrants from those countries than any other destination.

       At the same time, migration costs are only part of the story. For Chinese

emigrants, the cost of migrating to Canada and the US is about the same. Yet many more

go the US, presumably due to the higher wages there. The situation is similar for German

emigrants. Canada, France, and the UK are all lower-cost destinations than the US, yet

the US has more German immigrants than those three destinations combined.
                                                     37

         Finally, several entries highlight the role of history. Germany is by far the lowest-

cost destination for Turkish emigrants, despite Turkey’s similar proximity to the other

European countries. The U.S. is the low-cost destination for Vietnam, despite the

country’s proximity to Australia and colonial ties to France. Presumably, these estimates

reflect Germany’s labor-recruitment strategy from the 1960s, America’s post-war asylum

policy in the 1980s, and the immigrant networks that have developed in their wake.

         Moving from the scale of emigration to the selectivity of emigrants, Table 10

decomposes migrant selectivity from different source countries by region and income

level.35 The first column gives mean selectivity of emigrants by source-region, income-

level cell. Selectivity is the dependent variable in the selection regression, which is the

difference in the log skill ratio between emigrants and non-migrants. Emigrants are

positively selected on average from all source regions. Mean selectivity ranges from a

high of 3.92 in low-income African countries to a low of 0.25 in the U.S. and Canada. It

is generally lower in the high-income countries than in low-income countries.

         The next three columns use the regression results reported in column (2) of Table

4 to decompose mean selectivity into components attributable to source-destination

differences in skill-related wage differences, skill-varying migration costs, and a

residual.36 In Africa, migration costs account for about half of emigrant selectivity, with

wage differences and the residual accounting for about one-quarter each. Emigrants from

Africa appear to be much more positively selected than wage differences alone warrant.


35
   Low (high) income countries are those whose low-skill wage is below (above) the minimum value of
this variable for the 15 OECD countries in the regression sample.
36
   The contribution of wage differences to selection is the mean across source countries of the destination-
source difference in high and low-skill wages times the coefficient on wages in column (2) of Table 4; the
contribution of migration costs is the mean across source countries of the sum of the regressors in column
(2) of Table 4, each multiplied by its corresponding coefficient estimate; and the contribution of the
residual is the mean across source countries of the residual for the regression in column (2) of Table 4.
                                                   38

In the other low-income countries, wage differences play a larger role, accounting for

37% of positive selection in Latin America and the Caribbean, 48% in low-income Asia,

and 68% in Central and Eastern Europe. In high-income countries, migration costs

contribute strongly to positive selectivity. Wage differences by themselves would

actually contribute to negative selection in North America and high-income Asia and

only modest positive selection in Western Europe, Australia, and New Zealand. Taking

Tables 9 and 10 together, for most source countries, migration costs appear to play a

large role in both how many individuals emigrate and which types emigrate.

        We next ask how wage differences and skill-varying migration costs explain

differences in mean immigrant skills among the destination countries. The first column

of Table 11 presents our measure of immigrant skills, which is the mean log skill ratio

among immigrants in each destination country. Based on this measure, the US has the

most highly skilled immigrants on average, followed by Ireland and Canada.37 We seek

to explain the immigrant skill gap, defined as the difference between the mean log skill

ratio among immigrants in the U.S. and the mean log skill ratio among immigrants in

other destination countries. The immigrant skill gap is reported in column (2).

        We use the sorting regression reported in column (4) of Table 4 to carry out the

decomposition. The decomposition explains the immigrant skills gap as a linear

combination of the differences in mean values of the regressors, using the regression




37
   Other skill measures give somewhat different rankings. For example, Canada ranks first in the share of
immigrants with tertiary education. The reason for the difference is that the US has a lower share of
primary-educated immigrants than Canada. We focus on the log skill ratio because that is the skill measure
that follows from our model and the measure for which our regressions can provide a decomposition.
                                                     39

coefficients as weights. To aid interpretation, we report results in the form of the share of

the immigrant skill gap explained by each variable in the regression.38

           Results are reported in columns (3) through (14). Column (3) shows that on

average the wage difference explains 58 percent of the immigrant skill gap; in all

destination countries it explains at least 25 percent. In Ireland, which has a relatively

small immigrant skill gap, it explains over 100 percent.

           The next two columns show the importance of language. English explains at least

20 percent of the immigrant skill gap for each non-Anglophone destination country. The

role of common languages is smaller overall, but nevertheless important for some of

those destination countries whose languages are not widely spoken elsewhere.

           The next three columns quantify the importance of distance. Contiguity has little

effect. Longitudinal differences and distance have largely offsetting effects owing to the

differing signs of their coefficients in Table 4. Among the policy variables, visa waivers

and the Schengen treaty explain relatively little of the immigrant wage gap. Asylum

policy, in contrast, has important effects. In seven of the destination countries, asylum

policy explains at least 20 percent of the immigrant skill disadvantage. In Canada and

New Zealand, in contrast, the skills gap would be over 10 percent larger were it not for

their relatively restrictive admissions of asylum seekers.



5. Conclusions

           Two dominant features of international labor movements are positive selection of

individuals into migration and positive sorting of migrants across destinations. We show

that a simple model of income maximization can account for both phenomena.

38
     Nothing constrains the share explained by any subset of components to be less than one.
                                              40

       In our selection regression, we find that migrants for a source-destination pair are

more educated relative to non-migrants, the larger is the skill-related difference in

earnings between the destination country and the source. That is, positive selectivity is

stronger where the reward to skill in the destination is relatively large. This result obtains

for wage differences expressed in levels, but not in logs. Log wage differences, which

capture cross-country differences in returns to skill, fail to account for bilateral migration

patterns because cross-country differences in returns to skill are dwarfed by cross-country

differences in labor productivity. On their own, cross-country differences in returns to

skill would predict negative selection of migrants, which occurs rarely in the data.

       Positive sorting is a general prediction of income maximization. In our sorting

regression, the relative stock of more-educated migrants in a destination is increasing in

the level earnings difference between high and low-skilled workers. This correlation is

stronger when wage differences are adjusted for taxes, implying that migrants weigh

post-tax earnings when choosing a destination. The U.S. and Canada enjoy relatively

large post-tax skill-related wage differences, which largely account for their ability to

attract more educated migrants relative to other OECD countries.

       In the sorting regression, we obtain qualitatively similar results when we use

wages constructed from micro data as when we approximate wages using aggregate

income data and impose the assumption of log normality. As a practical matter, this

means that one can obtain empirically meaningful estimates of skill-related wage

differences from commonly available data sources. The sorting regression allows one to

test income maximization even without source-country wage data, which makes our

approach applicable to a wide variety of settings.
                                            41

       Our analysis also shows that language, history, and policy affect migration.

English-speaking destinations draw higher-skilled immigrants than other destinations,

whereas former colonial powers draw lower-skilled immigrants from their former

colonies than from other source countries. Destinations with liberal refugee and asylum

policies draw relatively low-skilled immigrants, all else equal. Unfortunately, our ability

to say more about policy is limited by the sparseness of data allowing one to compare the

regimes of different destination countries. Our model provides a framework in which

comparative analysis of immigration policies could be undertaken, but with current

limitations in data we are limited in the analyses we can carry out.
                                           42


References

Adams, Richard. 2003. “International Migration, Remittances, and Brain Drain: A
   Study of 24 Labor Exporting Countries.” World Bank Policy Research Working
   Paper no. 2972.
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, Romain Ranciere, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2006.
   “Exchange Rate Volatility and Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial
   Development.” NBER Working Paper No. 12117.
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2003. “Fairness and Redistribution:
   U.S. versus Europe.” NBER Working Paper No. 9502.
Beine, Michael, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2001. “Brain Drain and
   Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Development Economics,
   64(1): 275-289.
Beine, Michel, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2007. “Measuring International
   Skilled Migration: New Estimates Accounting for Age of Entry.” World Bank
   Economic Review, 21(June 2): 249-254.
Beine, Michel, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2008. “Brain Drain and Human
   Capital Formation in Developing Countries: Winners and Losers.” Economic
   Journal, forthcoming.
Belot, and Timothy Hatton. 2008. “Immigrant Selection in the OECD.” CEPR Working
   Paper No. 6675.
Borjas, George J. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” American
   Economic Review 77(4): 531-553.
Borjas, George, J. 1991. “Immigration and Self-Selection.” In John Abowd and Richard
   Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press, pp. 29-76.
Borjas, George J. 1999. “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.” In Orley C.
   Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Amsterdam:
   North-Holland, pp. 1697-1760.
Borjas, George J. 2006. “Labor Outflows and Labor Inflows in Puerto Rico.” Mimeo,
   Harvard University.
Borjas, George. J., Steven G. Bronars, and Stephen Trejo. 1992. “Self-Selection and
   Internal Migration in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics 32: 159-185.
Borjas, George J., and Lynette Hilton. 1996. “Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant
   Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement Programs” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   111(2): 575-604.
Carrington, William J. and Enrica Detragiache. 1998. “How Big is the Brain Drain?”
   IMF Working Paper 98/102.
Chiquiar, Daniel and Gordon Hanson. 2005. "International Migration, Self-Selection,
   and the Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States."
   Journal of Political Economy, April 113(2): 239-281.
Clark, Ximena, Timothy Hatton, Jeffrey Williamson. 2007. “Explaining U.S. Immigration,
   1971-1998.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2): 359-373.
Dahl, Gordon. 2002. “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with
   Multiple Markets.” Econometrica 70(6): 2367-2420.
                                         43

Docquier, Frederic and Abdeslam Marfouk. 2006. “International Migration by Educational
    Attainment, 1990-2000.” In Caglar Ozden and Maurice Schiff, eds., International
    Migration, Remittances, and the Brain Drain. Washington, DC: The World Bank and
    Palgrave McMillan, pp. 151-200.
Docquier, Frederic, and Hillel Rapoport. 2007. “Skilled Migration. The Perspective of
    Developing Countries.”
Durand, Jorge, Douglas S. Massey, and Rene M. Zenteno. 2001. “Mexican Immigration
    in the United States.” Latin American Research Review 36(1): 107-127.
Fernandez-Huertas, Jesus. 2006. “New Evidence on Emigration Selection.” Mimeo,
    Columbia University.
Freeman, Richard B. 2006. "People Flows in Globalization." NBER Working Paper
    No.12315.
Freeman, Richard B., and Remco H. Oostendorp. 2000. “Wages around the World: Pay
    across Occupations and Countries.” NBER Working Paper No. 8058.
Glaeser, Edward I. and Andrei Shleifer. "Legal Origins," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 2002, v107(4,Nov), 1193-1229.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2007. “Income Maximization and the Sorting
    of Emigrants across Destination Countries.” Mimeo, UCSD.
Hanson, Gordon H. 2007. “International Migration and the Developing World.”
    Mimeo, UCSD.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2004. “Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and
    Policy in Europe.” NBER Working Paper No. 10680
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2005. “What Fundamentals Drive World
    Migration?” In. George J. Borjas and Jeff Crisp, eds., Poverty, International
    Migration, and Asylum, New York: MacMillam.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Lei Zhang. 2006. “Quality-Consistent Estimates of International
    Returns to Skill.” NBER Working Paper No. 12664.
Hausman, Jerry, and Daniel McFadden. 1984. “Specification Tests for the Multinomial
    Logit Model.” Econometrica, 52(5): 1219-1240.
Ibarraran, Pablo, and Darren Lubotsky. 2005. “The Socioeconomic Status of Mexican
    Migrant Families: New Evidence from the 2000 Mexican Census.” In George J.
    Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration. Chicago: University of Chicago and National
    Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming.
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale. 2005. Give Us Your Best and Brightest: The Global
    Hunt for Talent and its Impact on the Developing World. Washington, DC: Center
    for Global Development and the Brookings Institution.
Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) Micro database, (various years); harmonization of
    original surveys conducted by the Luxembourg Income Study, Asbl. Luxembourg,
    periodic updating.
Mayda, Anna Maria. 2005. “International Migration: A Panel Data Analysis of
    Economic and Non-economic Determinants.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1590.
McFadden, Daniel. 1974. “The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand.” Journal of
    Public Economics, 3: 303-328.
McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport. 2006. “Self-Selection Patterns in Mexico-U.S.
    Migration: The Role of Migration Networks.” Mimeo, the World Bank and Bar-Ilan
    University.
                                        44

Munshi, Kaivan. 2003. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the
   US Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (May): 549-97.
OECD. 2003. Database on Foreign-born and Expatriates. http://www.oecd.org/.
OECD. 2005. Trends in International Migration. OECD: Paris.
OECD. Various years. Taxing Wages. OECD: Paris.
Orrenius, Pia M. and Madeline Zavodny. 2005. “Self-Selection among Undocumented
   Immigrants from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics, October 78(1): 215-
   240.
Pedersen, Peder J., Mariola Pytlikova, and Nina Smith. 2004. “Selection or Network
   Effects? Migration Flows into 27 OECD Countries, 1990-2000,”
    IZA Discussion paper 1104.
Psacharoupolos George, Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2004. “Returns to Investment in
   Education: A Further Update.” Economics of Education, 12(2): 111-134.
Ramos, Fernando. 1992. “Out-Migration and Return Migration of Puerto Ricans.” In
   Immigration and the Work Force, George Borjas and Richard Freeman (eds.).
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER. 49-66.
Rosenzweig, Mark. 2006. “Global Wage Differences and International Student Flows.”
   Brookings Trade Forum.
Rosenzweig, Mark. 2007. “Education and Migration: A Global Perspective.” Mimeo,
   Yale.
Roy, A.D. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic
   Papers 3 (June): 135-46.
United Nations. 2005. “Trends in Total Migrant Stock: 2005 Revision.” New York:
   Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations.
Volger, Michael, and Rotte, Ralph. 2000. “The Effects of Development on Migration:
   Theoretical Issues and New Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Population Economics,
   13(3): 485-508.
Yang, Dean. 2006. “Why Do Migrants Return to Poor Countries? Evidence from
   Philippine Migrants' Responses to Exchange Rate Shocks.” Review of Economics and
   Statistics, Vol. 88, No. 4, November 2006, pp. 715-735.
Figure 1: Share of emigrants and general population with tertiary education, 2000

                                                                                   Selection of migrants, 2000
                           .8
                                                                                      Taiwan
   Share of more educated among migrants


                                                                             QatarKuwait
                                                                            United      Arab Emirates
                                                                                                 Philippines
                                                           N igeria         Saudi Arabia Ja pan
                                                                          South
                                                                            Oman   AfricaHong     Kong
                                                              IndiaMalaysia                  Mong    olia
                               .6




                                                                             Bru nei   Venezuela,
                                                                                    Uzbekistan         RB                       Canada
                                                                  Iran Egypt
                                                             Liberia       Sing  apore       Panam a Israel
                                                           Myanma
                                                             Swaziland
                                                                Zim      r
                                                                      babwe         Macao,   Jordan
                                                                                                China
                                                                                             W est   Bank andAustralia
                                                                                                               Gaza             US
                                                         Papua     New      Guinea          Libya   Korea
                                                          Gabo
                                                         Ben
                                                         Sudan in n Baham as,
                                                         Tanzania                      Kyrgyzstan
                                                                                         The
                                                                                    Georgia
                                                         Burund
                                                             NamLeone
                                                         Sierra     iibia Bahrain
                                                                                Bolivia
                                                                                  TrinidadRussia
                                                                                           Latvia
                                                                                    Azerbaija  andn  Tobago
                                                        Leso
                                                         Cameroon
                                                       Niger  tho
                                                         Ethiopia
                                                          ChinaSolomon Islands
                                                       Rwanda
                                                         Zambia
                                                         Chad                       Tajikistan
                                                                                       Kazakhstan
                                                                                          Argentina
                                                                                          UK
                                                          Nepal
                                                        Uga   nda
                                                              Indonesia            Chile
                                                                                       Armenia Peru Swede    n
                                                         Kenya
                                                         Ghana
                                                                     ParaThailan
                                                                            gua yMoldova
                                                                              Syrian     Costa
                                                                                      dSwitzerland
                                                                                     Le  bano
                                                                                         Arab
                                                                                            Gu    RicaNe w Zealand
                                                                                                nRepublic
                                                                                               yana
                                                          Madagascar
                                                       Malawi        Brazil
                                                          Afg hanistan          Fiji Jamaica Barbados
                                                         Cen   tral
                                                          Eritrea
                                                               Congo,    C Rep.
                                                                            olom
                                                                      African   Rbia
                                                                             Uruguaepublic    Netherlands
                                                                                       Turkmenistan
                                                                                         y Norway
                                                                                              Denma     rk
                     .4




                                                          Togo
                                                           SriVietnam
                                                                 Lanka
                                                               Haiti
                                                           Pakistan    Iraq Poland
                                                                             Hunga
                                                                               C uba
                                                                           Nicaragua    ry Estonia
                                                                                     Iceland FranceGermany
                                                                                                      Belgium
                                                         Djibouti
                                                        Congo,      Dem . Rep.
                                                           Bangladesh                      Cyprus
                                                            BotswanaC zech       Austria
                                                                                     Re public
                                                                                          Ukraine
                                                           Cotead'Ivoire
                                                         Burkin
                                                         Bhutan         Romania
                                                                      Faso                      Ireland
                                                               Mauritius
                                                          Somalia                       Lithuania
                                                                                          Belarus
                                                                                         Ecu          Luxembourg
                                                                                              adorRepublic
                                                        Guinea                    Dominican
                                                                                Slove    nia        Finland
                                                               Cam
                                                                 Laobodia
                                                               East      PDR
                                                                        Tim  or
                                                                  H ondu      ras
                                                                          Malta
                                                         Mauritania Croatia Spa  Greece
                                                                                 in
                                                       Gambia,                 Serbia
                                                                      TheMacedonia
         .2




                                                                 Guatemala  Slovakia
                                                                            El Salvador
                                                       Mozambique                   Alb   ania
                                                                                       Suriname
                                                        Ang   ola Italy
                                                          Senegal         Bosnia and        Herzegovina
                                                                                        Bulgaria
                                                        Gu     Cape
                                                                 Tunisia
                                                            in ea-Bissau
                                                                 Algeria Verde
                                                                           Mexico
                                                         ComorosMo rocco
                                                             Equatorial      Guinea
                                                                       Portuga   l
                                                       Mali
                                                                     Turkey
                           0




                                                   0                           .2                 .4               .6                              .8
                                                                              Share of mo re educated among popula tion



Figure 2: Emigration odds (primary and tertiary educated) by source country, 2000

                                                                                                                                  Guyana
                            2




                                                                                                                  Haiti          Jamaica
                                                                                                                          Trinidad and Tobago
    Log odds of emigration for tertiary educated




                                                                                                    Gambia,   The The      Cape Verde
                                                                                                       Bahamas,      Fiji Barbados
                                                                                    Sierra Leone                  Mauritius Malta
                                         0




                                                                                          Ghana
                                                                                       Liberia
                                                                                       Mozambique                                    Suriname
                                                                                    Kenya
                                                                                 Uganda                        Lao Lebanon
                                                                                                                    PDR
                                                                                          EritreaSomalia
                                                                                                    Angola                Cyprus
                                                                                                                      El Salvador
                                                                         Papua New GuineaVietnam  Sri Lanka
                                                                                                       Nicaragua
                                                                                                            Hong
                                                                                                              CubaKong      Ireland
                                                                                                                           Macedonia
                                                                     Rwanda            Afghanistan         Honduras
                                                                                                              Guatemala
                                                                                                   Guinea-Bissau         Bosnia
                                                                                                                         Croatia and Herzegovina
                                                                                                   Congo,  Rep.Dominican
                                                                                                          Comoros New
                                                                                                             Iceland       Republic
                                                                                                                       Zealand
                                                                                                                       Portugal
                                                                     Malawi Zambia
                                                                                CameroonTogo           Cambodia
                                                                                                     Senegal
                                                                                                           UK    Morocco
                                                                                                                     Slovakia
                                                                                     Iran
                                                                                  Gabon    Panama
                                                                                            Brunei
                                                                                           Mali       East
                                                                                                  SingaporeTimor
                                                                                                       Macao,
                                                                                                         PolandChina Mexico
                                                                                Congo,  Dem.   Rep.
                                                                                                 Philippines
                                                                                                        Hungary    Serbia
                                                                                                                Austria
                             -2




                                                                           Zimbabwe
                                                                         Tanzania
                                                                           BeninGuinea  Taiwan
                                                                                      Pakistan  Iraq Equatorial
                                                                                           Mauritania
                                                                                       Malaysia
                                                                                  Djibouti                    Tunisia
                                                                                                                 Guinea
                                                                                                                   Greece
                                                                                                             Romania
                                                                                                            Estonia
                                                                                                                 Slovenia
                                                                     Nigeria
                                                                       Ethiopia          Colombia           Czech
                                                                                                            Italy
                                                                                                        Ecuador     Republic
                                                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                                                            Algeria
                                                                      Burundi              Uruguay Switzerland
                                                                                                    Armenia
                                                                                                   Latvia
                                                                                                  IsraelDenmark     Albania
                                                                                                                Lithuania
                                                                                                                  Luxembourg
                                                                    Sudan     Madagascar
                                                                           CentralSouth   Africa
                                                                                      Kuwait
                                                                                   African
                                                                                  Solomon     Jordan
                                                                                          Costa
                                                                                             West Rica
                                                                                            Republic
                                                                                             IslandsBank  and   Finland
                                                                                                               Gaza
                                                                                                          Norway    Bulgaria
                                                          Niger    Nepal         Bolivia
                                                                                    Cote  Chile
                                                                                           Syrian
                                                                                           Peru
                                                                                          d'Ivoire  Arab
                                                                                                     KoreaRepublic
                                                                                                               Turkey
                                                                      India
                                                         LesothoMyanmar        Egypt
                                                                             BangladeshBahrain
                                                                                Paraguay                 CanadaGermany
                                                                                                      Belgium
                                                                                                     Spain
                                                                                                     Sweden
                                                                       China
                                                                      Botswana
                                                                         Namibia
                                                                           Venezuela,         France Ukraine
                                                                                        RBMoldova        Belarus
                                                                       Burkina   FasoLibya Australia
                                                                         QatarThailand
                                                              Chad Indonesia
                                                                         Brazil  Argentina
                                                                                       Azerbaijan
                  -4




                                                                                     Georgia
                                                                                      Russia
                                                                  United   Japan
                                                                          Mongolia
                                                                         Arab     Kazakhstan
                                                                                Emirates
                                                                Saudi Arabia
                                                           Bhutan            Kyrgyzstan
                                                                    Uzbekistan
                                                       Swaziland Oman
                                                                       Tajikistan                  US
         -6




                                                                      Turkmenistan
                            -8




                                                            -8                     -6                    -4                -2               0      2
                                                                          Log odds of emigration for primary educated
   Table 1: Share of OECD immigrants by destination region and education, 2000

                                                                  Education Group
                     Destination Region                  All Primary Secondary Tertiary



                       North America                    0.514 0.352      0.540     0.655

                           Europe                       0.384 0.560      0.349     0.236

                     Australia & Oceania                0.102 0.088      0.111     0.109

                         All OECD                              0.355     0.292     0.353

Notes: This table shows the share of immigrants in OECD countries by destination
region and schooling group in 2000. North America includes Canada, Mexico and the
United States; Australia and Oceania includes Australia, Japan, New Zealand, and South
Korea; and Europe includes the other 24 OECD members (as of 2000).


  Table 2: Share of emigrants to OECD by source country and destination region, 2000
                                                 Destination region
    Source country        All OECD         N. America      Europe        Aus. & Oceania
       Mexico               0.113             0.219         0.001             0.000
          UK                0.053             0.041         0.027             0.206
         Italy              0.042             0.027         0.062             0.038
      Germany               0.038             0.028         0.049             0.045
       Turkey               0.035             0.003         0.085             0.005
         India              0.030             0.038         0.023             0.018
        China               0.030             0.039         0.009             0.066
     Philippines            0.030             0.046         0.007             0.030
       Vietnam              0.022             0.032         0.008             0.026
       Portugal             0.022             0.011         0.040             0.002
        Korea               0.021             0.025         0.002             0.075
        Poland              0.020             0.019         0.024             0.010
      Morocco               0.019             0.002         0.048             0.000
         Cuba               0.015             0.028         0.002             0.000
       Canada               0.015             0.025         0.004             0.006

Note: This table shows the share of immigrants accounted for by the 15 largest source
countries for migrants to OECD destination countries.
Table 3: Summary statistics for wage data

            A: Destination countries

            Pre-tax
            Wage:        Low-skill     High-skill   Difference   N
            Source          (1)           (2)          (3)       (4)
            LIS            20.12         41.87        21.76      13
            WDI             8.18         21.9         13.71      15
            FO             15.71         26.25        10.54      12


            Post-tax
            wage:        Low-skill     High-skill   Difference   N
            Source          (1)           (2)          (3)       (4)
            LIS            13.02         23.41        10.39      13
            WDI             5.22         12.15        6.94       15
            FO             10.03         14.56        4.54       12


            B: Source countries

            Pre-tax
            wage:        Low-skill     High-skill   Difference   N
            Source          (1)           (2)          (3)       (4)
            WDI             2.42         6.99         4.57       102
            FO              3.97         7.67         3.71       101
Table 4: Regression results from linear-utility model
Equation:                     Scale    Selection    Sorting         Sorting      Sorting     Sorting
Wage data source:             WDI        WDI          WDI            WDI          LIS         LIS
Variable                       (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)
Wj − Wj                      0.018
  h        s
                                    (0.029)
( Wh3   − Wh1 ) − ( Ws3   − Ws1 )             0.072
                                              (0.013)
( Wh3 − Wh1 ) , pre-tax                                 0.060                     0.026
                                                        (0.026)                  (0.013)
( Wh3 − Wh1 ) , post-tax                                             0.103                    0.048
                                                                    (0.045)                  (0.022)
Anglophone dest.                      1.451     0.567    0.838        0.636        0.817       0.678
                                    (0.873)   (0.183)   (0.183)     (0.256)      (0.193)     (0.241)
Common language                      0.648      1.268    0.355        0.352        0.331       0.332
                                    (0.293)   (0.248)   (0.137)     (0.139)      (0.125)     (0.124)
Contiguous                           0.880    -0.384    -1.005       -1.007       -1.108      -1.097
                                    (0.401)   (0.373)   (0.229)     (0.237)      (0.230)     (0.240)
Longitude diff.                      0.003     -0.009    0.004        0.004        0.005       0.005
                                    (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.003)
Log distance                         -1.152    0.676    -0.245       -0.259       -0.273     -0.279
                                    (0.171)   (0.131)   (0.092)     (0.097)      (0.107)     (0.111)
LT colonial rel.                     2.159     -0.711   -0.391       -0.445       -0.505      -0.550
                                    (0.411)   (0.193)   (0.176)     (0.161)      (0.150)     (0.137)
ST colonial rel.                     2.641     -0.395   -0.129       -0.187       -0.195      -0.224
                                    (0.601)   (0.431)   (0.256)     (0.257)      (0.276)     (0.276)
Visa waiver                          0.589     -0.299    0.335        0.364        0.440       0.471
                                    (0.314)   (0.135)   (0.164)     (0.172)      (0.200)     (0.203)
Schengen sig.                        0.058      0.402    0.430        0.403        0.528       0.507
                                    (0.337)   (0.166)   (0.250)     (0.252)      (0.295)     (0.304)
Asylee share                         -1.221    -2.512   -3.590       -3.635       -3.998     -4.007
                                    (3.698)   (0.818)   (0.901)     (0.709)      (0.929)     (0.810)
Observations                          2786      1393     1393         1393         1214        1214
R-squared                             0.44      0.47      0.61        0.61          0.63        0.63
Clusters                               15        15        15          15            13          13

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions
include a dummy variable equal to one if the destination-country statistical office explicitly codes a
primary education category. The scale regression also includes a dummy equal to one for the
tertiary skill-group observations and interactions between that dummy and all variables shown. The
sorting regressions include a full set of source-country dummies.
Table 5: Regression results from log-utility model
Equation:                     Scale    Selection   Sorting           Sorting     Sorting      Sorting
Wage data source:             WDI         WDI       WDI               WDI         LIS          LIS
Variable                       (1)         (2)       (3)               (4)         (5)          (6)
     j
ln W − ln W j                -0.435
        h         s
                              (0.087)
( δ3h   − δ1s )                            -1.307
                                           (0.186)
δ3h , pre-tax                                            3.929                    5.338
                                                        (0.767)                  (0.886)
δ3h , post-tax                                                       3.342                     4.146
                                                                     (0.761)                  (1.297)
Anglophone dest.               1.466
                              (0.857)
Common language                1.315
                              (0.213)
Contiguous                     0.656
                              (0.301)
Longitude diff.                -0.008
                              (0.003)
Log distance                   -0.530
                              (0.180)
LT colonial rel.               1.912
                              (0.485)
ST colonial rel.               2.185
                              (0.413)
Visa waiver                    -0.793
                              (0.259)
Schengen sig.                  -0.523
                              (0.350)
Asylee share                   -2.065
                              (3.257)
Observations                    2786        1393         1393         1393         1214        1214
R-squared                       0.29        0.17         0.40         0.38         0.43        0.38
Clusters                         15          15           15           15           13          13

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions
include a dummy variable equal to one if the destination-country statistical office explicitly codes a
primary education category. The sorting also regressions include a full set of source-country
dummies.
Table 6: Key wage coefficients based on alternative wage measures

        A. WDI wages,
        PPP-adjusted
        Equation:                              Selection          Sorting
        Variable                                  (1)               (2)
        ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) − ( Ws3 − Ws1 )           0.108
                                                (0.016)
        ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) , post-tax                                   0.082
                                                                  (0.054)
        Observations                             1379              1379
        R-squared                                0.50               0.60
        Clusters                                  15                 15

        B. LIS wages, PPP adjusted
        Equation:                              Selection          Sorting
        Variable                                  (1)               (2)
        ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) , post-tax                                   0.047
                                                                  (0.024)
        Observations                                               1202
        R-squared                                                   0.63
        Clusters

        C. Freeman-Oostendorp wages
        Equation:                              Selection          Sorting
        Variable                                  (1)               (2)
        ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) − ( Ws3 − Ws1 )           0.082
                                                (0.016)
        ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) , post-tax                                   0.072
                                                                  (0.045)
        Observations                             1093              1093
        R-squared                                0.49               0.63
        Clusters                                  12                 12

        D. Freeman-Oostendorp wages,
        PPP-adjusted
        Equation:                              Selection          Sorting
        Variable                                  (1)               (2)
        ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) − ( Ws3 − Ws1 )           0.064
                                                (0.011)
        ( Wh3 − Wh1 ) , post-tax                                   0.091
                                                                  (0.039)
        Observations                             1059              1059
        R-squared                                0.49               0.64
        Clusters                                  12                 12

      Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all
      regressions include all variable shown or discussed in the note to Table 4.
Table 7: Additional
Selection and Sorting
Regressions
Equation:                       Selection   Sorting     Sorting    Selection    Sorting     Sorting    Selection     Sorting     Sorting     Sorting     Sorting
Wage data source:                 WDI        WDI         LIS         WDI         WDI         LIS         WDI          WDI         LIS         WDI         LIS
Variable                           (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)
( Wh3 − Wh1 ) − ( Ws3 − Ws1 )    0.065                              0.078                               0.082
                                (0.013)                             (0.012)                             (0.012)
( Wh3 − Wh1 ) , post-tax                    0.121       0.052                    0.127       0.058                   0.121        0.068       0.106       0.050
                                            (0.054)     (0.025)                 (0.053)     (0.015)                  (0.047)     (0.019)     (0.039)     (0.018)
Relative university quality                                          0.000       -0.002      -0.004
                                                                    (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Log emigrant stock 1990                                                                                  -0.148       -0.039     -0.157
                                                                                                        (0.031)      (0.055)     (0.058)
Observations                      1393       1393        1214        1348        1348        1169         963          963         823        2338        2044
R-squared                         0.40       0.57        0.57        0.49        0.63        0.65         0.59         0.64        0.69       0.59        0.62
Clusters                           15         15          13          14          14          12           15           15          13         15          13


Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all regressions include all variables shown or discussed in the note to Table 4.
Columns (1)-(3) report regressions in which we redefine skilled migrants to be migrants with either secondary or tertiary education; columns (4)-(9) differ from
the corresponding regressions in Table 4 only by in the inclusion of the indicated regressor; and columns (10) and (11) re-estimate the sorting regression using
the full sample of source-destination pairs for which destination wage data are available.
Table 8: Wage coefficients from selection and sorting regressions from samples that omit one destination

A. Selection regressions; WDI wage measures
Omitted destination         AUS      AUT           CAN          DEU         DNK          ESP         FIN        FRA        GBR          IRL       NLD        NOR       NZL        SWE      USA
Variable                     (1)      (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)       (11)       (12)      (13)       (15)     (16)
(W − W ) − (W − W )
    3     1      3     1    0.066   0.071          0.068        0.071       0.078       0.078       0.072       0.075      0.072       0.079      0.074      0.066     0.067      0.074    0.073
   h     h       s     s
                               (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)    (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.015)
Observations                    1296      1294      1294        1303        1299        1298        1306        1293        1293       1348       1293       1295       1301      1292      1297
R-squared                        0.47      0.47      0.46        0.47        0.47        0.48        0.46        0.48        0.47       0.49       0.47      0.48       0.48      0.48      0.44
Clusters                          14        14        14          14          14          14          14          14          14         14         14        14         14        14        14

B. Sorting regressions; WDI post-tax wage measures
Omitted destination      AUS       AUT      CAN              DEU         DNK          ESP          FIN        FRA         GBR          IRL       NLD        NOR        NZL       SWE       USA
Variable                  (1)       (2)      (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)      (15)      (16)
( W − W ) , post-tax
    3    1               0.094     0.110   0.112             0.111       0.122       0.112        0.113       0.103       0.108       0.141      0.112      0.080      0.095     0.134     0.122
   h     h
                           (0.043)   (0.040)   (0.035)     (0.038)       (0.036)     (0.039)     (0.039)     (0.040)     (0.039)     (0.037)    (0.039)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.039)   (0.054)
Observations                2166      2175      2170        2206          2180        2176        2204        2161        2152        2287       2156       2177       2178       2160      2184
R-squared                    0.40      0.39      0.39        0.39          0.39        0.41        0.39        0.40        0.40        0.41      0.39       0.41       0.42       0.41      0.38
Clusters                      14        14        14          14            14          14          14          14          14          14        14         14         14         14        14

C. Sorting regressions; LIS post-tax wage measures
Omitted destination      AUS       AUT      CAN              DEU         DNK          ESP        FRA         GBR          IRL        NLD        NOR        SWE        USA
Variable                  (1)        (2)     (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)
( W − W ) , post-tax
    3    1               0.031     0.051    0.053            0.051       0.055       0.051       0.047       0.052       0.067       0.051      0.037      0.055      0.071
   h     h

                           (0.020)   (0.019)   (0.016)     (0.017)      (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.015)     (0.018)    (0.014)    (0.018)    (0.033)
Observations                1872      1881      1876        1912         1886        1882         1867        1858        1993        1862       1883       1866       1890
R-squared                    0.43      0.41      0.41        0.41         0.41        0.43         0.42        0.42        0.43        0.41      0.43       0.43       0.40
Clusters                      12        12        12          12           12          12           12          12          12          12        12         12         12

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all regressions include all variable shown or discussed in the note to Table 4.
Table 9: Fixed migration costs and migrant stocks for selected source and destination countries
 Destination:            Australia     Canada       France       Germany         UK           US
 Source
 Canada                       59.94                     53.84        48.66          33.7        10.6
                            21,375                      8,910        7,998       49,954      715,825
 China                         80.28          56.8         90.83         88.57         87.73          55.6
                             117,170       287,820        24,547        26,069        33,380       841,699
 Colombia                      89.88          69.4         72.84         71.72         71.43         34.67
                               3,083        11,725         6,136         5,895         8,928       402,935
 Dominican Republic           133.45         62.58         90.62         59.85         95.37          6.62
                                  38         3,225          238          3,188          350        527,520
 El Salvador                   50.52         26.82         83.06         82.21         89.85         -0.16
                               6,314        27,780          328           332           302        619,185
 Germany                       34.69         19.94          14.8                       13.76         21.83
                             102,219       163,880       109,425                     164,165       646,815
 Guatemala                    105.82         45.01         83.78         80.14         96.95          8.86
                                157          8,880          346           448           212        341,590
 Ireland                       19.66         22.87         34.63         13.76        -28.28         16.55
                              45,365        24,520         3,845        13,284       420,102       148,680
 Italy                          27.4         14.95         13.37         10.91         31.34          23.3
                             216,316       312,185       371,714       456,000        86,876       461,085
 Jamaica                       76.79         -1.73         67.18         51.03         -9.31         -2.98
                                680        103,265          299           872        124,313       449,795
 Korea, Rep.                   66.14         48.94         73.86          60.2         72.08         29.06
                              25,160        50,860         6,164        12,226         7,434       676,640
 Mexico                       117.03          59.6         90.46          82.5         90.62             0
                                870         24,795         3,064         4,029         3,558     6,374,825
 Philippines                   65.41         46.64         83.42         68.31         67.99         29.58
                              78,105       191,615         4,767        12,539        34,782     1,163,555
 Poland                        45.63         26.38         27.95          5.21         42.89         29.83
                              52,887       154,525        91,122       198,000        33,661       399,165
 Portugal                      46.13          9.32         -2.55          8.81         31.08         19.23
                              13,329       143,145       538,106       113,216        26,006       187,645
 Spain                         66.39         63.67         15.77         27.11         42.88         50.85
                              11,972         9,695       308,500       109,613        40,592        73,835
 Turkey                        63.17         68.03          40.1          7.95         53.27         60.36
                              26,160        13,045       133,890     1,272,000        36,754        64,780
 United Kingdom                12.39         11.87         23.02         17.29                       36.99
                             966,139       580,250        61,317        90,000                     613,930
 Vietnam                         39.56         31.02         38.45         45.46       61.75          21.01
                              128,666       127,590         58,570        43,105      19,137        807,305
Note: Top figure in each cell is fixed migration cost in 000s of annual 2000 USD; bottom figure is emigrant stock.
Table 10: Decomposition of emigrant selectivity, by income level and region of
source country
                            Mean                Mean contribution to selectivity of
     Source countries     selectivity Wage difference Migration costs           Residual
 Low income countries in:
          Africa            3.918          0.955             2.014                0.950
   Latin America & Car.     2.286          0.842             1.476               -0.033
           Asia             1.982          0.949             1.352               -0.319
    Cen. & E. Europe        1.265          0.862             0.864               -0.461
    Australia/Oceania         --             --                 --                  --

High income countries in:
         Africa                  --               --                 --                 --
     North America             0.249           -0.210              1.393             -0.935
          Asia                 1.190           -0.038              1.333             -0.105
    Western Europe             1.067            0.048              0.884              0.135
 Australia & N. Zealand        0.891            0.193              1.479             -0.781

       All countries           1.991            0.664              1.327              0.000

Notes: The table shows the mean value for the selection variable across source countries
in column (1) (the log odds of migration for those with tertiary education relative to the
log odds of migration for those with primary education), the mean value of the
contribution of wage differences to selection in column (2), the mean value of the
contribution of migration costs to selection in column (3), and the mean value of the
residual in column (4). The relevant regression results are those in column (2) of Table 4.
Low (high) income countries are those whose wage for low skill workers is below
(above) the minimum value of this variable for OECD countries in the regression sample.
Table 11: Decomposition of the immigrant skills gap
                                           Share of immigrant skills gap explained by:
                 Mean
               immigrant    Immigrant        Wage       English    Common                       Long.       Log       Colony,   Colony,    Visa                 Share        Share
                 skills      skills gap    difference    dest.     off. lang.   Contiguous       diff.    distance      LT        ST      waiver   Schengen    asylees     explained
 Destination      (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)        (8)        (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)        (13)         (14)
Australia            1.29           0.72         0.84      0.00         -0.01         -0.03      -0.16         0.22     -0.01      0.00    -0.01        0.00       -0.07        0.78
Austria             -0.54           2.55         0.36      0.25          0.03          0.02        0.07       -0.08      0.00      0.00    -0.04       -0.02        0.39        0.98
Canada               1.30           0.71         0.99      0.00         -0.06         -0.02        0.00        0.02     -0.01      0.00    -0.04        0.00       -0.13        0.76
Denmark             -0.51           2.52         0.28      0.25          0.04          0.00        0.07       -0.07      0.00      0.00    -0.04       -0.02        0.36        0.87
Finland             -0.75           2.76         0.38      0.23          0.03          0.00        0.07       -0.06      0.00      0.00    -0.04       -0.02        0.09        0.68
France              -0.10           2.11         0.44      0.30          0.02          0.02        0.08       -0.08      0.02      0.00    -0.05       -0.02        0.22        0.96
Germany             -0.31           2.32         0.44      0.27          0.03          0.03        0.08       -0.09      0.00      0.00    -0.05       -0.03        0.05        0.76
Ireland              1.39           0.62         1.52      0.00          0.00          0.00        0.27       -0.37     -0.01      0.00    -0.31        0.00        0.83        1.95
Netherlands         -0.54           2.55         0.32      0.25          0.03          0.00        0.07       -0.07      0.00      0.00    -0.04       -0.02        0.55        1.10
New
Zealand             0.71           1.30         0.64       0.00         0.00          -0.02      -0.13        0.14       0.00      0.00    -0.04        0.00      -0.26        0.32
Norway              1.15           0.86         0.53       0.74         0.10           0.01       0.21       -0.17      -0.01      0.00    -0.12       -0.06       0.40        1.64
Spain              -0.03           2.04         0.50       0.31         0.02           0.00       0.08       -0.06       0.03      0.00    -0.05       -0.03      -0.06        0.74
Sweden              0.28           1.73         0.55       0.37         0.05           0.00       0.11       -0.09       0.00      0.00    -0.06       -0.03       0.36        1.27
United
Kingdom             0.40           1.61         0.35       0.00         0.00          -0.01       0.10       -0.09       0.07      0.00    -0.06       0.00        0.22        0.58
United
States              2.01           0.00
Mean                0.38           1.63         0.58       0.21         0.02             0.00     0.07       -0.06       0.01      0.00    -0.07       -0.02       0.21        0.96

Note: Results are based on the model reported in column (4) of Table 4.
