                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE ORIGINS OF INDUSTRIAL SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERIES

                                           James D. Adams
                                         J. Roger Clemmons

                                        Working Paper 13823
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13823


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2008




The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation has generously supported this research. We thank Nancy Bayers
and Henry Small of Thomson Scientific for advice concerning the data. We also thank Ernie Berndt,
Nick Bloom, Wes Cohen, Wayne Gray, Mike Scherer, Scott Stern, and John Van Reenan for helpful
comments. Presentations at the NBER Productivity Meetings, the NBER productivity seminar, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, and the University at Albany have substantially improved this paper. Any errors
are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Origins of Industrial Scientific Discoveries
James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons
NBER Working Paper No. 13823
February 2008
JEL No. D24,L33,O31,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates science production functions for R&D-performing firms in the United States
using scientific papers as the measure of output, by analogy with patents. The underlying evidence
covers 200 top U.S. R&D firms during 1981-1999 as well as 110 top U.S. universities. We find that
industrial science builds on past scientific research inside and outside the firm, with most of the returns
to scale in production deriving from outside knowledge. In turn, the largest outside contribution derives
from universities rather than firms; this is especially true when papers are weighted by citations received,
a measure of their importance. Consistent with the role assigned to knowledge spillovers in growth
theory, the importance of outside knowledge, especially that of universities, increases from the firm
to the industry level. The findings survive the inclusion of fixed effects, interactions among the effects,
variations in sample and specification, and efforts to control for endogeneity.


James D. Adams
Department of Economics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3406 Russell Sage Laboratory
Troy, NY 12180-3590
and NBER
adamsj@rpi.edu

J. Roger Clemmons
Institute for Child Health Policy, College of Medi
The University of Florida
PO Box 100147
Gainesville, FL 32610-0147
jrc@ichp.ufl.edu
     “Empirically [knowledge capital] is too broad a concept: it aspires to and contains too much. We can,
however, focus on the contribution of identified investments in advancing the state of knowledge in a
particular (or related) area(s). The contribution of ‘science’ in general to a particular industry is probably
not measurable since there is no way of knowing how much ‘science’ is actually used in one industry
versus another.”

    —Zvi Griliches, “Issues in Addressing the Contribution of R&D to Productivity,” Bell Journal of
    Economics 10 (1979)

    I.        Introduction
    Against the odds, and despite the verdict of a master, this paper sets out to show that

the contribution of science to firms and industries is to some degree measurable. In this

article our main interest is in the early stages of innovation and in the role that science

inside and outside the firm plays in scientific discoveries. We assume that science is

productive and contributes to expected profits. This is a persuasive reason as to why

firms pursue science and we adopt it as our working hypothesis1.

    The analysis builds on a simple precept from the economics of search, that industrial

science replenishes technological opportunities in firms and industries (Evenson and

Kislev, 1976)2. Proceeding on this basis, we examine how opportunities are replenished

and how the firm’s science resources interact with stocks of knowledge to produce

industrial science. Thus our concern is with industrial science, not with patents, products,

and stock market values3.

    We would first like to be clear about what we do not claim. We do not claim that

only industrial science replenishes technological opportunity, just that it is a factor. Nor

do we assert that only academic science matters, for clearly we assume that industrial

science is an essential piece of the puzzle. Instead we merely claim that the return to

R&D rises in part because of science regardless of sector.

1
  But see Stern (2004), who argues that letting researchers do science also yields a wage savings.
2
  Adams (1990) draws on the insights of Evenson and Kislev (1975, 1976).
3
  Adams and Clemmons (2007) consider the role of science in patent production functions.


                                                       1
    To answer this question we pursue a flexible approach. We allow the firm’s past

scientific research, its stock of basic research, and the past scientific research of

universities as well as other firms to influence the rate of scientific discovery of a firm.

Knowledge is allowed to flow from any science and from any university or firm to any

particular firm and field4. In the case of universities we provide for collaboration as well

as citation channels of influence5.

    We are motivated by a desire to understand the sources that firms draw on while

doing their own science. Thus we are interested in the “origins” question, of the

comparative contributions of universities and other firms, as well as the firm itself, to its

scientific discoveries.

    The data give us the freedom to explore these dimensions. They are based on

scientific papers, citations, and collaborations during 1981-1999 collected by Thomson

Scientific in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The papers are written by scientists in the top

200 U.S. R&D firms and the top 110 U.S. universities. These institutions account for

most of the scientific research carried out in the U.S. during this period.

    The data include 230 thousand papers written by the top 200 firms and 2.4 million

papers written by the top 110 universities. They report roughly one million citations of

top 200 firms to papers of the top 110 universities, about 40 thousand collaborations

between firms and universities, and over 600 thousand citations to firms. From these data

we extract a panel consisting of science outputs and inputs at the three-dimensional level

of firms, fields, and years.



4
  Adams and Clemmons (2008, forthcoming) describe the data and characterize dimensions of the
knowledge flows in terms of firms and industries, universities, and science fields.
5
  Firms write some of their papers with collaborating institutions which are almost entirely universities.


                                                      2
   This paper draws on studies of knowledge production functions in microeconomics

(Griliches, 1979, 1992) and in growth theory (Romer, 1990; Jones, 1995; Aghion and

Howitt, 1998). We explore a particular implication of the growth side of this literature,

that knowledge is more important at the industry level than firm level.

   Given our emphasis on science inside and outside the firm, we draw on studies of the

limits of the firm in R&D, especially Cohen and Levinthal (1989), Mowery (1995), and

Adams (2006). Our results concur with findings from the management literature on open

innovation (Chesbrough, 2003) and innovation communities (Von Hippel, 2005).

Consistent with this, we find that reliance on outside knowledge has increased over time.

   The historical record (Nelson, 1962; Hoddeson, 1980, 1981; Hounshell and Smith,

1988) provides examples of firms for which science is essential to strategy. The

empirical literature on knowledge flows (Jaffe, 1989; Trajtenberg, 1990; Jaffe and

Trajtenberg, 1999; Harhoff, Narin, Scherer, and Vopel, 1999; Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh,

2002) has proven essential to our research. In this same vein, Narin, Hamilton and

Olivastro (1997) and Branstetter and Ogura (2005) find that patent citations to science

have increased over time, consistent with similar findings of our own.

   We assume that sampling behavior from knowledge stocks inside and outside the firm

is a necessary part of knowledge flows. Thus work on search, technical progress, and

growth has influenced us, especially microeconomic studies by Evenson and Kislev

(1976), Nelson (1982), and Klette and Griliches (1998), but also studies of growth by

Kortum (1997), Aghion and Howitt (1998), and Klette and Kortum (2004). Consistent

with our results, these writings stress the role of knowledge in counteracting diminishing

returns from search.




                                             3
    Less directly, our findings can be viewed as consistent with the literature on growth

and convergence, since they suggest that productivity in research as well as goods and

services is deliberately created and is probably easier for followers that are inside the

technology frontier. Examples are Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004, Ch. 8, 12), Howitt

(2000), and Griffith, Redding, and Van Reenan (2004), where productivity growth

compared with leaders depends on R&D and technology transfer6.

    This paper seeks to make several contributions. To our knowledge we estimate the

first science production functions at the firm level. Second, we bring several knowledge

flows to bear on the problem of explaining scientific output in firms and we confront

these measures both with each other and with a simple alternative, the firm’s basic

research stock (the new measures add considerably). Third, instead of assuming the

importance of knowledge flows from outside science, we test these against flows of

science inside the firm (outside flows do matter). Fourth, we compare university science

flows with those from other firms (university flows are more important). Fifth, rather

than assume that only citations matter, we explore the alternative of collaboration-based

university flows. Consistent with Adams, Black, Clemmons, and Stephan (2005),

collaboration also contributes. Finally, we confirm the importance of knowledge flows

after controlling for a range of individual effects and specifications, and we uncover

evidence that knowledge flows are more important at higher levels of aggregation,

especially university knowledge flows, as some growth theories suggest.


6
 Geography and technology can restrict knowledge flows. These frictions lie outside the scope of this
paper. For agriculture, Evenson and Kislev (1975) discuss limits on knowledge flows due to geography.
Keller (2002) and Peri (2005) find that distance, country, and language constrain knowledge flows. Adams
and Jaffe (1996), Adams (2002), and Adams, Clemmons and Stephan (forthcoming) discuss limits imposed
by field and technology. Frictions imposed by industry are less clear. Scherer (1982a, b) and Klevorick,
Levin, Nelson, and Winter (1995) suggest that inter-industry flows of technology are large. Adams and
Clemmons (2008, forthcoming) find weak effects of industry in impeding knowledge flows from science.


                                                   4
    The rest of the paper contains five sections. Section II presents the knowledge

production function for industrial science. Besides firm R&D, this includes knowledge

flows from universities as well as knowledge flows from the firm’s past research and that

of other firms. In this section we define the variables. Section III discusses the data.

Section IV presents time series graphs of knowledge flows from universities and firms by

industry group and science field. Section V reports our findings on industrial scientific

discoveries. Section VI concludes.

    II.     Science Production Function
    We assume that production of new scientific ideas in firms depends partly on search

effort. We measure effort by citations and collaborations. These require time spent

perusing scientific literature, as well as time and resources spent in joint research, all of it

rendered productive by scientific training. This input of labor is reflected in our data in

counts of citations to scientific papers and collaborations on jointly written papers.

Underlying the extent of search are stocks of advanced human capital, as well as an

equilibration of the marginal benefits and costs from search.

    Then, in what follows, we examine the amount of knowledge that arrives at the firm.

This turns out to depend on citation or collaboration counts divided by the number of

papers potentially cited or collaborated. This gives us a rate of search. To simplify the

discussion we shall refer to citation rates or collaboration rates simply as sampling rates

when the context is clear.

    The sampling rate is multiplied by the knowledge stock from which it draws, to

indicate the knowledge flow from a given institution. This is summed to arrive at the

total knowledge flow. Some knowledge flows are spillovers, in the sense that they




                                               5
represent outside knowledge that is nonrivalrous and non-excludable (Romer, 1990). But

some of the flows could represent technology transfer that is excludable. We therefore

refrain from calling knowledge flows spillovers.

      For the purpose of scientific discovery we identify stocks of knowledge in firms with

their basic research stocks, and we replace stocks of knowledge in universities with

stocks of R&D. We prefer R&D stocks as proxies for knowledge because they stand for

research effort in the long run, regardless of whether it is patented, published, or even

observed. In addition, R&D is associated with a larger number of products, which can be

thought of as the firm’s know-how or stock of knowledge (Klette and Kortum, 2004).

      A. Analysis at the Firm and Science Field Level
      In most of the empirical work we employ a three-dimensional panel in which a

knowledge production function for science i in firm j at time t takes center stage. The

panel treats scientific output as heterogeneous within the firm, so that knowledge arrives

at different rates at different branches of the firm’s knowledge production function for

science. For example, the firm can have a biomedical branch, a chemistry branch, an

engineering branch, and so forth, and the knowledge inputs that enter into each branch

differ from other branches. Our approach takes this into account.

      We postulate the following production function for scientific discoveries:

                 nijt = A exp( Z D′ δ ) Rηj ,Rt −1 ∏v =1 S ijv , t −1 exp(u ijt )
                                                       V   η sv
(1)

In (1) nijt is the number of papers (or citation weighted papers), A is productivity not

elsewhere accounted for, and Z D′ is a vector of firm, field, and time dummies with

coefficients δ . Thus total factor productivity in scientific research is Aijt ≡ A exp(Z D′ δ ) .

Note that firm dummies control for hard-to-observe effects of firm size, efficiency, and


                                                             6
diversification, field dummies control for differences among fields, and time dummies

control for time effects7. In addition, the firm’s stock of basic research R j , t −1 controls for

effects of the firm’s knowledge that are not measured by knowledge flows8. S ijv , t −1

includes lagged knowledge flows from past research in universities and other firms.

These are flows of outside knowledge. S ijv , t −1 also includes flows from the firm’s past

science research—this is the flow of inside knowledge. Notice that the lagged flows

specifically pertain to science i and firm j at time t . Also, u ijt is the error term and theη i

exponents are output elasticities. The composition of the error term is given by

(2)               u ijt = vi + v j + vt + eijt

In (2), vi , v j , vt are variance-components for field, firm, and time, whose effects are

absorbed by the dummy variables Z D′ . eijt is the “innovation” in the error term.

         Taking logarithms of (1) and substituting (2) into the result we reach:

                  ln(nijt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln( R j , t −1 ) + ∑v =1 η v ln(S ijv , t −1 ) + vi + v j + vt + eijt
                                                                     V
(3)

in which β equals the logarithm of A . For identification eijt must be orthogonal to the

right-hand side variables. In addition to using lagged variables as instruments we address

this by including all available lags as instruments using panel GMM.

         In (3) the firm’s stock of basic research is

                  R jt −1 = bt −1 ∑τ =1 rjt −1−τ (1 − d )τ
                                    5
(4)



7
  The dummies also absorb knowledge flows not controlled by researchers in a firm and field. These
become endogenous at higher levels of aggregation. See Romer (1990), Griliches (1992), and Jones
(1995).
8
  We also used stocks of basic plus applied research in place of basic research throughout, including the
knowledge flows, but this made little difference to our results.


                                                             7
Here bt −1 is the share of basic research in the primary industry of firm j from NSF (various

years), rjt −1−τ is the lagged flow of firm R&D over the previous five years from Standard

and Poor’s Compustat, and d = 0.15 is the depreciation rate assumed for R&D9.

        There is an important issue concerning the knowledge flows S ijv , t −1 . Since these

draw on several sciences they are really two-level production functions. Barring fixed

proportions, concavity is needed to uniquely determine inputs from each science. But for

tractability we replace the nonlinear functions with linear approximations10.

        The knowledge flows use sampling rates c ij / n j as weights that measure the

intensity with which researchers search various knowledge stocks. The numerator cij is a

count of citations or collaborations from group i to group j . This is divided by n j , the

number of scientific papers in group j that could have been referenced. For a group of

papers ni the rate c ij / n j is more meaningful than probability c ij / n i n j . The probability is

appropriate for a single paper because it captures the average proportion of knowledge

flowing from j to i (Adams, Clemmons, and Stephan, forthcoming). But if ni papers

cite n j papers in j then the probability c ij / n i n j reduces to the sampling rate c ij / n j . We

now consider the knowledge flows in detail.

        We begin with flows of outside knowledge into firms. The citation flow from

universities takes the form:



9
  Firm R&D flows are expressed in millions of 1992 dollars. We chose a five year measure of the R&D
stock because of the short length of many firm R&D histories. And since we do not have firms’ basic
research, we adjust the total stock of R&D by the industry ratio of basic research to total R&D.
10
   Since we include six sciences and four knowledge flow variables, estimating a nonlinear regression with
a two-level production function for the R&D variables is not promising. The linear knowledge flows are
simple and almost surely, are highly correlated with the ideal two-level production functions.


                                                    8
                     S ijtCU = ∑F =1   ∑ ∑τ
                                                   t −1
                                                          (CU ijtFkτ / nFkτ )R Fkτ
                                 M        N
(5)                                       k =1      =1


Here CU refers to citations to university science. Subscripts stand for the citing

(receiving) side of knowledge flows, and superscripts stand for the cited (sending) side.

Subscripts and superscripts consistently follow the ordering: field of science, institution

(university or firm), and time. Thus, in the case of (5) subscript ijt refers to citing

field i in firm j at time t and superscript Fkτ refers to cited field F , university k , and prior

year τ . The citation rate in parentheses is field-specific because university R&D stocks

are field-specific. CU ijtFkτ is the number of citations from papers in a field, firm, and year

to papers in a university, field, and year. It is inherently a six-dimensional object. The

number of papers in university k in field F at time τ is nkFτ . Thus the sampling rate equals

CU ijtFkτ / n Fkτ . The university citation flow is just the sum of the sampling rates times

cited R&D stocks over cited sciences F , universities k , and years τ . This explains the

triple summation in (5), which reduces the knowledge flow to the three-dimensional level

of citing field, firm, and year, representing in a simple way all that has been learned. In

(5) the definition of the stock of university R&D RkFτ is

                     RkFτ = ∑ z =1 rkFτ − z (1 − d ) z
                                 8
(6)

It is the sum of depreciated R&D flows rkFτ − z over the previous eight years, where the

depreciation rate is d = 0.15 . R&D f lows are taken from the NSF CASPAR database.

University R&D stocks have three advantages over firm R&D: they are consistently

available over a longer period, they exist by field, and they are expenditures on science11.



11
     Field and university R&D stocks are expressed in millions of 1992 dollars.


                                                              9
One disadvantage is that they could contain considerable respondent error. To reduce

simultaneity bias we lag (5) in production function (3).

      The collaboration knowledge flow from universities is simpler than (5). This is

because joint research takes place within field—the field of the journal where it is

published. Collaboration occurs in the same year—the year of publication12. Since

collaboration occurs within field in the same year, the knowledge flow is a single sum

over collaboration rates times collaborated university R&D stocks:

                   S JU ijt = ∑k =1 (JU ikt
                                 N
(7)                                     ijt / nikt ) Rikt −1 ,



The term JU ijtikt stands for counts of joint research in field i between firm j and

university k . The flow of knowledge is the sum of the sampling rate in parentheses times

the R&D stocks defined in (6). Since it is within-field (7) is restricted to field i . Again

we lag (7) in production function (3).

         Next consider knowledge flows within a firm. The firm’s basic research stock,

which enters this calculation at various points in time, depends on total R&D

expenditures in Compustat, since stocks of firm basic research do not exist, either by field

of science or in total. Because of this, we estimate the firm’s stock of basic research

across fields using bt −1 —the ratio of basic research to total R&D in the firm’s

primary industry—times Riτ , which is the stock of total R&D13.

         The knowledge flow from the firm’s past research is the product of the firm’s

basic research stock at various times by citation-sampling rates to its earlier papers:

12
  Tracing collaboration over time is beyond the research frontier at this time.
13
   The firm R&D stock is the deflated stock of R&D in millions of 1992 $ over the previous five years,
depreciated at 15 percent per year. We have these stocks going back as far as 1977 depending on the year
that the firm is first listed in Compustat. The industry ratios of basic research to total R&D are taken from
National Science Foundation (various years).


                                                          10
                 S ijtCS = ∑F =1
                           ∑τ                   (CS ijtFjτ / ∑F =1 nFjτ ) bt-1 R jτ
                            M        t −1                       M
                                         =1
(8)
                      = ∑τ (∑                    CS ijtFjτ / ∑F =1 nFjτ ) bt-1 R jτ
                            t −1         M                      M
                              =1         F =1


The term CS represents citations to papers written by the same firm. Following our

notation CS ijtFjτ citations are made by a firm’s papers in field i , firm j and time t to the

firm’s previous papers nFjτ in field F in year τ . Since firm j stays the same, (8) is a

double sum over fields and years cited. In the second line we use the citing field’s

weighted average citation rate. This is the number of citations from field i in year t to all

fields in year τ , divided by the number of papers in year τ across all fields. Unlike (5)

and (7) we use a weighted average because for firms, we lack R&D by field of science.

         The citation knowledge flow from other firms is similar to (8) except that cited

firms differ from citing. This requires a third sum over cited firms:

                 S ijtCI = ∑F =1    ∑ ∑τ                  (CI ijtFkτ / ∑F =1 nFkτ ) bt −1 R kτ
                            M        N             t −1                 M
                                     k =1
                                     k ≠i           =1
(9)
                      = ∑k =1       ∑τ          (∑F =1 CI ijtFkτ / ∑F =1 nFkτ ) bt −1 R kτ
                             N       t −1           M                    M

                             k ≠i        =1



We use CI for citations to other firms. Scientific papers written in field i , firm j , and

time t make CI ijtFkτ citations to papers nFkτ in field F , other firms k , and year τ . As in (8)

the ratio in parentheses on line two is the weighted average citation rate. We lag (8) and

(9) by one year in (3) to reduce issues of endogeneity.

      B. Aggregation to Higher Levels
      Besides the firm and field level we explore the production of science at the firm and

industry and field levels. Firm level analysis aggregates over fields within a firm.

Industry and field level analysis aggregates over firms, but leaves field intact.




                                                              11
     A firm level analysis checks for factors that are external to science fields but internal

to the firm. Such “quasi-external” effects might differ by source of knowledge. Another

reason for a firm level analysis is that we are better able to apply panel GMM at this

level, because a longer time series of data exists. One drawback, though, is that errors in

variables and in aggregation could weaken the fit of the equation.

     The knowledge production function for firm j is, to a first approximation,

                 ln(n jt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln( R jt −1 ) + ∑v =1 η v ln( S jvt −1 ) + v j + vt + e jt
                                                                 V
(10)

The notation resembles (3) except that knowledge flows are aggregated over fields.

        We also aggregate the data across firms in the same industry to undertake analysis

of the industry. The idea is to uncover knowledge effects that are external to firms but

internal to fields. The logic derives from Romer (1990), Griliches (1992), Jones (1995),

and Aghion and Howitt (1998): returns to knowledge could increase in passing from the

firm to the industry level, despite duplicative and business-stealing R&D.

        Knowledge production in field i and industry I is

                 ln(niI t ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln( RIt −1 ) + ∑v =1 η v ln( S iI vt −1 ) + vi + v I + vt + eiIt
                                                                  V
(11)

The notation is similar to (3) but the interpretation differs, because knowledge flows

include external effects that are held constant at the firm level14.

     III. Database
     The underlying data consist of 230 thousand papers of the top 200 U.S. R&D firms

and 2.43 million papers of the top 110 U.S. universities that were published during 1981-

1999. The data source is Thomson-Scientific in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The papers


14
  See Griliches (1992) for a proof. His discussion of aggregation from firms to industries uses common
prices for inputs and common production functions.


                                                        12
appear in 7,137 scientific journals. Each journal (and the papers in it) is assigned to a

single science field. The main alternative to this method is the assignment of papers

according to authors’ fields. But this information is all too often incomplete15.

     Top 200 firms make one million citations to papers of top 110 universities and 600

thousand citations to Top 200 papers including their own. We have seen that outside

knowledge flows involve citations to universities and other firms, and are “non-self”

citations. Conversely self-citations are evidence of inside knowledge flows from a firm’s

past research to its current research. Because firms very rarely collaborate in science, in

this paper collaboration consists of joint research between firms and universities16.

Indeed, university-firm collaborations cover 20 percent of firms’ scientific papers.

     In (5) and (7)-(9) we showed how to exploit citation and collaboration rates to

construct knowledge flows needed for production functions (3), (10), and (11). In

building the flows, we use data on R&D in universities by field from the NSF CASPAR

database; data on total R&D in firms from Compustat; and data on the ratio of basic to

total R&D by industry from National Science Foundation (various years).

     To undertake the empirical analysis we construct a panel of firms, fields, and years.

Firms are the top 200. Fields are biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering,

medicine, and physics: these cover 95 percent of all scientific papers in industry.

Although the data go back to 1981, we want to allow for histories of citation and

collaboration, so the time period that we use is 1988 to 1999. Fifteen firms drop out


15
   We attempted to assign all papers of Harvard University to science fields using address information.
About a third of the papers could not be assigned so we abandoned this method.
16
   Firm papers are 1/10 as many as university papers so collaborations between firms would be 1/10 as
many as university and firm collaborations. This assumes that collaboration propensities are the same. But
firm-firm collaborations are less common than this.


                                                   13
because R&D histories are missing. In addition data on fields do not exist in each year.

After missing values are removed the panel consists of up to six sciences, 185 firms with

adequate R&D histories, and up to 12 years of data over the period 1988-1999.

     Dependent variables are scientific papers as well as papers weighted by citations

during the first five years since, and including, publication. Independent variables

include field, firm, and time fixed effects. Also included are logarithms of the firm’s

basic research stock and the various knowledge flows defined in Section II. After

missing values are removed, the panel consists of 4,268 observations on papers and 2,495

observations on citation-weighted papers17.

     Tables 1 and 2 provide descriptive statistics. Table 1 shows means and standard

deviations of the principal variables. The mean number of papers is 28.4. Papers are

fractionally assigned, they are continuous, and they are not censored. And so we use

OLS to estimate production functions for papers rather than a count model (Hausman,

Hall and Griliches (1984))18. The mean of fractional citation-weighted papers is 71.9, but

a fourth of the observations are left-censored. We use Tobit analysis for this variable19.

     The rest of Table 1 presents means and standard deviations of basic research and the

knowledge flow variables (in millions of 1992 dollars), as well as their sampling rates.

The mean of the firm’s basic research stock—see (6)—is 145.5 million, reflecting the

amount of R&D in Top 200 firms.




17
   Since citations received cover the first five years after publication (including publication year) and since
the data end in 1999, citation-weighted papers end in 1995, leading to the drop in the observations.
18
   In the underlying calculations an institution gets half a paper or citation-weighted paper if it collaborates
with one other institution, a third of a paper if it collaborates with two others, and so on. This procedure
avoids multiple counting of papers across collaborating institutions.
19
   At the industry and field level none of the citation-weighted papers are zero so we use OLS at this level
of analysis.


                                                       14
       The mean university-firm citation rate is 0.006. The mean knowledge flow (5) is

41.0 million. The mean university-firm collaboration rate is 0.010; the mean knowledge

flow (7) is 2.9 million. The collaboration flow is smaller than the citation flow because

collaboration occurs much less frequently.

       Self-citation and firm-firm knowledge flows conclude Table 1. The mean self-

citation rate is 0.014, while the mean self-citation flow (8) is 41.8 million. The mean

firm-firm citation rate is 0.005, slightly less than the firm-university rate. But the mean

knowledge flow among firms (9) is 24.5 million, less than the university-firm flow, again

because firm-firm citation occurs less frequently.

   Table 2 presents total knowledge flows in columns and receiving fields and industry

groups in rows. The top panel shows flows by field. As one would expect, biology and

medicine account for more than half of university citation flows. Their share in

collaboration is less. Biology and medicine are less common in industry hence their

collaboration share is smaller. For the same reason, collaboration flows in computer

science and engineering exceed their share in citation flows.

   For related reasons citation flows within and between firms are distributed differently

than flows from universities. Compared with universities chemistry and physics are more

important in industry; biology and medicine are less important; and computer science and

engineering are again more important.

   Table 2’s bottom panel shows total knowledge flows by industry. One observes a

spike in drugs and biotechnology, with lesser spikes occur in petrochemicals, electrical

equipment, and software and distinct drop-offs that occur in metals, machinery, and

miscellaneous. These patterns follow the volume of science in an industry.




                                             15
   IV. Trends in Flows of Scientific Knowledge
   We now turn to trends in knowledge flows. The area graphs of Figure 1 display

shares in the total flow of scientific knowledge by type for each industry group. This

total is the sum over the four knowledge flows used in this study. Following equations

(5) and (7)-(9) they are: flows from citations to university papers; flows from

collaborations on university papers; flows from citations to papers of the same firm; and

flows from citations to papers of other firms. Use of shares allows us to see changes in

relative contributions over time and to compare these across industries and sciences.

   The six panels of Figure 1 represent: petrochemicals; drugs and biotechnology;

metals, machinery, and miscellaneous; computers, communications, and software;

electrical equipment and instruments; and transportation equipment. The share of

knowledge from university collaborations is larger in early years of the sample and is

shown by a downward pointing cusp. It results from the immediacy of collaboration

compared with the gradual build-up of citation. The share of knowledge flows from

university citations grows over time, as does the share of citation flows from other firms.

Over time, knowledge flows within the firm steadily lose share to outside flows.

   The university share (collaboration plus citation) grows fastest in drugs and

biotechnology; electrical equipment and instruments; and transportation equipment. The

share of other firms grows fastest in petrochemicals; drugs and biotechnology; and

electrical equipment and instruments. These differences follow variations in the use of

different sciences by industries as well as varying growth of R&D across sciences and

sectors. But Figure 1 as a whole clearly shows that firms draw an increasing share of

knowledge from external sources at the end of the 20th century. This agrees with the




                                            16
literature on open innovation, for example, Chesbrough (2003) and Von Hippel (2005).

           Figure 2 reports shares of knowledge flows by field. Decline in the within-firm

share is clear. It is smallest in chemistry and physics, where university research stocks

have grown more slowly, yet even here it occurs. The fact that chemistry and physics

are dominant sciences in petrochemicals; in metals, machinery, and miscellaneous; and in

computers, communications, and software (Adams and Clemmons, 2008, forthcoming)

helps to explain why the within-firm share drops less in these industries.

           The university share (citations plus collaborations) grows most in biology and

medicine, where university R&D has grown the fastest , and the same is true of computer

science. Across fields, collaboration flows again start off large, because collaboration

flows unfold more rapidly than citation flows. In addition, collaboration is more

important in computer science and engineering than elsewhere.

           The share of knowledge flows from other firms grows fastest in biology,

medicine, and computer science. But it occurs in all fields, where between-firm flows

grow relative to within-firm. This implies that knowledge sharing in industry has become

more important over time.

      V.      Findings
              A. Firm and Field Level Estimates
      Tables 3 and 4 are a basic set of estimates of the knowledge production function for

industrial science. Recall that this is

                  ln(nijt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η R ln( R jt −1 ) + ∑v =1 ηv ln( Sijvt −1 ) + vi + v j + vt + eijt
                                                                 V
(3)

The logarithm of papers or citation-weighted papers is on the left. On the right are field,

firm, and year fixed effects Z D′ and the logarithm of the firm’s basic research stock.



                                                        17
Under the summation sign are logarithms of citation and collaboration knowledge flows

from universities, the self-citation flow from the firm’s past research, and the citation

flow from other firms. The η i coefficients are elasticities, and the error components

complete the specification.

     Since knowledge flows sometimes equal zero we handle this by adding 0.001 to the

flows before taking logarithms. Given this adjustment, the elasticities are really averages

over zero and positive observations20.

     Table 3 reports regression findings with the logarithm of scientific papers as the

dependent variable. All equations use robust, clustered standard errors where firm and

science field are the clustering variable. Firm, field and year fixed effects are also

included. These are jointly significant at the 0.1 percent level.

     Equation 3.1 includes the firm’s basic research stock, whose elasticity is 0.124 and

significant. Equation 3.2 adds the self-citation knowledge flow. This cuts the basic

research elasticity to 0.061, while the self-citation elasticity is 0.195 and significant.

     Equation 3.3 adds the logarithm of citation flows from universities and other firms to

3.2. The basic R&D elasticity falls to 0.027 and becomes insignificant. While the self-

citation elasticity falls to 0.094, it remains significant. The university citation elasticity is

0.170 while the firm citation elasticity is 0.102 and both are significant. Accounting for

outside knowledge clearly detracts from the role of knowledge inside the firm.




20
  Another approach is to include a dummy indicator equal to 1 if the knowledge flow equals zero, and to
interact the dummy with the logarithm of each knowledge flow variable. When the interaction is included
along with the knowledge flow, the two terms together absorb the effect of a zero flow while the main term
by itself captures the effect of a positive flow. This is similar to a spline or polynomial regression across
zero and positive values, except that it does not force facets of the polynomial to join at corners. For this
approach see Adams and Clemmons (2008, forthcoming). For a brief introduction to splines see Greene
(2008), pages 111-112.


                                                     18
     Equation 3.4 adds university collaboration flows to 3.3. The basic research, self-

citation, and firm citation elasticities do not change. But the university citation elasticity

drops from 0.170 to 0.126, probably because collaboration substitutes for citation. All

knowledge flow elasticities are positive and significant, but the largest effect comes from

universities and other firms. Their combined elasticity is 0.343 whereas self-citation

contributes 0.084. Estimated returns to scale are given by the sum of the elasticities, or

0.427, suggesting diminishing returns21. And yet papers are not weighted by quality or

importance in Table 3.

     Table 4 gets at this by using citation-weighted scientific papers as the dependent

variable. To capture industrial relevance of a scientific paper the citations are forward

citations from other firms over the first five years of a paper’s existence22. The time

period is 1988-1995. The number of observations is 2,495 of which 586 are left-censored

at zero. We adopt random effects Tobit as the estimation method because the fixed

effects estimator is biased and inconsistent. This is because fixed effects cannot be

factored out of the Tobit likelihood, leading to an incidental parameters problem23.

     Elasticities in Table 4 tend to exceed those in Table 3. This is partly due to

differences in statistical method. In Table 3 the OLS expected marginal effect is the

elasticity. But in Table 4 it is the elasticity times the probability that the dependent

variable is not censored (Greene, 2008, pages 872-873).

     But the difference in marginal effects is not the main reason for the difference in

elasticities. In 4.1 the elasticity of the firm’s basic research stock is 0.562 but in 3.1 it is

21
   Differentiate equation (3) with respect to all variables X subject to the restriction that dX / X = c .
22
   Notice that citations received by the firm’s papers from other firms in the future are completely separate
from the citations that the firm makes to papers in the past. This is an important point, because it says that
citation-weighted papers are not subject to a hidden dependency.
23
   See for example, Cameron and Trivedi (2005), pages 800-801.


                                                      19
0.124. The difference in elasticities is 0.438. The probability that citation-weighted

papers are not censored is 0.765 ((2495-586)/2495) so the expected marginal effect in 4.1

is 0.765×0.562=0.430. The remaining difference is 0.306 (0.430-0.124), which accounts

for most of the raw difference, 0.438. The jump in the expected marginal effect is real;

some of this may be due to the use of random effects rather fixed effects.

    Equation 4.2 adds self-citation knowledge flows to 4.1. This cuts the basic research

elasticity from 0.562 to 0.474, while the self-citation elasticity is 0.180. Both are

significant. Equation 4.3 adds university and firm citation spillovers to 4.2. The

university and firm elasticities are 0.336 and 0.205. Including them reduces the basic

research and self-citation elasticities, though these remain significant.

    Equation 4.4 adds university collaboration. Its elasticity is 0.114 and it is significant.

Collaboration draws some effect away from the other variables, especially university

citation, though all elasticities remain positive and significant. As before, the sum of the

elasticities is an estimate of the returns to scale in production. This equals 1.04,

indicating constant returns and suggesting that part of the payoff to basic research partly

consists of higher quality science. But internal returns to scale are 0.43, indicating

diminishing returns when outside knowledge is held constant.

    Table 5 reports formal tests of equations 3.4 and 4.4. Equality of the university and

firm citation elasticities is rejected (line one) in favor of the alternative, that the

university elasticity is greater. The hypothesis that the university citation elasticity

equals the collaboration elasticity is also rejected (line two). The combined university

elasticity usually exceeds the firm citation elasticity (line three). At times (line four), the

combined university elasticity exceeds the total firm elasticity.




                                               20
    B. Robustness Checks
    Table 6 explores sensitivity of the elasticities to changes in sample and specification.

The method resembles that of Donohue and Levitt (2001). We use 3.4 as the baseline for

Panel A, which deals with papers; and 4.4 as the baseline for Panel B, which deals with

citation-weighted papers. For comparison the estimates from 3.4 and 4.4 form the top

lines of each panel. Columns are elasticities—standard errors are in parentheses. Rows

summarize the different experiments.

    Equation 6.1 allows for interactions between firm and field, while 6.2 allows for

interactions between firm and year. The elasticities fall slightly, yet all remain positive

and significant. In 6.3-6.5 science-intensive industries (drugs and biotechnology;

software and communications; or both) are dropped from the sample. Omitting these

could diminish the elasticities, but we find little effect. At the other extreme omitting

metals, machinery, and miscellaneous in 6.6 could increase the elasticities, but again

there is little effect. The estimates are stable across industries.

    Equation 6.7 tests the specification of the variables. Recall that the university citation

and collaboration flows (5) and (7) use field-specific R&D stocks for universities, while

the self-citation and firm-firm citation flows (8) and (9) use basic research stocks. Data

do not exist on firm basic research by field. In 6.7 we treat R&D stocks for universities

exactly like those for firms. But we find that this makes little difference. The estimates

in 6.7 are similar to the original estimates (Panel A, top). Apparently the decline in errors

in R&D cancels the specification error caused by summing over fields.

      The final line (6.8) replaces the knowledge flows with naïve mean sampling rates.

The results are significant, indicating that search effort plays a role in knowledge




                                               21
transmission. While this is consistent with the search hypothesis, observe the drop in R-

squared from 0.74 on the top line to 0.69 in equation 6.8. This implies that R&D stocks

play a role in addition to search effort.

     Panel B applies similar checks to citation-weighted papers with similar results24.

Dropping science-intensive sectors or dropping sectors that use little science (6.9-6.12)

matters little. Using the sum of university R&D over fields (6.13) has little effect on the

estimates. Using mean sampling rates in 6.14 yields significant elasticities, though the

drop in the log likelihood suggests that R&D stocks are important in addition to search.

     C. Firm Level Estimates
     We now expand the investigation to higher levels of aggregation. Recall that the firm

level equation is (10). Table 7 reports OLS estimates of (10) for papers in 7.1, and Tobit

estimates for citation-weighted papers in 7.2.

     All elasticities are positive and significant. The sum of the elasticities declines to

0.193 in 7.1, compared with 0.427 in the corresponding firm and field equation, 3.4. But

in 7.2 the reverse is true: the sum of the elasticities rises to 0.925 compared with 0.782 in

4.4. The firm’s basic research is significant in 7.1 while it is insignificant in 7.2. The

instability of basic research suggests that collinearity is present, probably with the self-

citation knowledge flow (8). And yet the self-citation elasticity is stable. Because of this

we emphasize self-citation and other knowledge flows in the remaining discussion.

     While it is hard to compare the firm level estimates with those at the firm and field

level, the relative contribution of university knowledge does increase at the firm level.

To see this note that in 7.1 the share of university citation and collaboration in all


24
  Since firm fixed effects produce inconsistent and biased estimates in Tobit analysis it is not worthwhile
to create interactions with field and year effects in Panel B, as was done in Panel A, in equations 6.1-6.2.


                                                     22
knowledge flows is (0.078 + 0.046) /(0.078 + 0.046 + 0.026 + 0.043) = 0.642 . But at the

firm and field level, in 3.4, the share of university citation and collaboration

is (0.126 + 0.096) /(0.126 + 0.096 + 0.084 + 0.088) = 0.546 .

         In 7.2 this share is (0.441 + 0.111) /(0.441 + 0.111 + 0.175 + 0.198) = 0.597 . But it

is (0.302 + 0.114) /(0.302 + 0.114 + 0.167 + 0.199) = 0.532 at the firm and field level in

4.4. We conclude that university knowledge flows are more important at the firm level.

         In Table 8 we undertake dynamic panel estimation of the production function

using panel GMM25. We include the logarithm of lagged scientific papers ln(n jt −1 ) as a

factor of production representing the persistence of discovery. The model is

         ln(n jt ) = β + Z D′ δ + η n ln(n j , t −1 ) + η R ln( R j , t −1 ) + ∑v =1 η v ln( S jv , t −1 ) + v j + vt + e jt
                                                                                  V
(12)

The error term e jt is serially uncorrelated. Differencing (12) to eliminate the fixed

effect v j introduces first order serial correlation in the transformed error e jt − e jt −1 , as well

as correlation with lagged papers ln(n j ,t −1 ) 26. Therefore, instruments for lagged papers are

provided by lags of t − 2 years and earlier. Instruments for differenced knowledge and

R&D variables in year t are levels of these variables dated t − 1 and earlier. More

instruments become available moving forward in time (Arellano and Bond 1991).

Moment conditions for products of the instruments with the errors are then combined in a

quadratic criterion and estimated using Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).

Because the data are differenced this method is known as Difference GMM.
25
   It is not clear how one would do GMM estimation of citation-weighted papers, for which 11 percent of
the observations are left censored at zero. Hence we omit GMM estimates for this variable.
26
   Blundell and Bond (1998, 2000) make a different assumption. The equation contains lagged papers as a
result of the correction for serially correlated errors in the original equation. The correction for this
introduces lagged dependent and exogenous variables. But in this article, lagged papers belong in the
original equation and serial correlation is absent until differencing to remove fixed effects introduces it, as
in Arellano and Bond (1991).


                                                              23
       One weakness of Difference GMM is that lagged instruments in levels may exhibit

low correlation with the differenced variables and create a problem of weak instruments.

Blundell and Bond (1998) show that, given certain initial conditions, additional moments

become available. The additional instruments are differences of the knowledge and R&D

variables in the levels equations. The additional level conditions are combined with the

differenced conditions to form a system, so this is known as System GMM. We estimate

(12) using Difference and System GMM27.

       Table 8 contains the results. Equations 8.1 and 8.2 use Difference GMM and assume

that the knowledge variables are exogenous or predetermined. The results are similar to

7.1 except for the inclusion of lagged papers ln(n j ,t −1 ) , which are insignificant. The

System GMM equation 8.3 fits better, consistent with Blundell and Bond (1998, 2000).

Lagged papers are significant, suggesting that past discovery does contribute to future

discovery. In general the knowledge elasticities in 8.3 rise compared with 8.1 and 8.2.

The Wald chi-Square statistics confirm the joint significance of the variables. To sum up,

the firm level results validate the importance of knowledge in scientific discovery. As

before, much of the knowledge that drives discovery comes from outside the firm28.




27
     We use Stata 10.0’s xtabond and xtdpdsys commands for Difference and System GMM respectively.
28
     We explored firm level estimates using spillovers in the style of Jaffe (1986). Here the equation is
(A)         ln(n jt ) = β + Z D′ δ + γ R ln( R jt −1 ) + γ U X Ujt −1 + γ I X Ijt −1 + ν j +ν t + e jt . The new terms
                                            U              I
consist of the two lagged variables X jt −1 and X jt −1 , which are “spillovers” from universities and industry.

                                          ∑
                                                N
The spillovers are defined as X jt =                   PijtK ln( RitK−1 ) K = U , I . Here PijtK is the un-centered
                                     K
                                                i =1
                                                i≠ j

correlation between vectors of lagged shares of papers by field of science in firms i, j . Estimates of (A)
perform poorly. Spillovers are insignificant in three out of four cases and the elasticities are sensitive to the
inclusion of zero spillovers.


                                                                24
C. Industry and Field Level Estimates
   Table 9 presents estimates of the industry, field, and year level production function

(11), where aggregation takes place over firms in the same industry. The regressions

report robust, clustered standard errors where clustering is by industry and field.

   Equations 9.1 and 9.2 report results for papers and citation-weighted papers. The

estimation method is OLS for both equations since at this level no observations are left

censored. In 9.1 the sum of the knowledge elasticities—the estimate of the returns to

scale—rises to 0.675, compared with the firm and field level estimate of 0.394 in 3.4. In

addition, the share of university citations and collaborations rises to 0.791 in 9.1

(0.534/0.675) compared with 0.564 in 3.4 (0.222/0.394). This is consistent with theories

which predict that spillover effects rise with aggregation (Romer, 1990; Griliches, 1992;

Jones, 1995; and Aghion and Howitt, 1998). This is especially true of university

knowledge, which may be less excludable than firm knowledge.

   Results for 9.2 are similar. In the industry and field equation 9.2 the sum of the

elasticities is 0.919. This is the expected marginal effect since no censoring occurs. But

in the firm and field equation 4.4 the sum of the knowledge flow elasticities is 0.782.

When multiplied by the probability not censored of 0.835 to yield the expected marginal

effect (Greene (2008), pages 872-873), the sum is 0.653. The knowledge elasticities

increase with aggregation. University flows assume a more prominent role, suggesting

larger externalities from university knowledge.

D. Marginal Products of Knowledge
   So far we have discussed elasticities of knowledge. These are percentage changes in

papers or citation-weighted papers per one percent change in knowledge. Here we would




                                             25
like to compute marginal products of the knowledge variables. Since knowledge is

expressed in millions, marginal products are expressed in papers per million.

   They are calculated as follows. Elasticities are defined as

(13)            η i = ∂ ln( Papers) / ∂ ln(S i ) = (∂ Papers / ∂ S i ) × (S i / Papers) .

Here S i is the knowledge flow from source i . Inverting (13) and evaluating at the mean

the marginal product is:

(14)             ∂ Papers / ∂S i = η i × ( Papers / S i )

where the bar indicates a mean. Table 10 reports marginal products computed using (14).

   Consider first the firm and field level (Panel A). The marginal product of university

collaboration is the largest, marginal products of university and firm citations are less;

and the self-citation marginal product is the smallest. This pattern would reflect an

equilibrium, if collaboration is more costly than citation (because collaboration commits

sizable resources), and if self-citation is less costly than external citation (because the

latter requires more search). At the firm level (Panel B) and the industry and field level

(Panel C), collaboration marginal products continue to be the largest and self-citation

marginal products the smallest. Marginal products of the firm citation spillover vary

relative to those of universities, suggesting rough equality. Also, industry and field

marginal products usually exceed firm and field level marginal products. This suggests

that the social product of research exceeds the private product.

   VI. Conclusion
   The evidence in this paper implies that industrial science progresses by drawing on

past scientific research inside and outside the firm, with most of the influence deriving

from outside research (Tables 3, 4, 7, and 9). Moreover, as time goes by, the share of



                                                   26
knowledge flows from outside the firm increases (Figures 1 and 2). In turn, the

contribution of outside scientific knowledge that is contributed by universities exceeds

that of other firms. This is particularly true when citation-weighted papers are the

dependent variable so that quality of scientific output is included. These findings survive

the inclusion of fixed effects for firms, fields, and years as well as variations in sample

and specification.

    At the firm level we use OLS and Tobit with lagged instruments for knowledge, and

for papers we use panel GMM to introduce additional lagged instruments. Both lend

support to the firm and field estimates but with a few differences, especially the GMM

equations (Table 8). The GMM results include lagged papers of the firm, with the goal of

capturing productive effects of previous discoveries, for which we find some, albeit

mixed support. As before knowledge remains positive and significant. There is evidence

that the university contribution rises relative to that of firms as aggregation proceeds from

the firm and field level to the firm level.

    At the level of the industry and field we find that the productive role of knowledge

again rises. These results are consistent with spillover effects of knowledge at higher

levels of aggregation (Romer, 1990; Griliches, 1992; Jones, 1995; Aghion and Howitt,

1998). At this level the role of university knowledge increases markedly, suggesting that

large spillovers from university research take place.

    The next step in this process of detection is to try to understand the role of science in

invention. Beyond this the role of science in commercialization of new products would

be interesting as well as challenging to explore.




                                              27
                                    References

Adams, James D., “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth,”

       Journal of Political Economy 98 (August 1990): 673-702.

______________, “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,”

       Journal of Economic Geography 2 (July 2002): 253-278.

______________, “Learning, Internal Research, and Spillovers,” Economics of

       Innovation and New Technology 15 (January 2006): 5-36.

______________, and J. Roger Clemmons, “Science and Industry: Tracing the Flow of

       Basic Research through Manufacturing and Trade,” Economics of Innovation

       and New Technology, 2008, forthcoming.

_________________________________, “Invention and Discovery in Science-Based

       Firms,” Working Paper, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY: November

       2007.

______________, and Adam B. Jaffe, “Bounding the Effects of R&D: an Investigation

       Using Matched Establishment-Firm Data,” RAND Journal of Economics 27

       (Winter 1996): 700-721.

______________, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Standing on Academic

       Shoulders: Measuring Scientific Influence in Universities,” Les Annals

       d’Economie et de Statistique, forthcoming.

_____________, Grant C. Black, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Scientific

       Teams and Institutional Collaborations: Evidence from U.S. Universities, 1981-

       1999,” Research Policy 34 (2005): 259-285.



                                          28
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt, Endogenous Growth Theory, 1st Edition,

       Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1998.

Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:

       Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of

       Economic Studies 58 (1991): 277-297.

Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, 2nd Edition, Cambridge,

       Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2004.

Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond, “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in

       Dynamic Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics 87 (1998): 115-143.

______________________________, “GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data: An

       Application to Production Functions,” Econometric Reviews 19 (2000): 321-340.

Branstetter, Lee, and Yoshiaki Ogura, “Is Academic Science Driving a Surge in

       Industrial Innovation? Evidence from Patent Citations,” NBER Working Paper

       11561, August 2005.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi, Microeconometrics: Methods and

       Applications, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

Chesbrough, Henry W., Open Innovation, Boston, Massachusetts: Harvard Business

       School Press, 2003.

Cohen, Wesley M., and Daniel A. Levinthal, “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces

       of R&D,” Economic Journal 99 (September 1989): 569-596.

_______________, Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh, “Links and Impacts: The

       Influence of Public Research on Industrial R&D,” Management Science 48

       (January 2002): 1-23.




                                          29
Donohue III, John J., and Levitt, Steven D., “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on

       Crime,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVI (May 2001): 379-420.

Evenson, Robert E., and Yoav Kislev, Agricultural Research and Productivity, New

       Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1975.

______________________________, “A Stochastic Model of Applied Research,”

       Journal of Political Economy 84 (April 1976): 265-282.

Greene, William H., Econometric Analysis, 6th edition, Pearson-Prentice-Hall: Upper

       Saddle River, New Jersey, 2008.

Griffith, Rachel, Stephen Redding, and John Van Reenan, “Mapping the Two Faces of

       R&D: Productivity Growth in a Sample of OECD Industries,” Review of

       Economics and Statistics 87 (November 2004): 883-895.

Griliches, Zvi, “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to

       Productivity Growth,” Bell Journal of Economics 10 (Spring 1979): 92-116.

___________, “The Search for R&D Spillovers,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics

       94 (Supplement 1991): 29-47.

Harhoff, Dietmar, Frances Narin, F. M. Scherer, and Katrin Vopel, “Citation Frequency

       and the Value of Patented Inventions,” Review of Economics and Statistics 81

       (August 1999): 511-515.

Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches, “Econometric Models for Count

       Data with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship,” Econometrica (July

       1984): 909-938.




                                          30
Hoddeson, Lillian H., “The Entry of the Quantum Theory of Solids into the Bell

       Laboratories, 1925-1940: A Case Study of the Industrial Application of

       Fundamental Science,” Minerva 18 (1980): 422-447.

_________________, “The Discovery of the Point Contact Transistor,” Historical

       Studies in the Physical Sciences 12 (1981): 41-76.

Hounshell, David A., and John Kenley Smith, Science and Corporate Strategy:

       DuPont R&D, 1902-1980, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Howitt, Peter, “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Differences,” American

       Economic Review 90 (September 2000): 829-846.

Jaffe, Adam B., “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from

       Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” American Economic Review 76

       (December 1986): 984-1001.

____________, “Real Effects of Academic Research,” American Economic Review 79

       (December 1989): 957-970.

____________, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “International Knowledge Flows: Evidence

       from Patent Citations,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 8

       (1999): 105-136.

Jones, Charles I., “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political

       Economy 103 (August 1995): 759-784.

Keller, Wolfgang, “Geographic Localization of International Technology Diffusion,”

       American Economic Review 92 (March 2002): 120-142.




                                          31
Klette, Tor Jakob, and Zvi Griliches, “Empirical Patterns of Firm Growth and R&D

       Investment: A Quality Ladder Model Interpretation,” Economic Journal 110

       (April 1998): 363-387.

______________, and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,”

       Journal of Political Economy 112 (October 2004): 986-1018.

Klevorick, Alvin K., Richard C. Levin, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter, “On

       the Sources and Significance of Interindustry Differences in Technological

       Opportunities,” Research Policy 24 (1995): 185-205.

Kortum, Samuel, “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica 65

       (November 1997): 1389-1419.

Mowery, David C., “The Boundaries of the U.S. Firm in R&D,” Naomi Lamoreaux and

       Daniel Raff, editors, Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives

       on the Organization of Enterprise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for

       NBER, 1995.

Narin, Francis, Kimberly S. Hamilton, and Dominic Olivastro, “The Increasing Linkage

       Between U.S. Technology and Public Science,” Research Policy 26 (1997): 317-

       330.

National Science Foundation, CASPAR (Computer-Aided Science Policy Analysis and

       Research) Database, Arlington, Virginia, www.nsf.gov/statistics

National Science Foundation, Funds for Performance of Basic Research, Applied

       Research, and Development, by Industry and Source of Funds, Arlington,

       Virginia, www.nsf.gov/statistics/iris, various years.




                                            32
Nelson, Richard R., “The Link between Science and Invention: The Case of the

       Transistor,” in Richard R. Nelson, editor, The Rate and Direction of Inventive

       Activity, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press for the National

       Bureau of Economic Research, 1962.

_______________, “The Role of Knowledge in R&D Efficiency,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 97 (August 1982): 453-370.

Peri, Giovanni, “Determinants of Knowledge Flows and Their Effect on Innovation,”

       Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (May 2005): 308-322.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy

       98 (October 1990, Part 2): S71-S102.

Scherer, F. Michael, “Interindustry Technology Flows in the United States,” Research

       Policy 11 (1982a): 227-245.

________________, “Interindustry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth,”

       Review of Economics and Statistics 64 (November 1982b): 627-634.

Stern, Scott, “Do Scientists Pay to be Scientists?” Management Science 50 (June 2004):

       835-853.

Trajtenberg, Manuel, “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of

       Innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics 20 (Spring 1990): 172-187.

Von Hippel, Eric, Democratizing Innovation, Boston: MIT Press, 2005.




                                          33
                                         Table 1
            Principal Variables for a Study of Scientific Discovery in Firms:
               Simple Statistics from a Panel of Firms, Fields, and Years


                              Variable                                      Mean            Standard
                                                                                            Deviation


Papers                                                                       28.4             60.0
Citation-Weighted Papers                                                     71.9             241.4

Basic Research Stock                                                        145.5             242.4

Science Citations, Firms to Universities
  Probability of Citation a                                                 0.006             0.008
  Citation Knowledge Flow, Universities b                                   41.0              101.6

Science Collaborations, Firms and Universities
  Probability of Collaboration a                                            0.010             0.024
  Collaboration Knowledge Flow, Universities b                               2.9               6.5

Science Citations, Firms to Themselves
  Probability of Citation a                                                 0.014             0.025
  Citation Knowledge Flow, Same Firm b                                      41.8              141.5

Science Citations, Firms to Other Firms
  Probability of Citation a                                                 0.005             0.011
  Citation Knowledge Flow, Other Firms b                                    24.5               58.7
                                                                a
Source: Thomson Scientific and authors’ calculations.               Mean probability is the average
of the citation or collaboration rate for each cell, denoted x i = (c ij / n j ) .
                                                                         _______
                                                                                     b
                                                                                         Knowledge
Flow is the citation or collaboration rate times the stock of R&D (in millions of 1992
dollars) by firm, field, and year, with a lag of one year. See the text for additional
discussion.




                                                  34
                                             Table 2
                         Total Knowledge Flows by Type, Field, and Industry


                                              Citation         Collaboration       Citation         Citation
           Field or Industry                 Knowledge          Knowledge        Knowledge        Knowledge
                                               Flow,               Flow,         Flow, Same       Flow, Other
                                             Universities       Universities        Firm             Firms


Fields of Science
   Biology                                      71,284             2,025           51,897            30,727
   Chemistry                                    18,820              810            43,420            25,136
   Computer Science                             8,153              1,759           4,734              3,043
   Engineering                                  21,657             4,201           13,545            11,571
   Medicine                                     43,429             2,903           27,217            12,123
   Physics                                      21,423             1,570           43,358            25,992

  Total Across Fields                          184,766            13,267           184,171          108,591

Industries
   Petrochemicals                              18,893              1,226           27,518           15,886
   Drugs and Biotechnology                     102,836             4,018           76,011           43,800
   Metals                                       1,446               184              806             1,149
   Machinery                                      748               178              333              928
   Computers                                    5,025               793             1,999            5,708
   Electrical Equipment                         11,805             1,718            4,809           10,893
   Transportation Equipment                      9,344             1,442            7,547            6,131
   Instruments                                  7,057               625            11,956            4,656
   Communications                              11,075              1,161           8,089            10,654
   Software and Business Services               14,980             1,744           42,314            7,546
   Misc. Agriculture & Manufacturing             1,556              177             2,789            1,242

  Total Across Industries                      184,766            13,267           184,171          108,591

        Notes: Except for rounding error totals equal sums across fields and industries. Total
        knowledge flow is the sum over citing and cited (collaborating and collaborated) cells of
        the citation/collaboration rate, times the cited R&D stock (in millions of 1992 dollars).
        The citation/collaboration rate c ij / n j is the number of citations from citing industry and
        industrial science field i to the cited academic science field j divided by the number of
        potentially cited papers.




                                                      35
                                      Table 3
             Firm and Field Level Science Production Functions, Papers
                (Robust, Clustered Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                                              Dependent Variable:
             Variable or Statistic                               Log (Papers)
            (Parameter in Italics)
                                                     3.1         3.2         3.3         3.4


Time, Field, & Firm Dummies Included                 Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
Test for Joint Significance of Dummies             206.8+++    37.7+++     87.4+++    156.1+++
Log (Basic Research Stock)                         0.124**     0.061*      0.027       0.033
                                                   (0.027)     (0.024)    (0.024)     (0.023)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow,                                             0.170**     0.126**
Universities) ( β univ,cit )                                              (0.015)     (0.013)
Log (Collaboration Knowledge Flow,                                                    0.096**
Universities) ( β univ,coll )                                                         (0.008)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Same Firm)                      0.195**     0.094**     0.084**
( β firm,selfcit )                                            (0.016)     (0.008)     (0.007)
Log (Citation Spillover, Other Firms)                                     0.102**     0.088**
( β firm,cit )                                                            (0.008)     (0.007)
Root Mean Squared Error ( σ )                       1.15        0.96        0.83        0.81
R2                                                  0.47        0.63        0.72        0.74

Notes: Number of observations is N=4,340. Time period is 1988-1999. Method is OLS.
Data are a panel of numbers of papers produced in a given firm, science, and year. **
Variable is significantly different from zero at the one percent level. * Variable is
significantly different from zero at the five percent level. +++ F-statistic is significant at
the 0.1 percent level.




                                              36
                                       Table 4
                  Firm and Field Level Science Production Functions,
                              Citation-Weighted Papers
                          (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                                               Dependent Variable:
             Variable or Statistic                        Log (Citation-Weighted Papers)
            (Parameter in Italics)
                                                    4.1         4.2       4.3         4.4


Time Dummies Included                              Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
Test for Joint Significance of Dummies             13.3         12.4    31.7+++     33.5+++
Log (Basic Research Stock)                        0.562** 0.474** 0.282**           0.258**
                                                  (0.075) (0.071) (0.065)           (0.064)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow,                                     0.336**           0.302**
Universities) ( β univ,cit )                                      (0.039)           (0.040)
Log (Collaboration Knowledge Flow,                                                  0.114**
Universities) ( β univ,coll )                                                       (0.029)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Same Firm)                      0.180** 0.167**       0.167**
( β firm,selfcit )                                            (0.026) (0.027)       (0.027)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Other Firms)                              0.205**     0.199**
( β firm,cit )                                                          (0.028)     (0.028)
σu                                                 4.20         3.53      2.21       2.09
σe                                                 2.65         2.71      2.83       2.84

Log Likelihood                                    -6,489.8 -6,465.5 -6,397.7       -6,390.2

 Notes: Number of observations is N0=2,719. Number of left censored observations is
 N1=448. Time period is 1988-1995. Method is Random Effects Tobit. Data are a panel
 of citation-weighted numbers of papers produced in a given firm, science field, and year.
 Citation weights are citations received by papers in their first five years. Papers
 published after 1995 have incomplete five-year histories and are omitted. σ u is the
 square root of the variance component for firm and science field. σ e is the square root of
 the variance component for firm, science field, and time. ** Variable is different from
 zero at the one percent level. * Variable is different from zero at the five percent level.
 +++
     F-statistic is significant at the 0.1 percent level.




                                             37
                                             Table 5
                            Wald Tests of Equality of the Coefficients,
                        Firm and Field Level Science Production Functions


          Description of Null                    Restriction                      F-Statistics for      F-Statistics for
             Hypothesis                     (Parameter in Italics)                    Papers               Citation-
                                                                                                          Weighted
                                                                                                            Papers

                                                                                      Eq. 3.4               Eq. 4.4


1. Equality of university and firm          β univ ,cit = β firm ,cit                  8.0++                  4.3+
   citation knowledge flow elasticities
2. Equality of university citation and      β univ ,cit = β univ ,coll                 4.1+                  12.0++
   collaboration knowledge flow
   elasticities
3. Equality of university citation plus     β univ ,cit + β univ ,coll =              67.3++                 16.4++
   collaboration knowledge flow
                                                 β firm ,cit
   elasticities, with firm citation
   knowledge flow elasticity
4. Equality of university citation plus     β univ ,cit + β univ ,coll =               8.8++                  0.7
   collaboration knowledge flow
                                                 β firm ,cit + β firm , selfcit
   elasticities with self-citation and
   firm knowledge flow elasticities

      Notes: ++ Equality restriction is rejected at the one percent level.             +
                                                                                           Equality restriction is
      rejected at the five percent level.




                                                        38
                                                    Table 6
                                Sensitivity of the Knowledge Flow Coefficients
                                         To Alternative Specifications
                                       (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                   Log ( Citation        Log             Log      Log (Citation   R2
        Specification               Knowledge       (Collaboration    (Citation    Knowledge
                                      Flow,          Knowledge       Knowledge    Flow, Other
                                   Universities)        Flow,        Flow, Same      Firms)
                                                     Universities)      Firm)


Panel A. Dependent Variable: Log (Papers),
Method: OLS a

Baseline Specification (Table        0.126**           0.096**        0.084**       0.088**       0.74
 3, Eq. 3.4)                         (0.013)           (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.007)

6.1 Allow Interactions of            0.037**           0.027**        0.020**       0.018**       0.89
  Field and Firm Dummies             (0.010)           (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.007)
6.2 Allow Interactions of            0.151**           0.106**        0.092**       0.099**       0.83
  Year and Firm Dummies              (0.020)           (0.012)        (0.009)       (0.010)
6.3 Drop Drug and                    0.099**           0.070**        0.071**       0.074**       0.72
  Biotechnology Firms                (0.012)           (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.008)
6.4 Drop Software and                0.131**           0.094**        0.082**       0.085**       0.74
  Communications Firms               (0.012)           (0.009)        (0.007)       (0.007)
6.5 Drop Drug and                    0.101**           0.068**        0.068**       0.069**       0.70
  Biotechnology, Software            (0.011)           (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.007)
  and Communications Firms
6.6 Drop Metals, Machinery,          0.130**           0.102**        0.087**       0.092**       0.74
  and Misc. Agriculture,             (0.014)           (0.009)        (0.008)       (0.008)
  Manufacturing Firms
6.7 Use Averaged University          0.137**           0.096**        0.084**       0.087**       0.74
  Citation and Collaboration         (0.014)           (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.007)
  Knowledge Flows
6.8 Use Naïve Citation and           0.249**           0.171**        0.379**       0.306**       0.69
  Collaboration Probabilities        (0.034)           (0.023)        (0.035)       (0.037)
  instead of knowledge flows




                                                       39
                                                    Table 6
                                Sensitivity of the Knowledge Flow Coefficients
                                         To Alternative Specifications
                                       (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                       Log              Log              Log        Log (Citation        Log
        Specification               (Citation      (Collaboration     (Citation      Knowledge        Likelihood
                                   Knowledge        Knowledge        Knowledge      Flow, Other
                                      Flow,            Flow,         Flow, Same        Firms)
                                   Universities)    Universities)       Firm)


Panel B. Dependent Variable: Log (Citation-Weighted
Papers), Method: Random Effects Tobit b

Baseline Specification (Table        0.302**          0.114*           0.167**         0.199**         -6,390.2
 4, Eq. 4.4)                         (0.040)          (0.029)          (0.027)         (0.028)

6.9 Drop Drug and                    0.269**          0.115**          0.162**         0.202**         -5,332.5
  Biotechnology Firms                (0.044)          (0.033)          (0.030)         (0.032)
6.10 Drop Software and               0.338**          0.091**          0.155**         0.195**         -5,929.3
  Communications Firms               (0.042)          (0.030)          (0.028)         (0.029)
6.11 Drop Drug and                   0.304**          0.087**          0.149**         0.196**         -4,872.1
  Biotechnology, Software and        (0.047)          (0.034)          (0.032)         (0.034)
  Communications Firms
6.12 Drop Metals, Machinery,         0.288**          0.119**          0.138**         0.194**         -5,738.8
  and Misc. Agriculture,             (0.040)          (0.030)          (0.027)         (0.028)
  Manufacturing Firms
6.13 Use Averaged University         0.348**          0.138**          0.162**         0.196**         -6,380.2
  Citation and Collaboration         (0.041)          (0.029)          (0.026)         (0.028)
  knowledge flows
6.14 Use Naïve Citation and          0.353**           0.124           0.340**         0.438**         -6,450.1
  Collaboration Probabilities        (0.098)          (0.069)          (0.071)         (0.087)
  instead of knowledge flows

         Notes: a Robust, clustered standard errors appear in parentheses. All equations include
         fixed effects for firm, field, and year. b Equations include random effects or variance
         components for firm and field ( σ u ); and for firm, field, and year observations ( σ e ).




                                                      40
                                        Table 7
                        Firm Level Science Production Functions
                           (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


              Variable or Statistic                            Dependent Variable:
             (Parameter in Italics)
                                                    Log (Papers) a        Log (Citation-
                                                                         Weighted Papers) b
                                                          7.1                   7.2


 Statistical Method                                 Fixed Effects          Random Effects
                                                        OLS                    Tobit
 Time Period                                         1988-1999               1988-1995
 Dummies Included                                    Firm, Year                 Year
 Test for Joint Significance of Dummies               282.5+++                 19.6++

 Log (Basic Research Stock)                            0.100**                  0.087
                                                       (0.026)                 (0.071)
 Log (Citation Knowledge Flow,                         0.078**                 0.441**
 Universities) ( β univ,cit )                          (0.019)                 (0.060)
 Log (Collaboration Knowledge Flow,                    0.046**                 0.111**
 Universities ( β univ,coll )                          (0.012)                 (0.043)
 Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Same                    0.026**                 0.175**
 Firm) ( β firm,selfcit )                              (0.009)                 (0.033)
 Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Other                   0.043**                 0.198**
 Firms) ( β firm,cit )                                 (0.012)                 (0.044)
 Number of Observations                                 1,486                    928
 Left Censored Observations                                0                     101
 Root Mean Squared Error ( σ )                          0.493                     --
 R2                                                      0.93                     --
 σu                                                        --                    1.32
 σe                                                        --                    2.27
 Log Likelihood                                            --                  -2,058.8
Notes: a OLS specification uses robust, clustered standard errors where the clustering
variable is the firm. ** Variable is significantly different from zero at the one percent
level. * Variable is significantly different from zero at the five percent level. +++ Statistic
is significant at the 0.1 percent level. ++ Statistic is significant at the one percent level.



                                              41
                                                 Table 8
                  Dynamic Panel Data Estimates, Firm Level Science Production Functions
                                    (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


              Variable or Statistic                                   Dependent Variable: Log (Papers)
             (Parameter in Italics)
                                                           8.1                      8.2                    8.3


Statistical Method                                 Difference GMM            Difference GMM a       System GMM b

Assumption on Knowledge Flows                          Exogenous               Predetermined        Predetermined

Time Period                                            1988-1999                1988-1999             1988-1999
Dummies Included                                         Year                     Year                  Year

Log (Lagged Scientific Papers)                           0.127                     0.050                 0.245**
                                                        (0.085)                   (0.119)                (0.044)
Log (Basic Research Stock)                               0.045                     0.198                 0.212**
                                                        (0.040)                   (0.217)                (0.076)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow,                           0.091**                   0.101**                0.126**
Universities) ( β univ,cit )                            (0.022)                   (0.031)                (0.018)
Log (Collaboration Knowledge Flow,                      0.051**                    0.026                 0.044**
Universities) ( β univ,coll )                           (0.009)                   (0.028)                (0.015)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow , Same                     0.043**                   0.043**                0.052**
Firm) ( β firm,selfcit )                                (0.011)                   (0.016)                (0.013)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Other                     0.053**                   0.041*                 0.063**
Firms) ( β firm,cit )                                   (0.013)                   (0.019)                (0.016)
Number of Observations                                    1,210                    1,210                  1,210
Number of Firms                                            151                      151                    151
                                                                +++                    +++
Wald χ (degrees of freedom= 15)
        2                                               264.4                     440.7                  929.6+++
Test for autocorrelation of order 1                     -3.88+++                  -3.01++                -4.89+++
Test for autocorrelation of order 2                       1.26                     0.75                   1.78


            Notes: a Instruments in the differenced equation include lag 2 and greater on papers, and
            lags 1 to 4 on knowledge flows. b Instruments in the differenced equation are as above.
            Instruments in the level equation are differences in papers and the knowledge flows. **
            Variable is significantly different from zero at the one percent level. * Variable is
            significantly different from zero at the five percent level. +++ Statistic is significant at the
            0.1 percent level. ++ Statistic is significant at the one percent level.


                                                           42
                                          Table 9
               Industry, Field, and Year Level Science Production Functions
                   (Robust, Clustered Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                                                  Dependent Variable:
              Variable or Statistic
             (Parameter in Italics)                    Log (Papers) a         Log (Citation-
                                                                             Weighted Papers) b

                                                            9.1                         9.2


Statistical Method                                          OLS                     OLS
Time Period                                             1988-1999                1988-1995
Dummies Included                                    Industry, Field, Year           Year
Test for Joint Significance of Dummies                     11.3+++                 17.4++

Log (Basic Research Stock)                                 0.262                   -0.215
                                                          (0.157)                 (0.201)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Universities)               0.374**                 0.290**
( β univ,cit )                                            (0.063)                 (0.116)
Log (Collaboration Knowledge Flow,                        0.160**                  0.300*
Universities)                                             (0.040)                  (0.117)
( β univ,coll )
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Same Firm)                  0.054*                  0.147**
( β firm,selfcit )                                        (0.026)                 (0.023)
Log (Citation Knowledge Flow, Other Firms)                0.087*                   0.182*
( β firm,cit )                                            (0.035)                  (0.084)

Number of Observations                                      728                     485
Root Mean Squared Error ( σ )                              0.672                   1.416
R2                                                          0.85                    0.75

   Notes: Data are a panel of industries, firms, and years. a Time period is 1988-1999.
   Standard Errors are robust and clustered by industry-field. b Time period is 1988-1995.
   ** Variable is different from zero at the one percent level. * Variable is different from
   zero at the five percent level. +++ Statistic is significant at the 0.1 percent level.
   ++
      Statistic is significant at the one percent level.




                                               43
                                     Table 10
                      Marginal Products of the Knowledge Flows




                                               Knowledge Flow,



                                                                 Knowledge Flow,



                                                                                   Knowledge Flow,



                                                                                                     Knowledge Flow,
                                                                 Collaboration




                                                                                                     Other Firms
                                               Universities



                                                                 Universities
             Level of the Analysis




                                                                                   Same Firm
                And Statistic




                                               Citation




                                                                                   Citation



                                                                                                     Citation
    Panel A. Firm and Field
     Table 3, Eq. 3.4: Papers (Mean=28.4)
      Mean (Mill. $)                         41.0      2.9                         41.8              24.5
      Elasticity                             0.126    0.096                        0.084             0.088
      Marginal Product (Papers/Mill. $)      0.087    0.940                        0.057             0.102
     Table 4, Eq. 4.4: Cite-Weighted Papers (Mean=71.9)
      Mean (Mill. $)                         35.6      2.7                         42.0              22.2
                 a
      Elasticity                             0.302   0.114                         0.167             0.199
      Marginal Product (Papers/Mill. $)      0.509   2.535                         0.239             0.538

    Panel B. Firm
     Table 7, Eq. 7.1: Papers (Mean=86.1)
      Mean (Mill. $)                         124.2    8.9                          123.9             73.0
      Elasticity                             0.078   0.046                         0.026             0.043
      Marginal Product (Papers/Mill. $)      0.054   0.445                         0.018             0.051
     Table 7, Eq. 7.2: Cite-Weighted Papers (Mean=218.9)
      Mean (Mill. $)                         106.0    8.1                          124.9             65.3
      Elasticity b                           0.441   0.111                         0.175             0.198
      Marginal Product (Papers/Mill. $)      0.911   2.673                         0.273             0.591

    Panel C. Industry and Field
     Table 9, Eq. 9.1: Papers (Mean=177.0)
      Mean (Mill. $)                         106.0    18.3                         254.4             150.0
      Elasticity                             0.374   0.160                         0.054             0.087
      Marginal Product (Papers/Mill. $)      0.625   1.548                         0.038             0.103
    Table 9, Eq. 9.2: Cite-Weighted Papers (Mean=420.9)
      Mean (Mill. $)                         203.8    15.6                         239.9             125.7
      Elasticity                             0.290   0.300                         0.147             0.182
      Marginal Product (Papers/Mill. $)      0.599   8.094                         0.258             0.609

Notes: a Elasticity is the Tobit estimate shown in equation 4.4, Table 4, multiplied by
0.835, the probability that the data are not censored. b Elasticity is the estimate shown in
equation 7.2, Table 7, multiplied by 0.891, the probability that the data are not censored.



                                             44
45
46
47
