NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVIDENCE FROM MATERNITY LEAVE EXPANSIONS OF THE IMPACT OF
MATERNAL CARE ON EARLY CHILD DEVELOPMENT
Michael Baker
Kevin Milligan
Working Paper 13826
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13826

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2008

We thank Byron Lee and Josh Lewis for excellent research assistance. We received many helpful comments
from presentations at the NBER Summer Institute, the AEA meetings, UBC empirical lunch, McMaster
University, Rand, and UC Davis. We also gratefully acknowledge the research support of SSHRC
(Baker Grant , #410-2005-0486, Milligan Grant #410-2002-0299). Finally, we thank the staffs of the
Toronto and B.C. Research Data Centres for their technical support. This paper represents the views
of the authors and does not necessarily reflect the views of Statistics Canada or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Michael Baker and Kevin Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Evidence From Maternity Leave Expansions of the Impact of Maternal Care on Early Child
Development
Michael Baker and Kevin Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 13826
February 2008
JEL No. J13,J22
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of maternal care on early child development using an expansion in Canadian
maternity leave entitlements. Following the leave expansion, mothers who took leave spent between
48 and 58 percent more time not working in the first year of their children's lives. We find that this
extra maternal care primarily crowded out home-based care by unlicensed non-relatives, and replaced
mostly full-time work. However, the estimates suggest a weak impact of the increase in maternal care
on indicators of child development. Measures of family environment and motor-social development
showed changes very close to zero. Some improvements in temperament were observed but occurred
both for treated and untreated children.

Michael Baker
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7 CANADA
and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca
Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
CANADA V6T1Z1
and NBER
kevin.milligan@ubc.ca

1.0 Introduction
Is parental or non-parental care best for children? Conflicting answers to this question
fuel the so-called ‘mommy wars’ over maternal work when children are young. One source of
the lack agreement is that non-parental care appears to have different impacts in different
populations. Karoly et al. (1998) summarize the compelling evidence from social experiments
showing that high quality early childhood care interventions can improve cognitive outcomes for
children at risk. On the other hand, recent evidence from samples including all types of children
suggests that non-parental care can lead to behavioral problems and that maternal employment in
a child’s first year of life can lead to delayed cognitive development.
Commentators have pointed out that the credibility of the inferences in this literature
varies considerably owing to differences in empirical design. Perhaps the strongest evidence is
for at-risk children, because experimental designs have featured randomization into high quality
non-parental care. However, current policy debate centers not on targeted interventions for atrisk children, but on universal programs such as pre-school for 4 year olds, extensions of
maternity leave in the US, or universal child care programs for infants in Canada. There is much
less experimental evidence for broader populations of children, so inferences lean more heavily
on observation: comparisons of children whose parents have chosen non-parental care to children
whose parents have not.
In this paper we provide new evidence on the developmental impact of maternal care
based in a significant increase in maternity/parental leave in Canada. At the end of 2000, the
duration of job-protected, partially-compensated, maternity leave increased from roughly six
months to one year in most provinces. Many mothers were thereby provided with an opportunity
to significantly extend the period they remained at home post-birth. Importantly, this episode

1

allows a researcher to study observationally equivalent women having children in neighboring
years under starkly different maternity leave policy regimes. This provides a source of
exogenous variation in the exposure to maternal care for a wide spectrum of children.
Our results on child development rest on the strength of this first-stage relationship
between maternity leave and time at home. Following Baker and Milligan (2005, 2007) and
Hanratty and Trzcinski (2006), we show that the increase in maternity leave led to a very
substantial increase in the amount of maternal care Canadian children received in the first year of
life. For mothers who were eligible for leave, we estimate that the amount of maternal care their
children received in the first year of life rose by over 3 months, an increase of roughly 50 percent
over the pre-reform average. Importantly, this increase in maternal care led to a large reduction
in maternal full-time work. Previous research identifies a negative link between full time
maternal work in a child’s first year of life and their subsequent cognitive development.
Of course, any effect of an increase in maternal care depends on what type of care is
displaced. We find the increase in maternal care is associated with a large decline in unlicensed
care provided by a non-relative in someone else’s home. Past research has raised questions about
the quality of this type of care, so the contrast to maternal care is clear.
To investigate the impact of this significant change in the care of young infants, we draw
on the National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (NLSCY). The NLSCY is a
nationally representative survey that tracks the behavioral, social, emotional and cognitive
development of children. We currently observe children born after the change in maternity leave
up to age 29 months. At these ages the NLSCY provides a variety of parent-reported
information. These include measures of parenting, temperament, social/motor development, the
achievement of milestones, family function and children’s social and family environment. While
some of these indicators are related to subsequent cognitive performance, we also note that they
2

may be important for adult economic success in their own right (Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua
2006).
We find that the reform led to a significant increase in the amount of maternal care
children received, with corresponding decreases in full time maternal employment and
unlicensed non-relative care in someone else’s home. The impact of these changes on our
measures of development, however, is negligible. The effects on measures of family
environment and motor-social development are very close to zero. Some improvements in
temperament are observed but appear to reflect common trends across all mothers rather than
only mothers eligible for the leave.

2.0 Previous research on care at young ages
For the vast majority of mothers, work and non-parental care go hand in hand when their
children are very young. Therefore a focus of the literature is on the relationship between child
development and the mother’s decision to work when their child is an infant.
The National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY) is a source for much of the research
on this topic in the United States. The majority of studies on early maternal employment
(specifically, the first year of life) using these data find negative effects on later cognitive
outcomes, although there is some dissent (see Waldfogel et al. 2002; Bernal and Keane 2006).
This conclusion is supported by analysis of the NICHD-SECC data (Brooks-Gunn et al. 2002),
which concludes that full-time maternal employment in the ninth month of life has negative
cognitive effects that manifest by 3 years of age. As a point of contrast, studies using various
other data generally find no negative impact of early maternal employment on the outcomes of

3

school aged children (see Brooks-Gunn et al. 2002).1 Nevertheless, in her survey of this
literature Waldfogel (2006) concludes that “…the research on this point is now quite clear.
Children do fare better on average if their mothers do not work full-time in the first year of life,
although… the effects vary by context” (p.45).
Complementary to this research are studies of the effects of non-parental care on other
dimensions of development. Magnuson et al. (2007), Baker et al. (2005), Loeb et al. (2007) and
the research summarized in Belsky (2006) suggest that larger and longer exposures to nonparental care lead to problem behavior: disobedience, defiance and aggression. The risk appears
to grow both in the cumulative duration (months) and intensity (hours per week) of exposure in
the first years. Loeb et al. (2007) finds that entry into non-parental care before the age of one can
have particularly detrimental effects.
In any discussion of these results an outstanding issue is the quality of non-parental care.
Measures of child care quality are evolving, and often expensive to collect. The data that exist
suggest that while higher quality child care can enhance the cognitive benefits of non-parental
care for older children (Belsky 2006), it does not attenuate any negative effect of early maternal
employment (Brooks-Gunn et al. 2002). Furthermore, quality does not appear to play a strong
mediating role in the relationship between exposure to non-parental care and behavior (Belsky
2006).
Against this background, our study has a number of attractive features. First, the change
in maternal care we observe spans the 9 months-old milestone where previous research has found
a relationship between maternal employment and cognitive development. Second, we have
access to a relatively rich description of the children’s environment. Finally, the variation in

1

These conclusions contrast with studies of the effects of pre-kindergarten that more consistently show positive
cognitive effects. See for example, Magnuson et al. (2007).

4

maternal care we observe as a result of the maternity leave reform is less likely correlated with
other determinants of children’s outcomes. In many of the previous studies cited, the inference
is observational rather than causal, and so may be biased by unobservable background factors
that differ systematically across families. Progress in the literature is marked by new data sets
(e.g., the NICHD SECC) that gather more extensive menus of observable background factors in
the hope that the additional factors can contain any selection effects. In contrast, our study makes
use of policy-induced variation in maternal care. While more likely free of omitted variables
biases, our inference is limited to mothers whose choice of time at home post-birth responds to
changes in maternity mandates and compensation.

3.0 Maternity Leave Policy
Jurisdiction over maternity leaves in Canada is split between the federal and provincial
governments. Provincial labor standards legislation governs the amount of time that mothers
may stay at home post-birth with a right to return to their old job. The legislation typically sets
eligibility based on a minimum period of pre-birth employment, bans dismissal due to
pregnancy, mandates a maximum duration for leave, mandates a right to return to the previous or
a similar job, and specifies which terms of employment are preserved during the leave. In no
province is the employer obligated to pay an employee while on this leave.
Income replacement during the leave is funded by the federal government. Within the
federal Employment Insurance (EI) system there is a program of maternity/parental (henceforth
maternity) leave benefits that mothers may claim when their earnings are interrupted by giving
birth. Eligibility and benefit entitlement are determined by the same rules used to calculate
unemployment benefits. Benefits are based on earnings averaged over the 6 months preceding
the claim. In the period we examine, the replacement rate is 55% up to a cap of $39,000, which

5

implies a maximum weekly benefit of $412.50 per week. A two week waiting period with zero
benefits lowers the effective replacement rate over the full span of the leave. Eligibility is based
on a minimum of 600 hours of employment in the 12 months preceding a claim. Claiming these
benefits does not trigger any job protection, and some mothers will not return to work after
completing a claim.
The reform we analyze originates in the federal EI system. Prior to December 31, 2000,
the duration of maternity leave benefits was a maximum of 25 weeks: 15 weeks that could only
be claimed by the mother, and a further 10 weeks that could be split by the mother and the father
(with no restrictions on how these 10 weeks were split). Starting with children born on
December 31, 2000, the total duration of benefits was increased to 50 weeks as the number of
weeks of benefits that could be claimed by either the mother or father rose to 35 weeks. The
reform also included a reduction of the required hours of employment for eligibility from 700 to
600.
This change in the rules for maternity leave benefits triggered a corresponding change in
the duration of job-protected maternity leave in the provinces’ labor standards legislation. Prior
to December 31, 2000, the duration of the job protection ranged from a low of 18 weeks in
Alberta to a high of 70 weeks in Quebec. With the change in the EI rules all provinces except
Quebec changed their labor standards legislation to increase the duration of job protection to at
least 52 weeks. Most provinces made the change coincident with the change in the EI rules.
Alberta (February 7, 2001) and Saskatchewan (June 14, 2001) changed their legislation early in
2001. These changes are summarized in Figure 1.
In addition to any change in maternal care, this reform may also have changed family
income because the EI replacement rate is less than 1.0. In some simple simulations, however,
we find that on an after-tax/transfer, after childcare cost basis, the effective replacement rate is
6

close to 1.0 for a median earning woman. For women earning less than the median, the EI
benefit (which depends on previous earnings) is lower but still may yield higher after-tax and
after paid childcare income than work. For higher earning women, the effective replacement rate
falls beneath 1.0, meaning that they may suffer an income shortfall in the leave extension period
relative to the pre-reform situation. We note that these high earnings women are more likely to
work for employers that have a program to top up EI benefits to a higher fraction of pre-birth
earnings.

4.0 Data
Our analysis is based on data from the National Longitudinal Study of Children and
Youth (NLSCY). The NLSCY is a nationally representative survey of children that has
complete cross-sectional coverage of children aged 0 to 5 over six waves of biannual data
starting in 1994-95 and ending in 2004-05. We focus on the children born in years surrounding
the reform; in years 1998 through 2003. We can observe these children at ages 6 through 29
months, although certain outcomes are only available for specific age ranges. Below, we describe
the measures available to us, and discuss the validity and use of these measures.
The NLSCY includes a wide variety of indicators of child development, home and care
environments, school performance and health. At the ages that we observe the treated children
both pre cognitive and non cognitive measures are available, but not direct cognitive
assessments.2
A first set of variables allows us to relate the policy change to the children’s care
environment. For this purpose, there are variables recording the child’s age when the mother

2

The first cognitive testing in the NLSCY is performed at 48 months of age.

7

returned to work, and some limited characteristics of the employment. There are also detailed
questions on the types of non-maternal care a child receives, including hours per week and
whether the provider is licensed.
The next set of variables describes the child’s development. Many of these variables are
available only for particular age ranges. For the ages we study, there are measures of
temperament, motor/social development, family function, parenting, parent/child activities and
the achievement of milestones. All are parent-reported and obtained through the interview
process. Several of these measures have been used in previous research. The Motor and Social
Development (MSD) scale (Baker et al. 1993) was developed at the US National Center for
Health Statistics for the general measure of early child development in large, population-based
surveys. It uses questions with high validity and reliability from leading measures of child
development (Denver Prescreening Developmental Questionnaire, Bayley Scales of Infant
Development and Gesell Development Schedules). This scale has also been used in the US
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, the British National Child Development Survey, and the
US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III. The parenting scales, one measuring
positive interaction and another measuring practices that provoke aversion, were developed at
Chedoke-McMaster Hospital, McMaster University, based in part on the Parent Practices Scale
of Strayhorn and Weidman. These scales are also used by the Fast-Track project, an
experimental intervention in the US to understand anti-social behavior among young children.
The general functioning subscale of the McMaster Family Assessment Device (FAD) is used to
measure family (dys)function. The FAD has been used in numerous studies, translated into
seven languages and has been extensively evaluated. The NLSCY also includes measures of the
ages at which significant milestones are achieved (first steps, first words etc.). The questions
about the child’s temperament were taken from the Ontario Health Study and the Montreal
8

Longitudinal Survey. These questions are based on the Child Behavior Checklist of Achenbach
and the Social Behavior Questionnaire. Finally, we also draw on questions about non-school
activities of the parent and child and questions about literacy, focusing on how often parents read
stories, teach new words and do play activities with their children.
Parent-reported data may suffer from systematic biases. For example, a parent who stays
home with a child may have a greater chance of becoming aware of a behavior since more time
is spent with the child than if the parent worked. However, reviews of the validity of parentreported data typically suggest they are informative about the underlying object they are intended
to measure and often display strong correlation with professional assessment ( De Los Reyes and
Kazdin 2005; Rydz et al. 2005). Furthermore, there does not appear to be clear evidence that any
bias in parents’ reports of their children’s development is correlated with their characteristics (De
Los Reyes and Kazdin 2005).

5.0 Empirical Framework and Identification
In this section we introduce our empirical framework, describe various sample omissions
that we make to achieve identification, and discuss some issues of interpretation and estimation.
5.1 Empirical Framework
Our inference is based on comparisons of average outcomes by birth cohort. We begin
with the estimating equation
(1)

y i = X i β + ∑ γ t YOBti + u i ,
t

9

where y is the outcome of interest for individual i, X are conditioning variables and YOB denotes
year of birth.3 The γ t , t ∈ {1999,2000,...,2003}, provide birth cohort-specific estimates of the
conditional mean of y, relative to the excluded year 1998.
If the reform led causally to a change in a given outcome, we expect that the estimates of

γ t will display a distinct pattern before and after the program change. The change in maternity
leave is in effect for the birth cohorts 2001 through 2003, and so we anticipate a discrete change
in the estimates between the cohorts 2000 and 2001. All else equal, we would also expect the
estimates for cohorts 1998 through 2000 and for 2001 through 2003 to be relatively similar in the
absence of any other factor driving changes in the dependent variable in these years.
A visual inspection of the estimates of γ t , which we report for each outcome variable in
the appendix, provides an informal check of the coherence of the data to the hypothesized
pattern. It also allows us to investigate counterfactual policy reforms (for example, supposing
the change in maternity leave occurred at the end of 1999 or 2002, instead of at the end of 2000)
as a robustness check for our inferences. Once these checks are satisfied, we then summarize the
impact of the reform more concisely by estimating the equation
(2)

y i = X i β + φPOSTi + ε i ,

where POST equals 1 for cohorts born after the reform (2001 or later). POST provides an
estimate of the impact of the reform, as the difference in the conditional mean of y between
cohorts born before the change in the maternity leave and cohorts born after.

3

The control variables (X) include dummy variables for male children, single month of child’s age, province, city
size, mothers’ and fathers’ education (4 categories), age (6 categories) and immigrant status, and the presence of up
to 2 older or younger siblings. For some dependent variables we also report a specification that adds the month of
birth provincial unemployment rate as a control for local labor market conditions. Because the interview process
spans several months, we use the average unemployment rate for the months September through May in the relevant
years.

10

5.2 Identification and Interpretation
The success of this strategy, of course, is not assured. Generally, conditional on the Xs
the estimate of POST will pick up any unobserved variable that is correlated with it and the
dependent variable. For example, underlying trends in the outcome measures or other changes in
the developmental environment of the children could contaminate our estimate of POST. We can
anticipate some of these unobserved variables and control for them through adjustments to our
sample. We have identified two policy changes of importance, either of which could potentially
affect family outcomes or child development and therefore damage the credibility of our
inferences.
The first is the extension of the subsidized childcare component of Quebec’s family
policy to 0 and 1 year olds in the fall of 2000. Under this extension, children of these ages
became eligible for heavily subsidized childcare, at $5 per day. Baker et al. (2005) report that
the introduction of subsidized childcare in Quebec over the period 1997-2000 had a large impact
on the functioning of families with young children, and the behavioral development of these
children. To avoid confusing any impact of the change in maternity leave with this change in the
price of non-parental care, we omit observations from Quebec from our sample.
The second significant change in policy is the increase to the National Child Benefit, a
benefit paid to low-income families with some attachment to the labor force. For example, the
annual benefit for single child increased from $605 in 1998 to $1293 in 2002. Milligan and
Stabile (2007) show that this change had a substantial impact on the employment of single
mothers. Because the benefit is income–tested at the family level, it had a much smaller effect
on two parent families.4 As a result, we omit observations for single-parent families from our
4

In 1998, the National Child Benefit was reduced to zero for family incomes above $25,921. By 2002, this
threshold had reached $32,960. A much smaller proportion of two-parent families fall under these thresholds.

11

analysis sample. It is worth noting that due to relatively low rates of single parenthood in
Canada, this omission removes only about 10 percent of births over the period.5
An alternative to tailoring the sample to exclude specific confounding factors is to
construct a control group of children who are exposed to the same influences as children in our
analysis sample, with the exception of the change in maternity leave. While older children might
be natural candidates for this role since they appear in the same waves of the survey but were
born too early to be affected by the maternity leave change, this idea is frustrated by the structure
of the NLSCY. There are distinct differences in the indices of development, family function and
the questions about non-school activities for different age groups that render these measures less
comparable across ages.
Because we do not observe pre-birth employment consistently across waves in the
NLSCY, we cannot precisely identify those women who were eligible either for job-protected
leave or for EI maternity benefits. As a result, our analysis samples contain mothers who were
potentially ineligible because of insufficient work prior to the child’s birth and also those who
may have been eligible but did not take benefits to which they were entitled. For this reason,
equations (1) or (2) should be interpreted as an “intention to treat” design, with ‘eligibility'
meaning the mother had a child after December 31, 2000 and ‘take-up’ meaning that the new
mother actually took a leave.6
The intention-to-treat estimates are informative about the impact on child development of
having a child after the policy changed. This is interesting if one is concerned about the
population-level impact of the policy change. More informative about individual behavior is the
5

In addition to the omissions described in the main text, we also exclude the very small number of children born in
Alberta and Saskatchewan in the months between December 2000 and the point when the provincial maternity leave
mandate changes a few months later.
6
In an intention to treat design, assignment to treat is random, but take-up of the intervention among the eligible is
less than complete. See Bloom (1984).

12

‘treatment on the treated’ parameter, which measures the impact of actually taking a leave on
child development. To move from the intention-to-treat to the treatment on the treated
parameters requires us to scale the intention to treat estimates by a factor reflecting the
proportion of women who had a birth and took a leave.7
To implement this scaling, we take the following approach. In Statistics Canada’s Survey
of Employment Insurance Coverage data, 70 percent of mothers with children aged less than one
year had insured employment in the 12 months preceding childbirth in 2000, rising to between
74 and 75 percent in 2001 through 2005.8 If this pre-birth employment meant these mothers
were eligible for the job protection aspect of maternity leave, then we should scale our estimates
by 1.33 (1/0.75). The presence of insured employment, however, does not guarantee EI benefit
receipt. These same data show that the proportion of mothers with any insurable employment
who ultimately are eligible for and claim benefits is 80 percent in 2000 and 2001 rising to
roughly 85 percent in 2002-2005. If we are interested in the impact of being eligible and taking
up EI benefits, then we should scale our estimates by 1.57 (1/(0.75*0.85)). In the discussion of
results that follows we make reference to both the 1.33 and 1.57 scaling factors as the lower and
upper bound implied by the available evidence.
Still another method to obtain the treatment effects is to restrict the analysis sample to
only those who might be eligible. While the NLSCY does not collect good information on prebirth employment, the information on post-birth employment is much better. We can use this
information to select mothers who are likely to have been eligible for both the EI maternity
benefits and the job-protected maternity leave. We implement this approach by selecting
7

See Heckman, Lalonde, and Smith (1999).
The source is Statistics Canada (2006), which reports results from the Survey of Employment Insurance Coverage.
The increase between 2000 and 2005 suggests that the reform led to an increase in the pre-birth employment of
mothers, but the match is not exact because each survey runs from April though January of the following year. In
contrast, the reference period for benefits is for employment in the 12 months preceding the birth of a child who can
be up to 12 months old. Unfortunately there are no data on maternity benefits preceding the 2000 survey.

8

13

mothers who return to work within a year of their child’s birth. Note that a comparison of the
results in the restricted and full samples provides yet another check on our identification. The
comparison reveals whether “likely eligibles” or “likely ineligibles”, as we define them, drive the
result in the full sample. This can only be an informal check, however, because the incidence of
return to work post-birth is potentially affected by the change in maternity leave.
5.3 Estimation
Equations (1) and (2) make clear that an estimate of POST rests on the variation of the
conditional mean of y across six birth cohorts. Recently, Donald and Lang (2007) have pointed
out the importance of explicitly accounting for the finiteness of the “effective sample” in the
estimation—that is, the fact that in some respects we only have six aggregated observations
rather than the thousands of individuals in the underlying microdata sample. To account for this,
we use a two-step procedure. We first estimate equation (1) with no constant, which provides
estimates of the YOBt effects for each birth cohort.9 We then use these estimates as the
dependent variable in a six observation regression following equation (2), except the only
explanatory variables are a constant and POST, and we weight by the sum of the individual
weights by year of birth. There are 4 degrees of freedom in these regressions so the critical value
for statistical significance at the 5-percent level is 2.78. All the substantial inferences of the
paper are robust to alternative methods of calculating the standard errors.10

These are similar to the γ reported in the Appendix, but rescaled since we now include the full set of cohort
dummies including one for the 1998 birth cohort.
10
We tried various other methods for calculating standard errors. First we tried using robust standard errors and
clustering on the year of birth. The resulting standard errors were implausibly small. Second, we tried a model fully
saturated with province-year of birth interactions, then regressed the interaction coefficients on POST. This is
similar to the method of Solon, Whatley, and Stevens (1997). Finally, we followed the advice of Bertrand et al.
(2004) and regressed our outcomes on a full set of province-POST interactions that then served as the dependent
variable for a second stage regression. These last two methods yielded inferences errors to the ones we report.
9

t

14

6.0 Results
We present results in three steps. First, we examine the impact of the reforms on work by
new mothers—and its complement, maternal time at home. Second we trace the change through
to the types and timing of different modes of non-parental care. Finally, we explore the impact
of the induced changes in care on child development and the family environment.
6.1

Maternal care and work

Estimates of the impact of the increase in maternity leave on the amount of maternal care
a child receives are reported in Table 1. As a summary statistic, in the first row we report the
result for a measure of the months of maternal care in the child’s first year of life. This variable,
which takes values between 0 and 12, is constructed from a report of the mother’s return to work
post-birth. The sample for this analysis is the mothers of children aged 13-29 months, so labor
market behavior over the first year of life is fully observable.
The estimate in the first column indicates an increase of 2.2 months, which is 26 percent
of the pre-reform mean. The causal interpretation of this estimate is supported by the individual
YOB estimates reported in appendix Table A1. We graph these estimates in Figure 2 to
illuminate our identification strategy. There is a clear shift in the estimates starting with the
2001 birth cohort.
This is an intention-to-treat estimate. To obtain the treatment on the treated, we can scale
the estimate, resulting in an increase in maternal care of between (2.2*1.333) 2.9 and (2.2*1.57)
3.5 months. The pre-reform mean of this variable among those who actually took maternal leave
is presumably different (and likely smaller) than the mean for the full sample. To obtain an
estimate of this mean we can restrict the sample to mothers who are likely treated by the policy
change based on their post-birth employment behavior. Restricting the sample to mothers who
15

returned to work in the 12 months following birth, the estimated increase in maternal care in the
first year of life is 3.150 (0.239) months, which sits at the midpoint of the interval defined by our
scaling technique. The pre-reform mean in the sample is 6.02 months indicating that our scaled
estimates suggest the reform led to an increase in maternal care of between 48 and 58 percent for
treated mothers.
In the third column of Table 1 we add the provincial unemployment rate as an additional
regressor. This variable proxies for labor market conditions that could affect the mother’s return
to work decision. Estimates conditioning on this variable, however, are virtually identical to the
originals, suggesting that local labor market conditions were not influencing our results in the
second column. We have also estimated a specification (not reported) omitting all the
explanatory variables except the YOB effects. The results are again very similar, revealing that
there is no significant observable variation in the types of mothers and families having births as a
result of the reform. This provides some additional justification for our empirical approach.
In the next five rows we map out the distribution of the effect across different months
over the first year. Recall that before the reform, maternity benefits were available for up to 25
weeks, and job protection was available for 18-35 weeks in the provinces included in the analysis
sample. In light of this, the largest impact is exactly where it is expected—in months 6 through
12—and in each case the estimates of the individual YOB effects (reported in the appendix)
support a causal interpretation. The proportional increases are substantial, ranging from 11
percent at 6 months to 67 percent at 12 months. Using the sample of mothers who returned to
work in the first year we can obtain (but do not report) direct estimates of these proportional
changes for the treated. They range from 17 percent at 6 months through 726 percent at 12
months.

16

In the last two rows of Table 1 we investigate the type of work displaced by this increase
in time at home. Here, we use the sample of mothers of children aged 7-12 months (the ages that
gained leave coverage through the reform), and define 0/1 indicators for currently working and
working full time (30+ hours per week). The results indicate a 30 percentage point decrease in
the proportion at work, two-thirds of which is a decrease in full-time employment. Therefore,
the majority of work displaced by the reform was full-time. This provides important context for
our analysis of development, because it is full-time work in this age interval that previous
research has related to cognitive delay.
6.2

Changes in non-parental care

To interpret our estimates of the impact of the reform on child development, it is useful to
know what sort of non-parental care the increase in maternal care displaced. This information is
provided in Table 2. We show estimates for two samples: children aged 7-12 months and 13-24
months. We expect the primary impact of the reform to be evident in the younger sample. The
older sample provides a check whether there is either a direct impact on older children, or a
persistent effect of some impact that starts at a younger age.
In the first row is a global measure of whether the child is in some type of non-parental
care. We estimate a decrease of over 18 percentage points for children aged 7-12 months, and
effectively no change for children aged 13-24 months. As expected, the primary effect of the
reform is at ages 7-12 months. However, the magnitude of the effect presents a puzzle as it does
not match the decrease in work of the mothers of these children reported in Table 1. We resolve
this discrepancy in the next four rows where we split the sample into four mutually exclusive
categories: 1) mothers who work and use (non-parental) care, 2) mothers who work and don’t

17

use care, 3) mothers who don’t work and use care, and 4) mothers who do not work and do not
use care. The results reveal that the 29 percentage point decrease in work is split across mothers
who do and do not use care (0.23+0.06). The 0.186 decrease in non-parental care reflects the
balance of a reduction in work with care (-0.23) and an increase in no work with care (+0.04).
As noted by Baker et al. (2005), the non-trivial proportion of mothers reporting work with no
care is likely a result of the underreporting of very informal care arrangements in the NLSCY.
As a result, the increase in maternal care as a result of the reform likely exceeds the direct
estimate of 18 percentage points. Furthermore, scaling for treatment, the impact on those likely
eligible for leave is at least 25 to 29 points.
In the next row of the table we report the result for the number of hours per week if in
care. In the younger sample there is a significant reduction of over 5 hours off a pre-reform
mean of 29 hours. There are at least two explanations of this result. First, there is a composition
effect resulting from the fact that the mothers who stay home longer after the reform would
otherwise be heavy users of non-parental care. Second, the longer periods at home post-birth
after the reform allowed mothers to introduce their children to non-parental care more gradually.
While the former explanation is consistent with the strong decrease in full-time work, the latter
explanation may be consistent with the increase in the proportion of mothers not at work and
using care.
The remaining rows of Table 2 disaggregate the changes in non-parental care. For ages
7-12 months, the drop in care in another’s home is 11.7 percentage points, of which 10.0
percentage points is unlicensed. Most of this (7.0 percentage points) is in the homes of nonrelatives, while 2.9 percentage points is in the homes of relatives. Again, the estimates of the
individual YOB estimates in the Appendix support a causal interpretation of these changes. A

18

basis for expecting a change in child development from the reform depends on the extent that the
quality of care between unlicensed non-relatives and mothers differs.
6.3

Changes in development and environment

We now turn to our measures of child development and of the domestic environment.
Again, we examine children aged 7-12 months and 13-24 months separately, looking for both
concurrent and persistent effects of the strong increase in maternal care.
In the first three rows of Table 3a we present the results for indices of parenting behavior
and family function. Each is built up from the answers to a series of questions about how the
parents interact with the child and with each other. The positive parenting index ranges from 0
to 20 with higher scores reflecting more positive behavior. The hostile/ineffective index runs
from 0 to 8 and here a higher value indicates less effectiveness. Finally, the family functioning
scale ranges from 0 to 36 with a higher value indicating more dysfunction. Baker et al. (2005)
report a significant deterioration in similar indices as a result of a strong increase in non-parental
care following the introduction of heavily subsidized universal childcare in Quebec. In that
study, however, the change in care was primarily experienced by children older than the ones
studied here.
The estimates for both age groups are mostly small and all are statistically insignificant.
Furthermore, in each case the estimates of the individual YOB effects show regular inter-birth
cohort variation that is not related to the timing of the extension of maternity leave. Finally, in
many cases the standard errors are small, indicating that our evaluation has some power.
Remembering that we need a t-value of 2.78 for significance at the 5 percent level, the standard
errors for the estimates for positive parenting indicate that we can rule out effects larger than 11

19

percent of the standard deviation of the pre-reform mean in the younger sample. For ineffective
parenting and family function the corresponding calculations are 15 and 31 percent of the
standard deviation. In the older sample they range from 12 to 17 percent. Each of these bounds
is fairly small given the large magnitude of the increase in maternal care.
The next set of measures captures different dimensions of the child’s temperament. Each
is a 7 point scale where lower numbers indicate a better result. For example, a lower value for
how easily upset indicates that the child does not get upset very easily. Many of the questions
require an evaluation of the child relative to other children, although for some the scale maps out
specific responses (for example, how many times per day the child is irritable). We are therefore
reluctant to assign a specific interpretation to the magnitude of the estimates, but some meaning
can be found in their signs.
Few of the estimates are statistically significant. Furthermore, given the standard errors
in most cases we have the power to rule out changes of greater than 10 to 15 percent of a
standard deviation. An exception is the estimate for difficulty calming the child, which is
positive and statistically significant for both ages and indicates greater difficulty following the
maternity leave reform. In each case the individual birth cohort estimates in the appendix
suggest a causal effect. For the younger age group this result is accompanied by a statistically
significant increase in crying, although in this case the YOB estimates suggest a causal
interpretation is not as clear. We test the robustness of these results below.
In Table 3b, we continue the investigation by looking at security, development, and
parental involvement. The first set of variables in the table measure the child’s reaction to new
experiences, persons and places and may provide some indication of the security they feel. The
estimates are negative for persons and places indicating better reactions, and the result for
persons is statistically significant in the older sample. The final two variables provide overall
20

assessments of the attention the child demands and the level of difficulty they present. The
estimates for both variables for both age groups are negative. The estimate for attention in the
older sample is statistically significant, and the estimates for difficulty in each sample are just
shy of the critical value.
In the next section of Table 3b are the variables for development. First is the estimate for
motor/social development. This index is built up from questions about the child’s physical
(ability to crawl, walk etc.) and cognitive/social (ability to say words, count, wash hands)
capabilities.11 We use a standardized score that is set to have a population mean of 100 and
standard deviation of 15. In application, scores within one standard deviation of the mean are
interpreted to be in the range of average development. Baker et al. (2005) found a reduction in
this measure of motor/social development with the increase of non-parental care from the
Quebec universal childcare program. Here, the point estimates are negative for each age group,
but also very small and statistically insignificant. Moreover, the individual YOB estimates in the
Appendix provide little evidence of a causal effect. The standard errors imply we have the
power to detect impacts of more than 29 (37) percent of a standard deviation of the pre-reform
mean in the younger (older) sample.
If we believe the motor/social development measure captures early cognitive skills, then
this result suggests that the cognitive effects of early maternal full time employment reported for
older children in other studies do not have a manifestation at the younger ages we examine

11

Bodnarchuk and Eaton (2004) find that parent reports of motor and milestone measures perform quite well in their
validation exercise.

21

here.12 However, we also note that our result contrasts with some previous observational
evidence of the effect of maternal care on motor/social development using NLSCY data.13
The next two variables record the age at which certain developmental milestones are
attained. We report the results for only two of the five milestones collected in the survey,
because changes in the wording of the questions across waves render the interpretation of the
others difficult. For both the age at which the child first sat up and the age at which they took
their first steps the estimated coefficients are statistically indistinguishable from—and very close
to—zero.
The final set of variables in Table 3b captures interactions between parents and children
that may enhance later cognitive development. Each measure expresses the frequency of the
indicated interaction on a five point scale ranging from 1 indicating rarely to 5 indicating daily.
In almost all cases the estimates are small and statistically insignificant indicating no change in
the frequency of the interaction with the increase in maternal care. The exception is an increase
in story telling for the older age group, although interpretation of this result is complicated by the
lack of any effect for the younger children. A limitation of these variables is that the highest
frequency recorded is daily, so these variables are not able to capture a change in the intensity of
a daily interaction.
In general, most results in Tables 3a and 3b show no impact—but there are a few
statistically significant effects. However, in an analysis with this many regressions, a certain
12

These effects of full time employment are typically found starting at age 3, although this is in turn the age at
which cognitive testing starts to be performed more intensively.
13
Sherlock et al. (2007) use the same motor/social development scale from the 1998-99 NLSCY wave, comparing
the children of mothers who return to work at different times post-birth. They measure impaired development as
being more than one standard deviation below the mean and find that each month a mother stays at home post-birth
reduces the probability of impaired motor/social development by 3 percent. We tried forming their measure of
impairment and applied our estimation methodology to it, finding an estimate on POST of 0.028 (0.020). Moreover,
the standard error is small enough to yield sufficient power to detect an effect as small as negative 5.6 percent,
which in our sample rules out an impact as large as that found by Sherlock et al. (2007), who found a 3 percent drop
for each month of delayed return.

22

number of statistically significant estimates will be obtained by chance. An examination of the
YOB estimates in the appendix provides a check if these results are causally related to the reform.
To provide another perspective, we turn to a control group analysis of the mothers likely not
eligible for the extended maternity leave as they show little attachment to the labor force postbirth. Specifically, we compare those who returned to work within twelve months of birth to
those who did not; the former sample should have a much higher level of treatment. Recall that
we used this strategy for the labor supply results in the discussion of Table 1 and found the
estimate from the sample of mothers who returned to work within a year sat amid our estimates
of the treatment on the treated by the scaling methods.
The results of this analysis are presented in Table 4. We expect the estimates from the
sample of mothers who returned within a year of birth to be larger than the estimates in Table 3a
by a factor of between 1.33 and 1.57. We expect the estimates for the complementary sample to
be close to zero. There is some evidence of this pattern for the calming variable. The estimate in
the sample of children whose mother returned to work with in a year is almost statistically
significant and just over 20 percent larger than the corresponding estimate in Table 3a. This
gives some indication that the calming result is robust. For the attention, new person, difficulty,
and stories variables, however, we do not find robustness. The mothers who were likely not
eligible show, if anything, a larger effect—although in no cases are the impacts in the two
samples statistically distinct. Therefore, this investigation further limits our conclusions,
indicating that the increase in time at home had little impact on the development variables in the
NLSCY.

23

7.0

Interpretation
While we have documented very large changes in the maternal care of children aged 7-12

months old, we have found few concurrent or persistent impacts on their development as
captured by our NLSCY variables. This may be surprising because previous research suggests
non-parental care at these ages can have cognitive effects. Also, the developmental measures in
the NLSCY are drawn from best practices in the field and are responsive to changes in nonparental care in other studies. Furthermore, our first stage is very strong: we examine large
changes in full-time maternal work and full-time non-parental care which previous studies
identify as important.
A priori, the developmental variables we examine provide a reasonable summary of
facets of a child’s progress that could be affected by a change in care. For example, without
committing to the direction of the effect, a child’s attainment of certain motor or social
milestones or her/his behavioral reaction to changes in places or new persons could depend on
whether the majority of his/her care is currently provided by the mother, or in a home-based
childcare arrangement. The fact that we do not observe any changes in these outcomes implies
one of two possibilities: either the effects are not present, or whatever effects occur they are not
captured by the variables available in the NLSCY.
If the effects are not present, some caution in interpretation is still needed. We are only
able to observe the children up to age 29 months, so it is possible that in the future some impacts
will become evident. That is, the impact may lie dormant and manifest only at older ages. If this
occurs, the mechanism for the later impacts will remain unclear since we have not uncovered
them here. This would frustrate our understanding of the impact of extra maternal care. We will

24

be able to examine this ‘dormant impact’ hypothesis in the future as later waves of the NLSCY
become available.
If instead there are effects on non-parental care at very young ages but the variables in the
NLSCY do not capture them, then there are potentially important implications for survey design.
While parent-reported measures of development have their critics, they are part of the content of
most children’s surveys because they are cost effective, can be updated on a regular basis though
a remote interview and are generally viewed as being informative about many dimensions of
development. If measures of the type available in the NLSCY cannot capture changes that are
occurring, then reliance on common parent-reported responses might need review.
A final important issue is the intended purpose of the questions asked about infants.
Identifying children who are at risk of developmental delay is one objective. However, a survey
that is effective in identifying at-risk children may not be effective in capturing changes in
development in the more advantaged population of two-parent families that we study. The
tension raised here is the one identified in the introduction: the evaluation of universal public
policies may require different evidence than the evidence traditionally used to analyze at-risk
families.

8.0 Conclusions
The decision of how much and whether to work during the first year of a child’s life
confronts most new mothers. Research on the developmental costs and benefits of maternal care
has produced mixed results—and typically must address the difficult problem of unobserved
correlates of the maternal work decision. In this paper, we have presented evidence on the
developmental impact of more maternal care resulting from the expansion of maternity leave
policies in Canada. Among mothers who took leaves, we estimate an increase in the time at
25

home post-birth of around 3 months or over 50 percent of the pre-reform level. This increase in
time at home primarily displaced full time work and unlicensed care provided in someone else’s
home. However, even with these extraordinary changes, we find little evidence of a change in
child development. Our estimates indicate that the family atmosphere is unchanged and that
temperament and motor-social and developmental milestones respond little to the extra maternal
time.
Our study offers three important advantages. First, we address the selection problem
generated by unobserved correlates through our exploitation of a policy reform that allows us to
view similar families under different policy regimes. Second, the impact of the reform is at ages
six to twelve months, a range identified as critical to development is past research. Finally, we
study a heterogeneous group of children, which may be more relevant to the evaluation of
universal child policies than experimental evidence using only children at risk.
Our primary conclusion that this change in maternal care had little effect on child
development up to 2 years of age has two alternative interpretations, which are topics for future
research. First, the development impacts of the changes we analyze may manifest at older ages.
Second, the parent-reported measures of child development we use, which are common to many
surveys, may not capture the changes in development induced by the maternity leave reforms.

26

References
Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2005), “How does job-protected maternity leave affect
mothers’ employment and infant health?” NBER Working Paper 11135.
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan (2005), “Universal Childcare, Maternal
Labor Supply, and Family Well-being,” NBER Working Paper No. 11832.
Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2007), “Maternal Employment, Breastfeeding, and Health:
Evidence from Maternity Leave Mandates” NBER Working Paper No. 13,188.
Baker, P.C., Keck, C.K., Mott, F.L. and Quinlan, S.V., 1993. NLSY child handbook-revised
edition: A guide to the 1986–1990 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth child data set, Center
for Human Resource Research, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
Bates, J.E, Freeland, C.A.B. and M.L. Lounsbury (1979), “Measurement of Infant Difficultness,”
Child Development, Vol. 50, No. 3, pp. 794-803.
Belsky, J. (2006), “Early child care and early child development: Major findings of the NICHD
study of early child care,” European Journal of Developmental Psychology, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp.
95-110.
Bernal R, and M Keane (2006), “Child Care Choices and Children’s Cognitive Achievement:
The Case of Single Mothers,” Northwestern University.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004), “How Much Should We
Trust Difference in Difference Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 1, pp.
249-275.
Bloom, Howard S. (1984), “Accounting for No-Shows in Experimental Evaluation Designs,”
Evaluation Review, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 225-246.
Bodnarchuk, J.L. and W.O. Eaton (2004), “Can Parent Reports be Trusted?” Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 481-490.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Wen-Jui Han, and Jane Waldfogel (2002), “Maternal Employment and
Child Cognitive Outcomes in the First Three Years of Life: The NICHD Study of Early Child
Care,” Child Development, Vol, 73, No. 4, pp. 1052-1072.
Clarke-Stewart, K.A., Fitzpatrick, M.J., Allhusen, V.D. and Goldberg, W.A., (2000),
“Measuring difficult temperament the easy way,” Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
Pediatrics Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 207–220.
De Los Reyes A. and A.E. Kazdin, “Informant Discrepancies in the Assessment of Childhood
Psychopathology: A Critical Review, Theoretical Framework, and Recommendations for Further
Study, Psychological Bulletin, 131(4), 2005, 483–509

27

Donald, Stephen G. and Kevin Lang (2007), “Inference with Difference in Differences and Other
Panel Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 221-233.
Hanratty, Maria and Eileen Trzcinski (2006), “Who benefits from expanded paid parental leave?
Impact of parental benefit expansions in Canada on mothers’ employment after birth,”
manuscript, University of Minnesota and Wayne State University.
Heckman, James J., Robert J. Lalonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith (1999), “The economics and
econometrics of active labor market programs,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3,
Ashley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.).
Heckman, JamesJ, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua (2006), “The Effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior,” NBER Working Paper 12006.
Karoly, Lynn A., Peter W. Greenwood, Susan S. Everingham, Jill Houbé, Rebecca Kilburn, C.
Peter Rydell, Matthew Sanders, and James Chiesa (1998), Investing in Our Children: What we
know and Don’t Know about the Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa
Moncia, CA: Rand Corporation.
Loeb, Susanna, Margaret Bridges, Daphna Bassok, Bruce Fuller, and Russell W. Rumberger
(2007), “How much is too much? The influence of preschool centers on children’s social and
cognitive development,” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 52-66.
Magnuson, Katherine A., Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2007), “Does prekindergarten
improve school preparation and performance?” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 26, No. 1,
pp. 33-51.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile (2007), “The integration of child tax credits and welfare:
Evidence from the Canadian National Child Benefit program,” Journal of Public Economics,
Vol. 91, No. 1-2, pp. 305-326.
Rescorla Leslie and Amie Alley (2001), “Validation of the Language Development Survey,”
Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 434-445.
Rydz D. Shevell, M.I. Majnemer A. and M Oskou, (2005) “Topical Review: Developmental
Screening”, Journal of Child Neurology 20 4-21.
Sherlock, R.L., Synnes, A.R., and M. Koehoorn, “Working mothers and early childhood
outcomes: Lessons from the Canadian National Longitudinal study on children and youth”, Early
Human Development (2007), doi:10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2007.06.003
Solon, G., W. Whatley and A.H. Stevens, “Wage changes in intrafirm job mobility over the
business cycle: two case studies”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 50 (1997), pp. 402–415

28

Spencer N.J. and C. Coe (1996), “The development and validation of a measure of parentreported child health and morbidity: the Warwick Child Health and Morbidity Profile,” Child:
Care, Health and Development, Vol. 22, No. 6, pp. 367-379.
Statistics Canada 2006: The Daily, November 1, 2006.
http://www.statcan.ca/Daily/English/061101/d061101b.htm
Waldfogel, Jane, What Children Need, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 2006.
Waldfogel, Jane, Wen-Jui Han, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2002), “The Effects of Early Maternal
Employment on Child Cognitive Development,” Demography, Vol. 39, No. 2, pp. 369-392.

29

Figure 1: Job Protected Maternity Leave Mandates by Province

80

70

Weeks of Leave

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
Dec-00

Jan-01

Newfoundland
Ontario

Feb-01

Mar-01

Nova Scotia
Manitoba

Apr-01

May-01

PEI
Saskatchewan

Jun-01

Jul-01

New Brunswick
Alberta

Aug-01

Quebec
British Colum

Notes: The lines indicate the number of mandated weeks of job-protected leave by province.

30

Figure 2: Months of Maternal Care in First Year Relative to the 1998 Birth Cohort
3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Birth Cohor

Notes: The bars display the regression coefficients on the γt terms from equation (1) using as a
dependent variable the months of maternal care in the first year. The excluded dummy is for
t=1998.

31

Table 1: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on time spent at home postbirth
PreReform
Mean
8.35
(3.68)

2.172*
(0.293)

POST
with UR
Control
2.177*
(0.282)

Months at home ≥ one month

0.96
(0.19)

0.015
(0.008)

0.014
(0.010)

Months at home ≥ three months

0.92
(0.27)

0.033
(0.012)

0.032
(0.013)

Months at home ≥ six months

0.82
(0.39)

0.090*
(0.024)

0.091*
(0.020)

Months at home ≥ nine months

0.49
(0.50)

0.354*
(0.039)

0.354*
(0.038)

Months at home ≥ twelve
months

0.42
(0.49)

0.280*
(0.040)

0.281*
(0.039)

Mother Works

0.55
(0.50)

-0.293*
(0.027)

-0.293*
(0.027)

Mother Works Full-time

0.34
(0.47)

-0.197*
(0.006)

-0.192*
(0.013)

Months spent at home in first
year

POST

Notes: N=6. A star indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. The sample for the time at
home analysis is the mothers of children aged 13-29 months. The sample for the maternal work
analysis is the mothers of children aged 7-12 months. Each row presents analysis of the indicated
dependent variable. The first column has the means (standard deviations) of the indicated
variable for cohorts born pre-reform. The second column has coefficients (standard errors) for
the POST variable described in the text. The third column adds the provincial unemployment rate
as a control variable in the second stage.

32

Table 2: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on work and care decisions
Children aged 7-12
Months
Pre-Reform
Mean

POST

In care

0.43
(0.49)

Work and care

Children aged 13-24
Months

-0.183*
(0.017)

PreReform
Mean
0.47
(0.50)

POST
-0.002
(0.008)

0.38
(0.48)

-0.228*
(0.005)

0.42
(0.49)

-0.009
(0.019)

Work and no care

0.17
(0.38)

-0.068
(0.026)

0.19
(0.39)

-0.007
(0.013)

No work and care

0.05
(0.22)

0.044
(0.020)

0.05
(0.21)

0.007
(0.014)

No work and no care

0.40
(0.49)

0.251*
(0.019)

0.34
(0.47)

0.009
(0.020)

Hours of care if in care

28.9
(16.80)

-5.299*
(0.629)

29.3
(15.58)

0.378
(0.791)

Centre based care

0.04
(0.19)

-0.019
(0.013)

0.06
(0.24)

0.017
(0.010)

Own home based care

0.13
(0.33)

-0.046*
(0.010)

0.15
(0.35)

-0.030
(0.015)

Other’s home based care

0.26
(0.44)

-0.117*
(0.009)

0.26
(0.44)

0.011
(0.017)

Licensed other’s home based
care

0.05
(0.21)

-0.017*
(0.006)

0.04
(0.20)

0.040*
(0.005)

Unlicensed other’s home
based care

0.22
(0.41)

-0.100*
(0.006)

0.22
(0.41)

-0.029
(0.015)

Unlicensed other’s home
based care: relative

0.11
(0.31)

-0.029
(0.011)

0.10
(0.30)

-0.002
(0.010)

Unlicensed other’s home
based care: non-relative

0.11
(0.31)

-0.070*
(0.012)

0.12
(0.32)

-0.027
(0.014)

Notes: N=6. A star indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Each row presents analysis
of the indicated dependent variable. The first two columns show the results for the sample of 712 month olds, and the next two columns for the 13-24 month olds. For each sample we report
the means (standard deviations) of the indicated variable for cohorts born pre-reform. We also
report the coefficients (standard errors) for the POST variable described in the text.

33

Table 3a: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on parenting and child
temperament
7-12 Months
Pre-Reform
POST
Mean

13-24 Months
Pre-Reform
POST
Mean

Parenting
Positive Parenting

18.20
(1.96)

0.103
(0.079)

17.88
(2.05)

0.086
(0.109)

Ineffective/Hostile Parenting

1.47
(1.67)

0.129
(0.090)

2.68
(1.56)

0.066
(0.070)

Family functioning

8.68
(4.92)

0.296
(0.552)

9.00
(4.81)

-0.621
(0.298)

Child Temperament
How easily upset

2.61
(1.60)

-0.004
(0.095)

3.09
(1.70)

0.116
(0.073)

How loud crying when upset

3.40
(1.85)

0.099
(0.056)

3.99
(1.90)

-0.038
(0.051)

How much crying

1.93
(1.21)

0.189*
(0.021)

2.16
(1.34)

0.062
(0.051)

Difficulty to calm

1.79
(1.16)

0.268*
(0.079)

2.21
(1.42)

0.191*
(0.057)

How often irritable

2.31
(0.85)

0.090
(0.038)

2.38
(0.98)

0.061
(0.046)

How much smile/laugh

1.35
(0.86)

0.171
(0.091)

1.51
(0.91)

0.006
(0.040)

Average mood

1.44
(1.04)

0.004
(0.044)

1.58
(0.99)

0.009
(0.028)

How changeable is mood

2.20
(1.43)

0.191
(0.092)

2.74
(1.66)

-0.180
(0.077)

Notes: N=6. A star indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Each row presents analysis
of the indicated dependent variable. The first two columns show the results for the sample of 712 month olds, and the next two columns for the 13-24 month olds. For each sample we report
the means (standard deviations) of the indicated variable for cohorts born pre-reform. We also
report the coefficients (standard errors) for the POST variable described in the text.

34

Table 3b: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on child security, physical
development, and parental involvement
7-12 Months
Pre-Reform
POST
Mean

13-24 Months
Pre-Reform
POST
Mean

Child Security
Response to new things (7-12)
experiences (13-24)

1.70
(1.07)

0.101
(0.071)

1.91
(1.17)

0.106
(0.099)

Response to new person

2.84
(1.82)

-0.170
(0.118)

3.29
(1.85)

-0.177*
(0.060)

Response to new place

2.19
(1.46)

-0.111
(0.115)

2.63
(1.60)

-0.136
(0.100)

How much attention required

3.32
(1.73)

-0.025
(0.090)

3.38
(1.73)

-0.112*
(0.036)

Overall difficulty of child

1.99
(1.28)

-0.112
(0.043)

2.27
(1.33)

-0.160
(0.072)

Development
Motor/social score

98.81
(15.20)

-0.016
(1.609)

101.83
(14.73)

-0.570
(1.948)

Age at which child sat up

5.77
(1.44)

-0.013
(0.058)

5.76
(1.65)

0.271
(0.111)

Age at which child took first
steps

9.46
(1.68)

-0.064
(0.085)

11.31
(2.09)

-0.012
(0.090)

Parental Involvement
Parent reads to child

4.30
(1.15)

0.066
(0.049)

4.68
(0.75)

-0.041
(0.034)

Parent teaches new words

4.25
(1.42)

0.126
(0.063)

4.77
(0.78)

-0.020
(0.043)

Parent tells story

4.08
(1.40)

0.002
(0.070)

4.25
(1.28)

0.076*
(0.019)

Parent plays action games

4.89
(0.48)

-0.045
(0.047)

4.79
(0.63)

0.025
(0.024)

Notes: N=6. A star indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Each row presents analysis
of the indicated dependent variable. The first two columns show the results for the sample of 712 month olds, and the next two columns for the 13-24 month olds. For each sample we report
the means (standard deviations) of the indicated variable for cohorts born pre-reform. We also
report the coefficients (standard errors) for the POST variable described in the text.

35

Table 4: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on measures of
temperament behavior in selected samples aged 13-24 months
Children whose mothers
returned to work within
12 months of birth
0.230
(0.091)

All other Children

How much attention required

-0.099
(0.088)

-0.163
(0.156)

Response to new person

-0.165
(0.095)

-0.177
(0.080)

Overall difficulty of child

-0.158
(0.075)

-0.191
(0.074)

Parent tells story

0.054
(0.076)

0.109
(0.062)

Difficulty to calm

0.108
(0.083)

Notes: N=6. A star indicates statistical significance at the 5% level. Each row presents analysis
of the indicated dependent variable. The first column shows the results for the sample of children
with a mother who return to work within 12 months of the birth. The second column shows the
results for the sample of all other children. Reported is the coefficient (standard errors) for the
POST variable described in the text.

36

Table A1: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on time not at work
Months not at work in
the first year
Months not at work ≥
one month
Months not at work ≥
three months
Months not at work ≥
six months
Months not at work ≥
nine months
Months not at work ≥
twelve months
Mother Works
Mother Works Fulltime

1999
0.968
(0.220)
0.026
(0.012)
0.036
(0.017)
0.068
(0.023)
0.131
(0.029)
0.127
(0.029)
-0.069
(0.062)
0.046
(0.063)

2000
0.668
(0.227)
0.021
(0.013)
0.042
(0.017)
0.058
(0.024)
0.074
(0.030)
0.056
(0.030)
-0.045
(0.035)
0.009
(0.033)

2001
2.993
(0.217)
0.036
(0.012)
0.071
(0.017)
0.160
(0.023)
0.453
(0.028)
0.373
(0.030)
-0.384
(0.054)
-0.191
(0.052)

2002
2.555
(0.216)
0.027
(0.012)
0.057
(0.016)
0.111
(0.023)
0.407
(0.028)
0.318
(0.031)
-0.302
(0.035)
-0.191
(0.032)

2003
2.833
(0.220)
0.036
(0.012)
0.055
(0.017)
0.139
(0.023)
0.438
(0.028)
0.360
(0.030)
-0.358
(0.067)
-0.175
(0.059)

Notes: N=6604, except 2121 in last two rows. Each row presents analysis of the indicated
dependent variable. Reported are the regression coefficients on the γt year effects from equation
(1), with t=1998 as the excluded variable. Robust standard errors arein parentheses.

37

Table A2: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on work and care
decisions
7-12 months
In care
Work and care
Work and no care
No work and care
No work and no care
Centre based care
Own home based care
Other’s home based care
Licensed other’s home based
care
Unlicensed other’s home
based care
Unlicensed other’s home
based care: relative
Unlicensed other’s home
based care: non-relative
Hours of care if in care
13-24 months
In care
Work and care
Work and no care
No work and care
No work and no care
Centre based care
Own home based care

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

0.036
(0.064)
0.007
(0.063)
-0.079
(0.046)
0.029
(0.026)
0.043
(0.061)
0.016
(0.024)
0.024
(0.050)
-0.003
(0.061)
-0.001
(0.021)
-0.002
(0.059)
-0.050
(0.035)
0.048
(0.052)
1.830
(2.888)

0.041
(0.036)
-0.008
(0.033)
-0.034
(0.027)
0.049
(0.022)
-0.006
(0.036)
0.032
(0.014)
0.005
(0.025)
0.004
(0.032)
0.010
(0.014)
-0.006
(0.031)
0.017
(0.026)
-0.023
(0.020)
0.230
(2.037)

-0.144
(0.059)
-0.239
(0.052)
-0.141
(0.029)
0.095
(0.039)
0.285
(0.059)
0.012
(0.019)
-0.003
(0.045)
-0.152
(0.047)
-0.023
(0.016)
-0.130
(0.045)
-0.050
(0.034)
-0.080
(0.034)
-3.720
(2.761)

-0.164
(0.035)
-0.233
(0.032)
-0.071
(0027)
0.069
(0.018)
0.235
(0.035)
-0.005
(0.010)
-0.042
(0.022)
-0.116
(0.031)
-0.014
(0.012)
-0.101
(0.029)
-0.021
(0.026)
-0.081
(0.018)
-5.586
(2.108)

-0.168
(0.068)
-0.203
(0.062)
-0.157
(0.046)
0.035
(0.031)
0.325
(0.071)
-0.012
(0.014)
-0.096
(0.035)
-0.059
(0.060)
0.012
(0.029)
-0.071
(0.055)
-0.026
(0.044)
-0.045
(0.035)
-2.864
(3.364)

-0.026
(0.037)
-0.063
(0.037)
-0.038
(0.031)
0.038
(0.018)
0.064
(0.036)
0.017
(0.018)
0.000
(0.026)

-0.020
(0.038)
-0.031
(0.038)
-0.033
(0.028)
0.011
(0.016)
0.053
(0.036)
0.028
(0.019)
-0.045
(0.027)

-0.023
(0.037)
-0.058
(0.037)
-0.048
(0.029)
0.036
(0.016)
0.071
(0.036)
0.023
(0.020)
-0.036
(0.027)

-0.007
(0.038)
-0.045
(0.038)
-0.014
(0.030)
0.039
(0.018)
0.020
(0.037)
0.029
(0.019)
-0.041
(0.025)

-0.027
(0.038)
-0.046
(0.037)
-0.036
(0.029)
0.018
(0.015)
0.063
(0.036)
0.048
(0.021)
-0.050
(0.024)

38

Other’s home based care
Licensed other’s home based
care
Unlicensed other’s home
based care
Unlicensed other’s home
based care: relative
Unlicensed other’s home
based care: non-relative
Hours of care if in care

-0.043
(0.032)
-0.006
(0.018)
-0.037
(0.030)
-0.009
(0.022)
-0.027
(0.023)
-1.356
(1.654)

-0.007
(0.033)
0.010
(0.016)
-0.017
(0.031)
0.023
(0.025)
-0.040
(0.022)
0.736
(1.619)

-0.012
(0.032)
0.037
(0.020)
-0.049
(0.029)
-0.000
(0.021)
-0.049
(0.022)
0.455
(1.537)

0.007
(0.036)
0.037
(0.024)
-0.030
(0.032)
-0.000
(0.024)
-0.029
(0.024)
-0.210
(1.874)

-0.027
(0.034)
0.044
(0.020)
-0.071
(0.030)
-0.001
(0.023)
-0.070
(0.023)
-0.667
(1.692)

Notes: In the first panel N=2121 for all regressions except the last row where N=824. In the
second panel N=4469 for all regressions except the last row where N=2283. Each row presents
analysis of the indicated dependent variable. Reported are the regression coefficients on the γt
year effects from equation (1), with t=1998 as the excluded variable. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses.

39

Table A3: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on work and care
decisions
N

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

7-12 months
Positive Parenting

2078

Ineffective/Hostile Parenting

2102

Family functioning

2063

How easily upset

2113

How loud crying when upset

2112

How much crying

2114

Difficulty to calm

2114

How often irritable

2109

How much smile/laugh

446

Average Mood

1057

How changeable is mood

2108

Adapts well to bad

2110

Response to new person

2111

Response to new place

2105

How much attention required

2109

Overall difficulty of child

2112

Motor/social score

1982

Age at which child sat up

1027

0.005
(0.266)
-0.105
(0.199)
0.364
(0.740)
0.012
(0.187)
-0.067
(0.234)
0.083
(0.156)
0.031
(0.163)
-0.060
(0.101)
0.006
(0.227)
-0.350
(0.149)
0.056
(0.199)
-0.034
(0.128)
0.213
(0.216)
-0.054
(0.177)
-0.294
(0.204)
0.029
(0.155)
-4.903
(2.070)
NA

Age at which child took first
steps
Parent reads to child

527

NA

2115

Parent teaches new words

1079

-0.048
(0.140)
NA

0.122
(0.142)
0.112
(0.115)
1.329
(0.351)
0.188
(0.118)
0.004
(0.134)
-0.020
(0.092)
-0.180
(0.086)
0.011
(0.063)
-0.175
(0.164)
-0.068
(0.173)
-0.124
(0.106)
-0.166
(0.080)
0.135
(0.132)
-0.260
(0.103)
-0.168
(0.124)
-0.049
(0.097)
-3.214
(1.214)
0.096
(0.202)
-0.140
(0.313)
-0.039
(0.089)
0.161

0.347
(0.204)
0.518
(0.234)
1.391
(0.494)
-0.098
(0.185)
0.358
(0.247)
0.260
(0.158)
0.081
(0.163)
0.234
(0.110)
-0.061
(0.206)
-0.121
(0.138)
-0.089
(0.164)
-0.080
(0.133)
-0.164
(0.204)
-0.170
(0.194)
0.101
(0.203)
0.039
(0.166)
1.511
(1.808)
0.076
(0.228)
-0.176
(0.361)
-0.026
(0.122)
0.366

0.178
(0.147)
0.119
(0.105)
0.958
(0.411)
0.131
(0.111)
0.086
(0.132)
0.173
(0.091)
0.213
(0.098)
0.060
(0.065)
0.146
(0.242)
-0.052
(0.131)
0.205
(0.116)
0.041
(0.087)
-0.010
(0.127)
-0.205
(0.105)
-0.117
(0.121)
-0.135
(0.091)
-2.530
(1.125)
0.020
(0.196)
0.234
(0.317)
0.121
(0.078)
0.220

-0.254
(0.308)
0.117
(0.255)
0.046
(0.772)
-0.053
(0.217)
-0.184
(0.261)
0.183
(0.176)
0.143
(0.172)
0.135
(0.123)
0.011
(0.239)
0.014
(0.182)
-0.067
(0.205)
0.017
(0.153)
-0.643
(0.212)
-0.542
(0.174)
-0.466
(0.219)
-0.346
(0.163)
-0.557
(2.223)
0.261
(0.277)
0.130
(0.363)
-0.087
(0.144)
0.268

40

Parent tells story

1474

NA

Parent plays action games

1475

NA

13-24 months
Positive Parenting

4303

Ineffective/Hostile Parenting

4300

Family functioning

4298

How easily upset

4441

How loud crying when upset

4443

How much crying

4447

Difficulty to calm

4445

How often irritable

4445

How much smile/laugh

4447

Average Mood

4446

How changeable is mood

4434

Adapts well to bad

4439

Response to new person

4437

Response to new place

4437

How much attention required

4440

Overall difficulty of child

4440

Motor/social score

4326

Age at which child sat up

3432

0.246
(0.153)
-0.019
(0.117)
0.153
(0.366)
-0.021
(0.125)
0.083
(0.152)
-0.055
(0.100)
0.021
(0.118)
-0.015
(0.071)
-0.066
(0.076)
-0.026
(0.075)
0.120
(0.121)
-0.048
(0.088)
0.225
(0.135)
-0.224
(0.116)
0.045
(0.130)
-0.078
(0.091)
1.867
(1.138)
NA

Age at which child took first
steps
Parent reads to child

3436

NA

4457

0.119
(0.059)

(0.177)
0.082
(0.186)
0.064
(0.049)

(0.192)
-0.083
(0.225)
-0.056
(0.100)

(0.169)
0.130
(0.181)
0.057
(0.051)

(0.237)
-0.150
(0.252)
-0.183
(0.112)

0.118
(0.159)
-0.070
(0.118)
0.981
(0.364)
0.210
(0.135)
0.117
(0.144)
-0.047
(0.101)
0.072
(0.115)
0.064
(0.083)
0.039
(0.076)
-0.013
(0.075)
0.285
(0.130)
-0.023
(0.102)
0.268
(0.141)
0.060
(0.128)
-0.026
(0.135)
-0.015
(0.106)
-1.354
(1.215)
-0.067
(0.140)
-0.055
(0.179)
0.123
(0.059)

0.361
(0.149)
-0.066
(0.114)
-0.055
(0.371)
0.157
(0.124)
0.065
(0.146)
-0.048
(0.097)
0.174
(0.112)
0.022
(0.074)
0.014
(0.091)
-0.053
(0.074)
-0.114
(0.111)
-0.040
(0.086)
0.005
(0.133)
-0.256
(0.112)
-0.078
(0.125)
-0.304
(0.092)
2.490
(1.195)
0.093
(0.111)
0.070
(0.143)
0.039
(0.063)

0.267
(0.144)
0.200
(0.125)
-0.317
(0.386)
0.206
(0.124)
0.120
(0.141)
0.015
(0.088)
0.380
(0.108)
0.181
(0.068)
-0.066
(0.065)
0.046
(0.072)
0.008
(0.111)
0.006
(0.090)
0.032
(0.121)
-0.227
(0.113)
-0.048
(0.128)
-0.198
(0.085)
-0.246
(1.112)
0.271
(0.148)
-0.264
(0.177)
0.101
(0.057)

0.110
(0.154)
0.047
(0.115)
-0.474
(0.379)
0.143
(0.121)
-0.041
(0.140)
0.097
(0.094)
0.174
(0.107)
0.055
(0.069)
-0.021
(0.077)
0.006
(0.072)
-0.011
(0.116)
0.242
(0.088)
0.010
(0.132)
-0.219
(0.114)
-0.144
(0.125)
-0.103
(0.090)
-2.408
(1.186)
0.496
(0.118)
0.004
(0.138)
0.043
(0.061)

41

Parent teaches new words

3551

NA

Parent tells story

3554

NA

Parent plays action games

3558

NA

-0.090
(0.072)
-0.046
(0.109)
-0.035
(0.055)

-0.064
(0.049)
0.063
(0.075)
0.043
(0.039)

0.007
(0.058)
0.067
(0.100)
-0.014
(0.056)

-0.072
(0.055)
0.054
(0.074)
-0.002
(0.040)

Notes: Each row presents analysis of the indicated dependent variable. Reported are the number
of observations and regression coefficients on the γt year effects from equation (1), with t=1998
as the excluded variable. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. NA indicates variable not
available for that year.

42

