                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY:
                              WAS THERE A BUSH DOCTRINE?

                                         Barry Eichengreen
                                         Douglas A. Irwin

                                        Working Paper 13831
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13831


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




This is a revision of a paper prepared for the conference "American Foreign Policy after the Bush
Doctrine" at the Miller Center, University of Virginia, June 7-8 2007. A shorter version is to appear
in a volume from the Miller Center and Oxford University Press. We thank Glenn Hubbard, Phil Levy,
Will Melick, Michael Moore, Matthew Slaughter, and Ted Truman for helpful comments on earlier
drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Barry Eichengreen and Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Economic Policy: Was There a Bush Doctrine?
Barry Eichengreen and Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 13831
March 2008
JEL No. F0

                                                ABSTRACT

While many political scientists and diplomatic historians see the Bush presidency as a distinctive epoch
in American foreign policy, we argue that there was no Bush Doctrine in foreign economic policy.
The Bush administration sought to advance a free trade agenda but could not avoid the use of protectionist
measures at home -- just like its predecessors. It foreswore bailouts of financially-distressed developing
countries yet ultimately yielded to the perceived necessity of lending assistance -- just like its predecessors.
Not unlike previous presidents, President Bush also maintained a stance of benign neglect toward
the country's current account deficit. These continuities reflect long-standing structures and deeply
embedded interests that the administration found impossible to resist.

We see the next administration as having to address many of the same problems subject to the same
constraints. The trade policy agenda will evolve slowly, with questions about the viability of multilateral
liberalization under the WTO and the degree to which labor and environmental conditions can be included
in trade agreements. Policy toward China will continue to confront difficult choices: even if it succeeds
in pressuring the country to reduce its accumulation of dollar reserves, thereby easing the current account
imbalance with the United States, this may only imply a more difficult market for U.S. Treasury debt
and higher interest rates at home. Continuity will therefore remain the rule.


Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

           In many areas of foreign policy, the Bush doctrine marks a sharp break with the

approaches of earlier administrations. At first glance this seems true of the Bush

Administration’s foreign economic policy as well.2 Not unlike the administration of

Ronald Reagan before them, the administration of George W. Bush brought to

Washington a powerful ideology – that of limited government – to inform and shape

policy decisions. This staunchly noninterventionist, free-market approach led candidate

Bush to campaign as a supporter of free trade. It led his inner circle to conclude that

intervening in foreign exchange markets, however acceptable for Europe or Japan, was

inappropriate for the United States. Bush and his advisors opposed using government

influence and taxpayer money to intervene in emerging markets suffering financial crises,

bilaterally and through the International Monetary Fund (IMF). They were skeptical that

official assistance, whether doled our directly or through the World Bank, could be an

agent of change in less developed countries.

           In the event, the new administration had little opportunity to pursue this vision

before 9/11 reshaped its foreign economic policies. The idea that government should be

limited rested uncomfortably with this reminder of the paramount responsibility of any

administration for national security. The wish to limit discretionary trade policy and

foreign aid butted up against the realization that these could be devices for supporting

allies in the war on terror. The fallout from 9/11 meant that a tremendous amount of U.S.




2
    As Richard Cooper (1972) famously pointed out, economic policy is foreign policy.


                                                     2
Treasury resources were diverted toward terrorism-related issues such as the economic

and financial reconstruction of Iraq.3

        At the systemic level, powerful interests and long-standing structures also forced

the administration to modify its initial vision. Holding to free trade threatened to

antagonize special interests on whose support reelection prospects depended. Leaving

Turkey or Argentina to its financial fate might destabilize global financial markets.

Denying foreign aid to countries with weak governments might contribute to the further

breakdown of their economic and political systems. In these and other connections, the

existence of powerful lobbies and special interests forced the Bush Administration, now

having to maneuver in the policy arena, to assume a more pragmatic stance. The

existence of structures like the World Trade Organization (which constrains the

president’s trade policy-making options) and international capital markets (which have

too much destabilizing capacity to be treated with benign neglect) required the

administration to modify or abandon the more radical elements of its agenda.

        Reflecting the constraints of these inherited structures and interests, policies

departed less from those of earlier years than the administration’s initial rhetoric would

have led one to expect. Whereas some political scientists and diplomatic historians are

apt to see the Bush presidency as a distinctive epoch in American foreign policy, we

therefore argue that there was no Bush Doctrine in international economic policy.

        This analysis leads us to expect continuities with future policy as well. Neither

the foreign policy concerns created by 9/11 nor long-standing structural constraints on

international economic policy making will go away. In combination they will prevent the

3
  As described by Taylor (2007). Policy toward terrorist financing is a complex story of its own; we do not
treat it here, partly because the issue is highly specialized, and partly because no one paper can address
everything.


                                                     3
next administration, whatever its identity, from undertaking radical changes to U.S.

foreign economic policy – much as they constrained the administration of George W.

Bush.



2. Trade Policy

        In trade policy, the Bush administration behaved like almost every other post-

World War II presidential administration: it linked initiatives in this domain to broader

foreign policy goals, supported the multilateral trading system, and sought trade

negotiating powers from the Congress to conclude trade agreements. Also like its

predecessors, the administration made exceptions to this doctrine by giving temporary

protection to politically-influential sectors. Although its approach has some distinctive

aspects, most notably the energetic pursuit of bilateral free trade agreements, the Bush

administration does not stand out as distinctive in its trade policy stance.

        The fundamental reason for these similarities is that the roots of trade policy run

deep. The current trade policy framework was established by the Reciprocal Trade

Agreements Act (RTAA) that came into existence during the Roosevelt administration at

a time when world trade had collapsed due to protectionism and the Great Depression.4

Congress delegated some of its constitutional powers over trade policy to the executive

branch.5 The RTAA was controversial because it marked a sharp break from America’s

protectionist, isolationist past, as reflected in the infamous Hawley-Smoot tariff of 1930.

After World War II, the RTAA was infused with an important, bipartisan foreign policy

rationale: the strengthening of Western Europe and the fight against communism. The

4
 On the importance of the RTAA, see Irwin (1998).
5
 Prior to 1974, those agreements did not even require Congressional approval; starting in 1974, Congress
must approve any agreement (by a majority vote in each chamber) but cannot amend the agreement.


                                                    4
logic was straightforward: expanding world trade would promote economic recovery in

Western Europe and secure democracy, enabling the region to resist Soviet communism

and thereby promote U.S. national security interests.

       As a result Congress rarely allowed the president’s trade negotiating authority to

lapse. A bipartisan consensus on the importance of open trade policies – however frayed

it was at times – endured throughout the post World War II period and ensured policy

continuity through Republican and Democratic administrations and Congresses. It

enabled the United States to play a leading role in creating the General Agreement on

Tariffs and Trade (GATT), participate in several GATT trade negotiating rounds, and

support the establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995.

       This framework leaves a presidential administration little scope for developing a

distinctive trade policy. Every president since Franklin Roosevelt has believed that the

open world trading system and trade liberalization are fundamentally in America’s

economic and foreign policy interest. Every president has sought Congressional

authority to negotiate trade agreements to open up foreign markets to U.S. exports in

exchange for a reduction in U.S. trade barriers. And every president has made special

accommodation for trade-affected interests at home.

       President Bush was exceptional only in the degree to which he spoke out clearly

and unambiguously in favor of free trade. Most presidents have tempered their

endorsement of free trade with the qualification that trade must be “fair” and that

adequate protection must be given to displaced workers or industries injured by imports.

With Bush there was no wishy-washy rhetoric about “fair trade” to which even President




                                             5
Ronald Reagan had succumbed. All recent presidents have rejected “protectionism,” but

Bush was emphatic and without qualification at the outset of his term.6

         During the 2000 election campaign, candidate Bush took a strong stand in favor

of the economic, political, and moral benefits of free trade. Four months into his

administration, the new president linked free trade to freedom more generally: “Free

trade supports and sustains freedom in all its forms . . . . When we open trade, we open

minds.” (May 29, 2001). He argued that free trade is an uplifting policy that not only

spreads prosperity and hope to where both are in short supply, but that it would ultimately

lead to demands for political freedom as well. “Free trade is also a proven strategy for

building global prosperity and adding to the momentum of political freedom . . . . And

greater freedom for commerce across the borders eventually leads to greater freedom for

citizens within the borders.” (August 12, 2002).

         In a campaign speech in Miami in 2000, Bush outlined his trade agenda: secure

trade negotiating authority from Congress and negotiate agreements to establish free

trade from Canada to the Cape of Good Horn.7 Once in office the Bush administration


6
 In early statements of administration policy, Bush never mentioned the word “fair trade.” For example, in
March 2001, at Western Michigan University in Kalamazoo, Michigan, Bush stated: “This administration
will always speak for American interests, but free and open trade is in our national interest. The world will
know this, that I strongly and my administration strongly supports free trade.” However, later in the
administration the rhetoric of fair trade had crept in. In his 2004 State of the Union message, Bush stated:
“My administration is promoting free and fair trade to open up new markets for America's entrepreneurs
and manufacturers and farmers, to create jobs for American workers.”

7
   “If the United States cannot offer new trade with the nations of Latin America, they will find it elsewhere
-- as they are doing already in new agreements with the European Union. In the last few years, Mexico
signed a trade agreement with the Europeans, while Canada has a new trade pact with Chile. All of this
while, in Washington, time has been lost. European businesses and consumers are benefiting -- ours are
not. I don't fault our European friends for making these deals. We dropped the ball, and they're running
with it. But we must get back into the game, and here is how I propose to do it...First, I will secure fast-
track authority -- the ability to pass or reject trade agreements without amendment. Without it, as we have
seen, America is slow to move, and other nations are unwilling to negotiate with us seriously. . . . Our goal
will be free trade agreements with all the nations of Latin America. We can do so in cooperation with our
NAFTA partners. We should do so with Chile, and Brazil and Argentina, the anchor states of Mercosur.


                                                      6
proceeded exactly as promised. The first step was to secure “trade promotion authority”

(previously known as fast track authority) in order to reach bilateral and multilateral trade

agreements to reduce trade barriers. Without trade promotion authority (TPA), the

president could negotiate with other countries about trade barriers, but he could not do so

credibly, thus reducing the probability of reaching an agreement.8 Congressional

permission for the executive branch to conclude trade agreements had lapsed in 1997.

The Clinton administration had used fast track authority to push through the North

American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the Uruguay Round of trade agreements

in 1993 and 1994, respectively.9 Although both measures, particularly NAFTA, were

controversial, the Clinton administration succeeded, but the political price was steep.

Suffering from trade fatigue, Congress had declined the administration’s request to renew

its trade negotiating authority.

         Once in office, Bush’s U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), Robert Zoellick, asked

Congress for TPA and initiated a broad trade agenda based on multilateral and bilateral

trade agreements. As TPA legislation was being formulated, USTR had to prepare for a

WTO ministerial meeting in November 2001. The previous WTO ministerial meeting in

Seattle in 1999 had been marred by violent protests outside the convention, while a sharp

split between developing and developed countries erased any chance of a new trade

round. The 2001 ministerial in Doha, Qatar promised to be equally fractious, and few

expected it to succeed.

Brazil is the largest economy in Latin America, with such vast economic potential, and our relations must
reflect this. We will also work toward free trade with the smaller nations of Central America and the
Caribbean. We must be flexible because one-size-fits-all negotiations are not always the answer. But the
ultimate goal will remain constant ... free trade from northernmost Canada to the tip of Cape Horn.”
Remarks in Miami on 27 August 2000.
8
  See Destler (1997).
9
  These trade initiatives had been largely negotiated under the first Bush administration, but it fell upon the
Clinton administration to secure their passage through Congress.


                                                       7
          Then 9/11 intervened. Other countries rallied around the United States and

sought to ensure that world trade would be kept open and free despite the terrorist attacks

and the possibility of a global recession. Yet many developing countries remained

suspicious of a new trade round because the obligations that they had undertaken in the

Uruguay Round were still fresh in mind. The concerns of developing countries were

eased by the promise that the new round would focus on economic development.10 This

helped to inject new life into the WTO and enabled the launch of the new multilateral

trade negotiations.

          Much in the way that the Truman administration had sought to link early trade

liberalization with foreign policy goals, the Bush administration enlisted the war on terror

as part of a new push for trade liberalization. Nine days after 9/11, Zoellick published an

op-ed in the Washington Post entitled “Countering Terror with Trade” in which he

argued that

          “[e]conomic strength -- at home and abroad -- is the foundation of America's hard
          and soft power. Earlier enemies learned that America is the arsenal of democracy;
          today's enemies will learn that America is the economic engine for freedom,
          opportunity and development. To that end, U.S. leadership in promoting the
          international economic and trading system is vital. Trade is about more than
          economic efficiency. It promotes the values at the heart of this protracted struggle.
          . . . . Congress now needs to send an unmistakable signal to the world that the
          United States is committed to global leadership of openness and understands that
          the staying power of our new coalition depends on economic growth and hope. . .
          . Congress needs to enact U.S. trade promotion authority so America can
          negotiate agreements that advance the causes of openness, development and
          growth. It is a sad irony that just as the old world of bipolar blocs faded into
          history and the new world of globalization fast-forwarded, the United States let its
          trade promotion authority lapse.”

          The prospect of a new negotiating round at the WTO was just what the Bush

administration needed to convince Congress that it required TPA. In December 2001 the


10
     Hence the name the Doha Development Round.


                                                  8
Republican House of Representatives passed the Bipartisan Trade Promotion Authority

Act of 2001 by the very partisan vote of 215 to 214, with Republicans voting 194-24 in

favor and Democrats voting 188-20 against. This sharply partisan vote was a worrisome

signal of future difficulties; previous approvals had often come with some reluctance on

the part of Democrats, but the TPA votes were extremely divisive (Shapiro 2006). 11

        Thus, 9/11 helped create an environment that facilitated the granting of TPA and

the launching of the Doha Round. But after moving more quickly than most

administrations on trade policy, the Bush administration discovered that implementing

freer trade was more difficult than anticipated. While TPA cleared a path for

commencing the Doha Round, it soon became clear that the negotiations would not be

easy. Administration officials hopeful for an “early harvest” from the Doha round were

powerless to produce such a result without a willingness on the part of the European

Union to compromise on its agricultural subsidies or developing countries to embrace

domestic trade reforms.12

        The administration also felt tensions when using trade policy as a tool in the war

on terror, discovering that it could not ignore domestic political considerations in using

trade concessions to help allies. Shortly after 9/11, President Pervez Musharraf of

Pakistan requested the suspension of tariff and quota on Pakistan’s exports of textiles and



11
   The Senate approved TPA in the context of a vote on Andean trade preferences in May 2002, and
negotiating authority finally cleared Congress in July 2002. TPA was approved for three years with a
possible two year extension at the request of the president.
12
   Indeed, the compromise reached at Doha to label the round a “development” round may have sown the
seeds of future discord. Many developing countries expected non-reciprocal market access to be granted to
them by developed countries. Developing countries believed they were owed such treatment as a result of
imbalances in the Uruguay Round and promises at Doha, but developed countries held fast to demands for
reciprocity. In fact, both the 2003 WTO ministerial in Cancun and the 2005 ministerial in Hong Kong
ended in failure and a key deadline in late 2006 was missed, suggesting that the Doha round will have to be
completed in the next administration.


                                                     9
apparel to the United States in an effort to lift its economy.13 After debate within the

administration, Commerce Department officials informed Pakistan’s representatives that

the United States would be unable to grant trade concessions aside from some temporary

swing quotas. Pressure from the domestic textile and apparel industry had blocked any

expansion of imports. In the event, Pakistan’s textile exports to the United States actually

fell sharply in the months after 9/11 because of a sharp rise in insurance premiums,

costing Pakistan over a billion dollars in exports.14

        Still, Zoellick envisioned using the prospect of bilateral trade agreements to assist

allies in the war effort, denying potential trade benefits to countries that did not cooperate

in the war in Afghanistan and Iraq. The most notable example was the successful pursuit

of a free trade agreement with Australia (which sent troops to Iraq) and the rejection of

any such agreement with New Zealand (which did not support the war).

        A more ambitious goal was bringing freer trade to the Middle East. The United

States has long encouraged the countries of the Middle East to diversify away from oil

and to take steps to unleash the economic growth that brings about shared prosperity.

The president had always stressed freer trade could be a catalyst for broader political and

economic changes that would enhance the cause of liberty and democratization. In May

2003 he announced a plan of graduated steps for Middle Eastern nations to increase trade

and investment with the United States and others in the world economy. The Bush

administration identified free trade agreements as one means to this end, the hope being


13
   Both the European Union and Turkey had done so.
14
   According to Franklin Foer (2002), the reason for the rejection of Pakistan was that Republicans decided
that they wanted to pass TPA without Democratic support to show the business lobbies that reliably pro-
trade Democrats were not trustworthy on the issue. To get a majority, Ways and Means Chairman Bill
Thomas needed to woo protectionist Republicans to the bill with promises that key industries in their
districts would be protected. House Republican leaders secured the deciding vote of Robin Hayes (R-NC)
by promising not to increase quotas on Pakistani textile imports.


                                                    10
that economic changes could help bring about political and societal change that increase

freedom and reduce the risk of terrorism.

         Aside from Oman, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates, the administration has

found few willing partners in the region. Countries marked by political and economic

repression – such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Iran, among others – remain

relatively closed to the world economy. Their leaders do not want to unleash forces

associated with the rough and tumble of increased trade and foreign investment.15

         The administration also discovered that implementing free trade policies at home

was not simple either. This was evident in three areas: steel, agriculture, and China.

          In any election campaign there is the temptation to promise specific trade relief to

constituencies that are said to be suffering from import competition. Campaigning at a

West Virginia steel mill, then-vice presidential candidate Dick Cheney told workers: “If

our trading partners violate our trade laws, we will respond swiftly and firmly. There

should be no more looking the other way so that politics can triumph over principles.”16

         In itself this promise was nothing out of the ordinary. Every administration since

Lyndon Johnson had promised and delivered special trade protection to the steel industry

– with the notable exception of the Clinton administration during the steel price decline

following the Asian financial crisis.17 But Cheney’s commitment was striking, given the

administration’s free trade stance.


15
    For an assessment of the role of trade and political reform in the Middle East, see Momani (2007).
16
    The origin of this promise is purported to be the president’s campaign adviser, Karl Rove, who
calculated that West Virginia was a close enough call for the Republicans that such a pledge might tip the
state’s electoral votes to the Republicans. In fact, Rove’s position may have been vindicated because Bush
won West Virginia, the first time a Republican had done so since 1984 and only the fourth time in eighteen
elections since 1932, and the election would have been lost without that state.
17
   Industries are always free to petition for antidumping and countervailing duties in an administrative
process that is not subject to presidential discretion. But historically, the steel industry has been politically
powerful enough to merit executive trade actions to limit imports. President Johnson and Nixon negotiated


                                                       11
         After the election, the Cheney promise on steel came due. In June 2001, the Bush

administration took the unusual step of initiating a Section 201 “escape clause” case on

behalf of the steel industry.18 This was the first time that a Section 201 case had been

initiated by the executive branch and signaled the degree to which the administration

supported the imposition of import restrictions. The problem for the independent, quasi-

judicial International Trade Commission (ITC), which had to interpret the petition in light

of the Congressional statute, was that the steel import surge occurred in the wake of the

Asian financial crisis in 1997-98, whereas the case required the consideration of imports

from 1999-2000, when they had dropped off considerably.19 With the Bush

administration having sent the strongest possible signal by initiating the 201 case, the ITC

ruled, in many but not all categories of goods, that the U.S. industry had been injured by

increased imports.

         The president had the discretion to accept the proposed ITC remedy, impose other

measures, or reject any remedy whatsoever. This sparked an internal debate over

appropriate action.20 Yet the fact that the administration had initiated the case virtually



voluntary export restraints with Japan and the European Community, President Carter instituted the trigger
price mechanism of product-specific price floors, Presidents Reagan and Bush signed voluntary restraint
agreements with principal suppliers (Moore 1996).
18
   Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974 allows the United States to impose temporary tariffs and quotas on
imported goods if they are injuring a domestic industry. (A similar provision – called safeguards - is
written into the GATT as well.) Under Section 201, the U.S. International Trade Commission starts an
investigation to determine if goods are being imported into the United States in such increased quantities as
to be a substantial cause of serious injury or threat of serious injury to a domestic industry producing a like
or directly competitive product, it recommends to the President relief that would remedy the injury and
facilitate industry adjustment to import competition. The President makes the final decision concerning
whether to provide relief and the type and duration of relief, which usually take the form of tariffs that
decline over a five year period. Private firms or industry associations are allowed to invoke the statue and
initiate the process.
19
   This would come back to haunt the agency when the decision was reviewed at the WTO.
20
   Drawing on his experience as the CEO of Alcoa, Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill proposed an
international agreement to reduce excess capacity in the world steel market, to essentially form a global
steel cartel to manage production (Suskind 2004, 216ff). Presidential adviser Karl Rove thought that steel
protection might help swing Pennsylvania and Michigan to the Republican side in the 2002 mid-term


                                                      12
assured that it would accept the ITC’s verdict. It would have been odd to have initiated a

case and then to have rejected the proposed relief (although some in the administration

believed that relief was provided only because TPA had not been secured). In March

2002 the president announced the final decision to accept the ITC recommendation and

impose tariffs of up to 30 percent on selected categories of imported steel.

        Although this action was in some sense cut from the same cloth as the steel trade

restraints imposed by previous administrations, there was a key difference. Previous

administrations were not constrained by GATT rules and had negotiated voluntary export

restraints (VERs) with foreign suppliers. VERs enabled foreign exporters to earn quota

rents, tempering their opposition to the export restriction. Under the Uruguay Round

agreements, however, countries could no longer negotiate VERs but instead had to use

the existing trade remedies in the GATT, such as the escape clause. By imposing tariffs,

these instruments harmed foreign exporters instead of handing them quota rents; hence

foreign countries were much more likely to oppose them. Furthermore, a new and

stronger dispute settlement system had been set up at the WTO to prosecute disputes over

international trade rules.

        Almost immediately the European Union, along with Japan, China, South Korea,

Switzerland, and Norway, challenged the Bush steel action in the dispute settlement

system in the WTO. The EU threatened to retaliate even before the president announced


elections. Prior to the meeting, according to Suskind, Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill and Federal Reserve
Chairman Alan Greenspan urged Vice President Cheney to reject steel tariffs on the grounds “that the
largely bipartisan consensus on free trade was one of the great victories of the last decade; that the
President would confuse many constituencies by flouting that consensus,” and that the action might violate
WTO rules. In February 2002, at a meeting in the White House situation room, the economic and
diplomatic policy principals of the Bush administration met to make a final decision about the ITC ruling.
According to Suskind (2004), Zoellick and Cheney favored imposing the safeguard action while most other
participants were skeptical but not adamantly opposed. (Zoellick believed that relief would help secure the
passage of TPA in the Senate, which had yet to vote on the measure.)


                                                    13
his final decision. In May 2003 a WTO panel found that the ITC decision was

inconsistent in several ways with the WTO safeguard agreement, such as whether the

surge in steel imports was unforeseen and whether imports had increased in absolute or

relative terms (Read 2005). Despite a U.S. appeal, the WTO Appellate Body essentially

reaffirmed the panel’s decision.

         The administration then faced the choice of (a) rescinding the steel tariffs, (b) not

changing its policy and tolerating retaliation against U.S. exports by the EU and others,

or (c) offering compensation in the form of other tariff reductions. In December 2003,

Zoellick announced that the safeguard tariffs had achieved their purpose and would be

lifted. This decision was not difficult because the steel measures had received

unfavorable press in the United States and around the world, had been in effect through

the 2002 midterm elections and had thus served their political purpose, and had coincided

with large increases in domestic steel prices (something that was only partly a result of

the tariffs themselves), boosting the profitability of the industry.21

         A second retreat from the Bush administration’s stated principles of free trade and

open markets was the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002. Congress enacts

farm legislation every five years, and the Freedom to Farm Act of 1997 had resulted in

lower farm subsidies and price supports. But low commodity prices then prompted

Congress to enact supplemental appropriations that restored farm benefits. The Bush

administration did not take an active part in proposing and crafting this legislation and

consequently paid a price. Congress formalized these informal supplements and the

president signed the legislation in May 2002. The failure to curtail farm subsidies

21
  As the Financial Times noted, “More than any single action by the Bush administration, the steel tariffs
sowed doubts around the world about whether the U.S. can do what it is asking of other countries – make
politically difficult decisions at home to advance the prospects of free trade abroad.” (December 5, 2003).


                                                    14
marked a retreat from the principles of the Freedom to Farm Act and was a bad omen for

the Doha Round, one goal of which was to scale back agricultural subsidies. The

looming $40 billion annual support (budgetary and non-budgetary) for agriculture in the

United States drew strong criticism from developing countries. The problem for the

administration was not so much its actions in this case (every president since the 1930s

having signed bills giving subsidies to domestic farmers), but the clash with its strong

free market, free trade rhetoric.

       A third retreat from free trade was the November 2005 memorandum of

understanding between the United States and China establishing 21 quotas covering 34

categories of U.S. imports of textiles and apparel products that had previously been

subject to safeguard actions. These quotas were reminiscent of the Multifiber

Arrangement (MFA) abolished by the WTO in January 2005 but were implemented to

slow the rapid growth in apparel imports from China in particular. In March 2007 the

Bush administration then signaled that China was no longer a “non-market” economy and

hence that countervailing duty law (which allows the imposition of tariffs on subsidized

imported goods) could be applied against its exports. This decision, involving a case of

imports of specialty paper products, was yet another indication that the administration’s

trade policies were not more ideologically driven or substantively different from those of

its predecessors.

       To be sure, the Bush administration resisted other opportunities for backsliding.

It supported the accession of China to the WTO, seeing through the abolition of the

Multi-Fiber Arrangement, and resisted use of the Section 421 “China safeguard.”

Although frequently criticized for rejecting multilateralism, the administration worked to




                                            15
comply with the WTO dispute settlement rulings (the Foreign Sales

Corporation/Extraterritorial Income Exclusion, the Byrd amendment, and steel safeguard

cases in particular) and, of course, for having launched the Doha Round.

        The principal way in which the Bush administration’s trade policy differed from

its predecessors was in the use of bilateral agreements. Given the obstacles to concluding

a broad multilateral agreement at the WTO, in particular the ability of the slowest

countries to block progress toward dismantling trade barriers and reducing subsidies,

USTR Zoellick was not content to wait. He therefore enunciated the doctrine of

“competitive liberalization” – the United States would bypass the WTO and pursue

bilateral and regional trade agreements as a way of putting pressure on reluctant

reformers.22

        The administration’s ambitious pursuit regional arrangements could have been

anticipated once Zoellick was appointed USTR. Even before the 2000 election, he had

argued that:

        “If some regions are too slow to open their markets, the United States should
        move on to others. America should spur a competitive dynamic for openness and
        transparency. Competition can work wonders: when the United States pursued
        NAFTA and APEC, the EU finally felt the pressure to complete the global
        Uruguay Round trade negotiations. If other hold back in the new WTO round, the
        United States should repeat this strategy of regionalism with a global goal in order
        to break the logjam.”

And in 2002, Zoellick (2002) explained:

        “We will promote free trade globally, regionally and bilaterally, while rebuilding
        support at home. By moving forward on multiple fronts, the United States can
        exert its leverage for openness, create a new competition in liberalization, target
        the needs of developing countries, and create a fresh political dynamic by putting
        free trade onto the offensive. . . . To multiply the likelihood of success, the United

22
  The term “competitive liberalization” was first used by Fred Bergsten (1996) to describe the process of
Asian trade liberalization during the early 1990s and was adopted by Zoellick as a description of his
approach.


                                                    16
       States is also invigorating a drive for regional and bilateral free-trade agreements
       (FTAs). These agreements can foster powerful links among commerce, economic
       reform, development, investment, security and free societies. . . . The United
       States is combining this building-block approach to free trade with a clear
       commitment to reducing global barriers to trade through the WTO. By using the
       leverage of the American economy's size and attractiveness to stimulate
       competition for openness, we will move the world closer toward the goal of
       comprehensive free trade.”

       Prior to the Bush administration the United States had signed just a few FTAs on

an ad hoc basis: the U.S.-Israel FTA in 1985, the U.S.-Canada FTA in 1989, NAFTA in

1993, and the U.S.-Jordan FTA in 2001 (signed by Bush but initiated by the Clinton

administration). Breaking with past practice, Zoellick now aggressively increased the

number of bilateral negotiations, concluding agreements with Australia, Chile, Singapore,

Peru, Morocco, Bahrain, South Korea, Colombia, Panama, and five Central American

countries (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua).23 Additional

negotiations were undertaken with five nations in southern Africa as well as with

Malaysia, Thailand, and the United Arab Emirates.

       More than just a domestic initiative, this strategy was also a response to foreign

trends. The global move toward bilateral and regional trade agreements predated the

Bush administration. The number of such agreements notified at the WTO by other

countries accelerated in the early 1990s, around the time of NAFTA. As Bush stated in

his Miami campaign speech in 2000, he was aware that the United States was behind the

curve and that U.S. exporters were beginning to suffer discriminatory treatment as a

result of other countries’ FTAs.

       Economists tend to support the non-discriminatory most-favored nation principles

of the GATT and WTO and believe that multilateral negotiations are the only way to deal

23
 In what eventually became known as CAFTA-DR (Central American Free Trade Agreement and the
Dominican Republic).


                                              17
with the troublesome issue of agricultural and export subsidies.24 Proponents of FTAs

argue that they are a useful alternative when the multilateral option is not viable. The

FTA or “like-minded” country approach bypasses the hold-up problem at the WTO, is

likely to create more trade than it diverts, and hence may put pressure on reluctant trade

reformers.25 At the same time, some trade policy analysts fear that the FTAs divert

scarce negotiating resources away from the multilateral system.

        From the standpoint of domestic politics, FTAs have the problem of forcing the

Congress to vote frequently on trade bills, which many members find unpalatable. Some

FTAs were uncontroversial and passed the Congress easily: the Australian FTA passed

the House by a vote of 314 to 109, the Singapore FTA passed by 272 to 155, the

Moroccan FTA by 323 to 99, and the Bahrain FTA went through by 327 to 95. Others

encountered stiff opposition and required much arm twisting to ensure their passage.

CAFTA-DR raised the specter of the divisive NAFTA debate and squeaked through the

House by a vote of 217 to 215 in July 2005, while the FTA with Oman passed the House

by a vote of 221 to 205. The partisan nature of these trade votes gave members of

Congress an incentive to keep their position ambiguous until they obtained a political

favor from the president in exchange for their vote. Also, trade is an uncomfortable issue

for Congress, and the more times it is forced to vote on such bills the worse the

environment becomes for future trade legislation.

        The Democrats’ capture of the Congress in the 2006 midterm elections effectively

spelled the end of the Bush trade agenda. Many Democrats have been skeptical of


24
   Bhagwati and Panagariya (1995) and Bhagwati (2008), among others, fear that bilateral agreements are
more trade diverting than trade creating and harm the multilateral system by diminishing the importance of
the most favored nation clause.
25
   See Evenett and Meier (2008) for an assessment of competitive liberalization.


                                                    18
measures to expand trade and have resisted FTAs, particularly with developing countries,

which they believe should include stronger labor and environmental provisions if pursued

at all. In a bow to political reality, the Bush administration reached an agreement with

Congressional Democrats in May 2007 to include labor and environmental provisions in

future trade agreements. As a result, the Peru FTA passed with greater bipartisan

support, clearing the House in November 2007 by a vote of 285-132.

        TPA expired in June 2007 with little prospect of renewal for the remainder of

Bush’s second term. And the political environment has become so hostile to trade that

even bipartisan compromises to move the trade agenda forward may impossible to reach.

The trade agenda has become complicated by fears about offshoring American service

jobs, growing concerns about income inequality and the distribution of the gains from

globalization, and the large bilateral deficit with China. All of these factors have

prevented the Bush administration from accomplishing its ambitious goals set out in its

first term.

        A final issue that the Bush administration confronted was the national security

related aspects of foreign investment. The interagency Committee on Foreign Investment

in the United States (CFIUS) reviews foreign purchases of U.S. companies or operations

to see if they create problems for national security. While the Bush administration

favored an open investment policy, foreign purchases of American companies became

controversial during its tenure. Several high-profile acquisitions, from China and

countries in the Middle East (such as the UNOCAL acquisition by a state-owned Chinese

firm and the Dubai ports deal) have floundered over concerns about foreign influence.




                                             19
       Furthermore, in late 2007 and early 2008, a number of state-owned investment

companies (sovereign wealth funds) then purchased equity stakes in capital-strapped U.S.

financial institutions. While their capital injections were appreciated, reservations about

their influence over the politically-sensitive financial sector – especially given that the

foreign investor was a state-owned and often state-managed entity – were voiced. All

this suggests that the open U.S. investment regime may come under pressure in coming

years as well.



3. Monetary and Financial Policies

       In keeping with its free-market rhetoric, the Bush administration came to office

skeptical of activist IMF intervention in emerging market financial crises, foreign

exchange market intervention, and multilateral development assistance. In the 2000

campaign Bush made critical remarks about how the Clinton Administration had run to

the rescue of crisis countries such as Mexico in 1995, Russia in 1997, and Asian

countries in 1998. Administration officials were suspicious of a European-led

bureaucracy like the IMF. They signaled that the Bush Administration would seek

significant reforms of the multilaterals.

       The views of Bush’s economic team were informed by fears of moral hazard.

Knowing that the IMF would come to the rescue with emergency financial assistance,

governments in emerging markets adopted riskier policies or waited longer to adopt

corrective measures, in this view, while investors lent indiscriminately. When the crisis

came, the IMF provided the government with funds to support its financial markets; in

effect, official funds were used to purchase the bonds that investors sold, preventing the




                                              20
market from collapsing but allowing investors to avoid significant losses. Not only did

multilateral rescues transfer resources to Wall Street investors from the American

taxpayers funding the Fund (from American “plumbers and carpenters” in the phrase of

Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill) – or, insofar as the IMF is ultimately paid back by the

crisis country, from its own taxpayers to Wall Street – but market discipline was

weakened. This critique thus indicted multilateral rescues on both efficiency and equity

grounds.

         Specialists disagree about the extent of moral hazard. Skeptics observe that

neither foreign investors nor the crisis country escape scot free.26 The crisis country

suffers a recession, and investors still incur losses. But the majority of the Meltzer

Commission, constituted to investigate the operations of the IMF and World Bank during

the Clinton Administration and which reported in 2000, evinced no such doubts.27 And

number of members of the Meltzer Commission had ties to the Bush Administration.28

         Secretary O’Neill and his undersecretary for international affairs John Taylor had

complex views of the bailout question. In a 1998 interview that gained notoriety once he

was nominated as deputy secretary, Taylor echoed the views of his mentor George Shultz

that the world would be better off without the IMF. O’Neill was known not just for his

“plumbers and carpenters” remark but also for the observation that the IMF was

“associated with failure” and that its international rescues had been “too frequent.”29 But


26
   A good summary of the skeptical view is Mussa (2006).
27
   See the report of the International Financial Institution Advisory Commission (2000).
28
   Meltzer hailed from O’Neill’s hometown of Pittsburgh and did academic work close to Taylor’s, having
helped to publish one of his important papers. Charles Calomiris was close to his Columbia University
colleague and coauthor Glenn Hubbard. For more on these connections see below.
29
   In full, the first remark went “as we in the finance ministries of the world talk glibly about billions of
dollars of support for policies gone wrong, we need to remember that the money we are entrusted with
came from pumbers and carpenters who sent 25 per cent of their $50,000 annual income to us for wise
use.” Cited in Blustein (2005), p.118. The “associated with failure” remark is cited there as well.


                                                     21
O’Neill also praised the Clinton Administration’s 1995 bailout of Mexico in his

confirmation hearings and believed that, if there was a problem, hard-working officials

could solve it.30 Taylor for his part was anxious to avoid precipitous action that might

roil the markets.31

         So if the problem with IMF rescues was investor moral hazard, O’Neill’s instinct

was to find new ways of providing assistance that forced investors to take a haircut. If

the problem with scaling back IMF assistance was exciting the markets, Taylor’s instinct

was to move gradually. This was in contrast with the Council of Economic Advisers,

which adopted a harder line on the need to scale back the frequency and magnitude of

IMF programs.32

         The first real test of the administration’s approach to foreign monetary and

financial affairs was the crisis in Argentina.33 Argentina already had a program with the

IMF, and when Bush took office it had already experienced three years of economic

stagnation.34 Argentine voters and bondholders were losing patience, raising the danger




30
   Blustein (2005), p.173.
31
   The full text of his 1998 Bloomberg interview is itself indicative of this propensity. Taylor (2007),
p.101.
32
   Blustein (2005), p.145.
33
   The Argentine problem long predated the Bush Administration. Seeking to put behind it a history of
inflation and instability, the country had adopted a quasi-currency board in 1991. But it displayed neither
the fiscal discipline nor the labor market flexibility necessary for that regime to work smoothly. Inflexible
labor markets meant slow growth, and lack of fiscal discipline meant dependence on capital inflows and
doubts about debt sustainability. The Argentine authorities, of whom there were many over time, averred
admirable intentions but warned that, owing to political constraints, reform would take time. They
therefore sought the IMF’s seal of approval in the form of a precautionary program that entailed monitoring
but not, in the first instance, money. The U.S. declared its support for this initiative in 1997. As grow
slowed and doubts about debt sustainability deepened, precaution gave way to money. Again the U.S.
assented. Then, at the end of 2000, the program was beefed up to $14 billion, an extraordinary 500 per cent
of Argentina’s quota in the IMF. (In addition, there was $5 billion from the Interamerican Development
Bank and the World Bank and $1 billion from the Spanish government.) In both cases the Fund insisted on
fiscal restraint and labor market reform but not modification of the exchange rate regime as conditions for
lending. Space does not permit a comprehensive account; for more detail see Mussa (2002).
34
   Reflecting domestic problems compounded by devaluation in neighboring Brazil.


                                                     22
that a political backlash and capital flight might topple both the government and the

financial system.

         This would have been a fine time for the IMF and U.S. government to insist that

Argentina restructure its debts and put in place more flexible wage and exchange rate

policies and to indicate that no further assistance would be forthcoming until these tasks

were undertaken. The country would have been forced to address the roots of its

problem.35 Investors would have learned that indiscriminate lending had costs. Other

countries would have been taught to watch their p’s and q’s.

         The golden opportunity was the summer of 2001, when the Argentine government

leaked to the press the idea that the IMF would not only accelerate disbursal of the $1.25

billion to be paid out at the end of the second quarter but also augment its program. The

IMF not typically being forced into additional lending by public announcements by the

borrower, this would have been a fine time to pull the plug.

         But the State Department worried about the consequences of failing to support a

fledgling South American democracy.36 Taylor worried that an Argentine restructuring

could undermine investor confidence in the external debts of other emerging markets and

damage banks and investment funds. O’Neill believed that money was leverage and that

with sufficient leverage the U.S. could force reforms of Argentine policy. Others in

Treasury were more skeptical. In the White House, Glenn Hubbard at the CEA and

Lawrence Lindsey, head of the National Economic Council, were skeptical of

35
   O’Neill’s comments suggest an awareness that domestic factors with a long history were, in large part, at
the root of the problem. “They’ve been off and on in trouble for 70 years or more. They don’t have an
export industry to speak of. And they like it that way.” Blustein (2005), p.174.
36
   There were also issues of comparable treatment. Additional IMF support was provided for Brazil in the
summer of 2001, which in turn made it more difficult to deny support to Argentina. (A CEA memo
lamenting this labeled it the “prodigal son effect”). But difficult did not mean impossible: unlike
Argentina, Brazil had shifted to a more rational exchange rate regime in early 1999 and moved in the
direction of sustainable policies, justifying a differentiated response.


                                                    23
forbearance. With the economists divided, the arguments of the State Department tipped

the balance. The U.S. agreed to disbursal of the $1.25 billion already committed subject

to the Argentine government meeting performance criteria. It agreed to consider

augmenting the program by an additional $8 billion.

         O’Neill was impressed by the contrast between how companies and countries

addressed debt-sustainability problems. Corporations could restructure under the

protection of the bankruptcy court. The burden was shared by the creditors, not even

bondholders with seniority being immune. Its finances having been reorganized, the

enterprise could continue as a viable entity. That there existed no analogous procedure

for countries was, in this view, what forced the IMF to lend and created moral hazard.37

        The scheme eventually hatched in discussions between Taylor’s office and

Argentine officials was that $3 billion of the $8 billion of new IMF credits extended to

Argentina would be used for a market-based debt restructuring. But how this plan would

work was never specified. Why earmarking $3 billion of IMF assistance for this purpose

should have significantly changed creditors’ calculus was, in any case, unclear. $3

billion was a drop in the bucket gauged against Argentina’s $95 billion of debt to private

creditors, especially when one recalls that the IMF’s $3 billion was not free money –

Argentina would have to pay it back. Nothing would be changed by simply replacing $3

billion of private debt with $3 billion of official debt, which was the implication of using

the earmarked funds to retire outstanding obligations. And there was no obvious way of

leveraging the earmarked funds. Locking up more than a third of the IMF’s $8 billion in


37
  O’Neill was not alone: the analogy with Chapter 11 bankruptcy had been made in academic circles, and
similar ideas had circulated within the Fund. An early influential statement was Sachs (1994). A
comprehensive account of the prehistory is Rogoff and Zettelmeyer (2002). But O’Neill’s insistence on
results made these abstract concepts very real.


                                                  24
this way only limited the liquidity of its assistance. It diminished the credibility of the

IMF program given that observers had not the slightest idea of the content of the $3

billion restructuring-related initiative.38

         The one positive result of the initiative was that it heightened awareness of the

difficulty of restructuring as an alternative to bailouts. O’Neill raised the issue with

Horst Koehler, the IMF’s managing director, and Koehler’s deputy, Anne Krueger, at a

breakfast meeting on September 17th.39 This paved the way for Krueger to propose a

Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism (SDRM).40 The SDRM was not an official

IMF proposal; Kohler let Krueger run with the ball. It was not a sovereign bankruptcy

court, but it would have created an independent panel of experts, operating under IMF

aegis, with the power to cram down settlement terms on creditors.41 Ultimately it was not

feasible, given the need for an international treaty to override conflicting provisions of

national law and the negative reaction of financial markets.

         The idea was not even favored by the Bush administration; rather, it was O’Neill

going off on his own. In a sense the SDRM represented everything that the Bush

administration opposed: international entanglements overriding U.S. sovereignty and

governments taking matters out of the hands of markets.42 But O’Neill’s characteristic



38
   Hubbard and Randall Kroszner at CEA and Ken Rogoff, the IMF’s chief economist and economic
councilor, made these points at the time but failed to change the course of events.
39
   A conversation he recounted at a Senate hearing three days later.
40
   “We lack incentives,” Krueger observed in her November speech, “to help countries with unsustainable
debts resolve them promptly and in an orderly way. At present the only available mechanism requires the
international community to bail out the private creditors. It is high time this hole was filled.” Krueger
(2001), p.1.
41
   How much power the panel would have possessed and how directly it would have worked with the IMF
varied as the proposal evolved; eventually the original SDRM proposal was superceded by a more modest
SDRM II or SDRM-lite. For a discussion of the successive versions, see Krueger (2002).
42
   Thus, Hubbard made a number of speeches critical of the SDRM which signaled the absence of broader
support within the Administration for the SDRM initiative. See footnote 36 below. A possible exception
was the foreign policy apparatus: just as State had favored financial assistance for Argentina, the National


                                                     25
insistence that competent individuals were surely capable of working out the problem

could not be ignored. John Taylor’s office set about studying options.

        One option was collective action clauses, British-style contractual provisions that

eased restructuring by providing for a bondholders’ meeting at which a qualified majority

could bind in a dissenting minority. These had been advocated by academics since the

Mexican crisis of 1994-5, although emerging market issuers been not been willing to risk

adding such provisions to debt securities issued in New York – this not being the

standard template for contracts in that market – for fear that doing so might send a signal

that they were prepared to contemplate restructuring and auger higher borrowing costs.43

        For Taylor, collective action clauses were a way of channeling his boss’

enthusiasm. They were market friendly, did not entail a role for government, did not

create new responsibilities for the IMF, and promised to reduce the pressure for bailouts

by creating an alternative for dealing with debt problems. They were a middle way

between the SDRM and nothing. O’Neill endorsed the approach in December.44

Treasury officials described its merits in February 2002 testimony to Congress. Taylor

rolled it out publicly in an April 2002 speech at the Institute for International

Economics.45




Security Council now sympathized with Krueger’s arguments for the SDRM, perhaps more so insofar as
Krueger and Condaleeza Rice had been colleagues at Stanford.
43
   See Eichengreen and Portes (1995). Legal practitioners had been aware of the case even earlier; see
Buccheit (1990) and Macmillan (1995). Proposals for such clauses featured in a G10 report in 1996 and a
G22 report in 1998, but to little effect. See G10 (1996) and G22 (1998). Clinton’s Treasury brain trust had
been aware of the debate but was unwilling to force the issue. Presumably the Russia-LTCM crisis did not
constitute a favorable backdrop.
44
   While not at the same time seeking to quash the SDRM; someone with his corporate background may
have liked seeing competing teams working up competing plans (Gelpern and Gulati 2007).
45
   Here was a case where Treasury and CEA agreed; Hubbard also endorsed CACs in a 2002 speech critical
of the SDRM (Hubbard 2002), while referring to them as a “Treasury proposal” as a way of suggesting that
there was still the need for a more general market-oriented approach to restructuring.


                                                    26
         For the better part of a year no emerging market issuer was willing to go first for

fear that a bond with unconventional contractual provisions would require a liquidity

premium and that issuing it would send a negative signal. Treasury mounted a lobbying

campaign.46 Finally in February 2003 Mexico, whose geographical and intellectual

proximity placed it on the receiving end of much U.S. lobbying, issued a $1 billion global

bond with a 75 per cent amendment threshold in New York. The market reception was

positive, and the logjam broke: CACs quickly became the market norm.

         Some commentators believe that the moral hazard associated with IMF bailouts

has been significantly reduced as a result, while others suggest that only cosmetic

progress has occurred.47 The honest answer is that it is too early too tell. Emerging

markets enjoyed more than five years of exceptional liquidity after the Fed, concerned to

head off deflation, cut interest rates in 2001. That liquidity, combined with the robust

growth of the global economy and strong commodity markets, meant that there were no

more Mexican- or Argentine-style crises as of the time of writing.48 When more do roll

around, we will be better able to judge how much difference this initiative has made for

ease of restructuring, pressure for bailouts, moral hazard and market discipline. In any

case, this approach, emphasizing legal and institutional reform, at least constituted a

coherent alternative to the ad hoc approach that had the Administration criticize its

predecessor’s support for IMF rescue packages but then support the extension of another




46
   A blow-by-blow account is Gelpern and Gulati (2007). John Snow had replaced O’Neill as secretary at
the end of 2002, but this did not change the policy.
47
   Readers should be aware, if this is not obvious already, that one of the authors has a hound in this race
(see Eichengreen 2003).
48
   There was, however, a subsequent restructuring by Belize of bonds featuring CACs.


                                                     27
the first time a serious crisis erupted. If nothing else it signaled the administration’s

commitment to a new strategy.49

         What debt restructuring and Argentina were for the administration’s first two

years, external imbalances were for the subsequent period. The U.S. current account

deficit rose from a bit over $400 billion in 2000 to roughly $800 billion in 2005,

expanding to an unprecedented 6 per cent of U.S. GDP. Explanations for the U.S. deficit

included low U.S. savings, reflecting the 2001 tax cuts and the run-up first of high-tech

stocks and then of real estate values (Roubini and Setser 2004); high U.S. investment,

responding to the attractions of a flexible U.S. economy (Cooper 2004); high foreign

saving, mainly in Asia, reflecting the underdevelopment of markets in consumer credit

and social safety nets (Bernanke 2005); and depressed foreign investment, reflecting the

slow pace at which East Asia recovered from their financial crisis (Rajan 2006). In the

view of U.S. politicians, however, there was no question that China was at the center of

the equation. China’s emergence was arguably the most dramatic and profoundly

important international economic event of this period. The Chinese economy was

already 50 per cent larger in 2005 than in 2000; the country’s exports nearly doubled over

the period.

         The Bush Treasury and the U.S. Trade Representative had to contend with the

threat of protectionist sanctions, notably in the form of a bill by Senator Charles Schumer

(D-NY) that, in the absence of an initiative to allow the renminbi to appreciate, would

have slapped at 27.5 per cent tariff on imports from China.50 The Nixon Administration

had imposed a unilateral import surcharge in 1971, when the U.S. had similarly been in

49
  This is the interpretation, in part, of Gelpern and Gulati (2007).
50
  27.5 per cent splitting the difference between alternative estimates of the extent of renminbi
undervaluation known to Schumer’s people, which ranged from 20 to 35 per cent.


                                                     28
deficit vis-à-vis Japan and Europe. But to now do the same to China would have cast

doubt on the U.S. commitment to a rules-based World Trade Organization and

jeopardized prospects for getting the Doha Round back on track (see above), not to

mention risking Chinese cooperation on North Korea.

        To their credit, Secretary Snow and his colleagues instead urged China to allow

more currency flexibility on the assumption that a flexible renminbi would appreciate,

narrowing China’s bilateral surplus. Treasury pressed the case for renminbi adjustment

in public statements and private discussions with Chinese officials. The Administration

asked Schumer and the Congress to wait for it to produce results.

        For their part, the Chinese were reluctant to adjust their exchange rate, the

maintenance of export-led growth depending in their view on a stable and competitively

valued currency. Social stability hinged on creating millions of additional jobs in urban

manufacturing annually, something with which a sharp appreciation and sharp slowdown

in export growth were not compatible. In any case, simply revaluing the renminbi might

have little effect on the U.S. deficit if other countries did not go along.

        Finally, it was not clear that American tactics were well designed for getting the

Chinese to move. U.S. officials pushed for free floating rather than offering to settle for a

transitional revaluation. They spoke of a “market-determined exchange rate,” reflecting

uncertainty about the extent of the renminbi’s undervaluation and their preference for

shunning intervention in foreign exchange markets.51 But China, lacking deep and liquid

markets and hedging instruments for banks and firms, was in no position to let its




51
  This emphasis on “market-determined exchange rates” may have reflected the bias of noneconomists
around Vice President Cheney, whose views were shaped more by ideology than economic analysis.


                                                 29
currency float freely.52 The administration’s “market-determined exchange rate” rhetoric

asked them to do the impossible. Focusing on the renminbi exchange rate made little

sense, moreover, insofar as what was needed was a package of policy changes (increased

spending on infrastructure and public services, the development of financial markets and

a social safety net, increased domestic demand to soften the impact of lower net exports,

and more payment of dividends by state-owned enterprises) and parity adjustments not

just by China but by a range of U.S. trading partners.53 Nor was the U.S. in a position to

offer anything in return other than avoiding punitive tariffs.

         There are explanations for why direct pressure produced little, other than Chinese

statements of willingness to move to a more flexible exchange rate “eventually.” In early

2005 the Administration switched tactics: from public pressure to quiet diplomacy; from

an exclusive focus on the exchange rate to the need for a coordinated set of Chinese

policy adjustments (developing financial markets and augmenting the social safety net);

and from preoccupation with the bilateral relationship to encouraging China to become a

responsible stakeholder in the multilateral institutions.54 This was the culmination of a

long journey for an administration that had come to office with attitudes that ranged from




52
   Treasury offered technical assistance on the development of spot and futures markets, but this was not
something that could be completed overnight. Moreover, that many Chinese officials had their roots in
central planning rendered them skeptical about the merits of a “market-determined” exchange rate. Snow,
in his summer 2003 visit, also emphasized the desirability of having China open its capital account. Again,
this was not something that the country was either able to do; given its state of financial development, this
advice was at best beside the point, at worst dangerous. It discredited the U.S. lobbying campaign.
53
   As laid out in Blanchard and Giavazzi (2006).
54
   The switch in tactics was probably not unrelated to the succession of Snow and Tim Adams to the
positions previously held by O’Neill and Taylor at Treasury. The perceived need to do something new was
also pointed up when the Senate voted in April by an overwhelming 67-33 to allow consideration of
Schumer’s tariff bill if China did not revalue within six months.


                                                     30
distain to outright hostility toward the IMF and World Bank but now saw them as key

mechanisms for advancing its foreign economic policies.55

         Robert Zoellick invoked this responsible-stakeholder rhetoric both publicly and

privately. Henry Kissinger, Brent Scowcroft and William Rhodes were briefed by

Treasury and carried the message to Beijing. That aside from Rhodes (senior vice-

chairman of Citigroup) they were not financial specialists pointed to the fact that the

administration sought to encourage China to assume more responsibility for the operation

of the international system generally, and not just for the imbalances problem.

         Even from this narrowly financial perspective, the new approach paid dividends.

The Chinese revalued by 2.1 per cent on July 21st, 2005 and announced that henceforth

the renminbi would be allowed to fluctuate more freely. In practice, its movement was

still tightly controlled by the People’s Bank, resulting in little further appreciation and

explosive growth in China’s surplus through the first half of 2007. Still, this could be

advertised as a down payment. The Schumer bill was tabled. Snow’s successor Henry

Paulson continued to press the Chinese for greater currency flexibility and appreciation.

On his inaugural trip to China as treasury secretary in September 2006, Paulson met with

the party secretary of fast-growing Zhenjang Province and dined with the central bank

governor, himself a well-known proponent of flexibility. Paulson thus sought to reframe

the debate as not between the U.S. and China but between pro- and anti-liberalization

forces in both countries.

          To redirect attention away from the bilateral imbalance and encourage China to

assume greater responsibility for the international system, the Bush administration

55
  The history of strained relations did not make things easy: the U.S. tried and failed to get the IMF to
conduct a special consultation with China over the exchange rate issue. Such consultations have been
conducted twice in the history of the Fund, with Sweden in 1982 and South Korea in 1987.


                                                     31
reluctantly embraced the IMF’s Multilateral Consultations Initiative, announced in the

spring of 2006. The idea was that, with the IMF providing projections and serving as

honest broker and with Europe, Japan and Saudi Arabia also at the table, it was more

likely that the major players could agree on a coordinated package of policy adjustments

to smoothly unwind global imbalances. The onus would not be on China alone to offset

any compression of U.S. demand; with China, Europe, Japan and the oil exporters

expanding demand simultaneously, there would be less need for sharp adjustments by

any one economy. This was also a way of cloaking U.S. demands in multilateral cloth

and lending international legitimacy to the call for Chinese adjustment. The IMF, and not

the Treasury through its semi-annual report on international economic and exchange rate

policies, would be responsible for determining whether the renminbi was being

maintained at inappropriate levels. There is an obvious parallel with the Bush

administration’s initial reluctance to deal with Saddam Hussein through the United

Nations but its subsequent efforts to enlist the organization in Iraq.

         The administration appreciated, however, that multilateral consultations were a

two-edged sword. Allowing the IMF to become adjudicator of exchange rates was fine

and good except if the Fund concluded that the U.S. deficit was unsustainable and the

dollar would have to fall. Convening a multilateral consultation also raised the question

of what the U.S. would bring to the table.56 Other countries were unanimous in

identifying low U.S. savings as contributing to the imbalances problem. Raising taxes or

even just sunsetting the Bush tax cuts of 2001-2 were obvious ways of encouraging

public saving, but there was reluctance to do so on ideological and practical political


56
  This is why the administration was less than enthusiastic about the multilateral consultation initiative and
saw it as a pale response to its earlier request for a special consultation with China.


                                                     32
grounds. Sharper increases in interest rates might encourage private saving, but this grew

less attractive as the U.S. expansion entered its late stages and slow growth loomed.

        When the results of the first consultation were released in April 2007, they turned

out to be weak soup. The U.S. government acknowledged the desirability of cutting its

budget deficit and raising household savings but without committing to specific policies.

China similarly acknowledged the desirability of greater exchange rate flexibility, as it

had in the past, without committing to any specific changes in policy.

        By early 2007 the trade-weighted value of the dollar had fallen by 17 per cent

from early-2002 levels.57 Demand had begun picking up in Europe and Japan, and there

were signs that the U.S. deficit had peaked, leading the IMF to back off the issue.58 But

China had only allowed the renminbi to appreciate by a cumulative 7 per cent against the

greenback, placing most of the burden on other countries that were forced to absorb the

bulk of the adjustment and rendering them reluctant to do more.59 Thus it was important

for the soft-landing scenario that in early 2007 the Chinese authorities indicated a

willingness to contemplate greater flexibility if the country’s external surplus continued




57
   According to the Fed’s broad index. That the BIS’s broad index had fallen by less reminds us that there
is no one best way of definitively measuring effective exchange rates. See Klau and Fung (2006).
58
   Observers continued to debate whether the rise in U.S. net exports would be sustained and thus whether
the dollar had fallen enough to make a serious dent in the current account.
59
   Thus, Korea, whose currency appreciated sharply in 2005 and then by some 10 per cent against the dollar
in the course of 2006, engaged in extensive intervention in an effort to stem the currency’s further rise.
Thailand, having seen the baht rise by 17 per cent in the course of the year, tried a badly-received
experiment with capital controls in December. The European Trade Union Confederation referred to the
“brutal” appreciation of the euro against the dollar. These measures and statements are indicative of the
reluctance other countries to allow their currencies to rise further against the dollar in the absence of
Chinese willingness to do likewise.



                                                   33
to grow.60 Precisely what this means and whether it will support a smooth unwinding of

global imbalances remain to be seen.61

         By 2004-5 there had thus developed an appreciation of the advantages of

attempting to advance U.S. foreign monetary and financial interests through the IMF

rather than relying exclusively on bilateral initiatives.62 Working through the Fund

depersonalized and depoliticized the international debate. Of course, the IMF could be

an agent of depoliticization only if its decisions were taken on the basis of clear rules and

procedures rather than politics. Hence the debate over CACs and the SDRM, which

opened up alternatives to bailouts, was accompanied by measures to strengthen the

application of IMF credit ceilings, which were traditionally limited to 300 per cent of

quota.63 Simultaneous with Mexico’s decision to issue bonds with collective action

clauses in New York, the Fund’s executive directors agreed that, as a precondition for

receiving exceptional access to IMF resources, countries would have to satisfy specific

criteria related to debt sustainability and capital market access and that staff would have

to submit an “exceptional access report” detailing conformance for the approval of the

Executive Board.

         The administration further acknowledged that the U.S. could more effectively

advance its interests in the Fund by boosting the representation of emerging markets.

The institution would be seen a legitimate venue for policy debate and action only if

rapidly growing countries were adequately represented in terms of quotas (which

60
   See inter alia Bloomberg (2007).
61
   If it does, the administration’s approach of relying on words rather than deeds – avoiding both trade
conflicts with China and measures that would have interfered with U.S. expansion – will have been
vindicated.
62
   Again it is not hard to see an analogy with other forms of foreign policy and with the evolution of the
Administration’s attitude toward the United Nations.
63
   Taylor (2007, p.106 et seq.) notes how his own views of the issue had been informed by academic
research on monetary policy emphasizing the advantages of rules-based policies over discretion.


                                                     34
determined voting rights) and seats on the Executive Board. The U.S. thus led the charge

for governance reform at the Fund starting in 2004.64 The summer of 2006 saw

agreement on a 1.8 per cent quota increase for four underrepresented emerging markets –

China, Korea, Turkey and Mexico – and on the principle of more comprehensive quota

revision designed to reflect changes in the global economic landscape, to be completed

by September 2008, in the course of which the U.S. quota would not be increased.65

         This brings us to World Bank reform. George W. Bush himself was no fan of

assistance for poor countries, which he likened to welfare. Secretary O’Neill insisted that

the aid apparatus needed to be overhauled before being given more money. The world

had spent “trillions of dollars [on development] and there’s damn little to show for it,” he

complained, implying that the Bank was inefficient and poorly run.66 O’Neill

complained that World Bank President James Wolfensohn had no second in command

and that the institution lacked priorities. It did not have adequate systems for assessing

results.67

         John Taylor writes how he was sympathetic to the goal of poverty reduction and

how, like O’Neill, he pushed for more measurement of results.68 He urged the Bank to

focus on its core competency, namely measures for reducing poverty in the poorest


64
   The more cynical would observe that the increase in seats and voting shares for emerging markets would
come at the expense of Europe, not the United States, which would never lose its 15 per cent voting share
and de facto veto over important policy decisions (which require a 85 per cent supermajority).
65
   This was a turnaround for an administration initially hostile to the Fund – again demonstrating how
deeply locked in the existing institutional framework is and how to continues to condition U.S. policy. At
the same time it can be argued that the opportunity for more comprehensive IMF reform was inadequately
exploited. In particular, the U.S. did not insist on reform of leadership selection, allowing the Europeans to
nominate Rodrigo de Rato as Kohler’s successor – since the Administration did not want to lose its
traditional prerogative of nominating the president of the World Bank, something that has since been
shown to be something of a poisoned chalice (see below).
66
   Mallaby (2004), p.289
67
   Anyone familiar with the Bank can appreciate his frustration. But one wonders whether this
organization, with its noble charge, was being held to higher standards than other government agencies.
68
   Taylor (2007), chapter 5.


                                                     35
countries, and to graduate middle-income countries like Brazil and Turkey with access to

international capital markets. He pushed for grants over loans to avoid burdening poor

countries with more debt-servicing obligations.69 Eventually Taylor concluded in favor

of forgiving the debts of the poorest countries.70

         Bush rolled out his plan for replacing loans with grants prior to the G8 Summit in

Genoa in July 2001. The result was a tug of war between the administration on one side

and its European counterparts and Bank staff on the other, which suspected the

administration of using these proposals as cover for scaling back the Bank. The

Europeans opposed graduating middle-income countries, since this meant limiting Bank

involvement in many parts of the world. They opposed shifting from loans to grants

since there would be no money for new loans unless previous recipients paid back what

they had borrowed.

         At this point 9/11 intervened. Soon after attacks on the World Trade Center,

World Bank President Wolfensen began emphasizing the contribution of the Bank’s

antipoverty mission to the administration’s war on terror. He spoke with NSC chair Rice

and ramped up Bank missions in the region around Afghanistan. O’Neill resisted calls

from Britain and suggestions from Wolfensohn for backing these initiatives with

increased aid, insisting that the Bank must first demonstrate that it could put more money

to good use.


69
   To the extent that the reflow of interest from earlier loans allowed the Bank to lend more, he argued that
it was simply double counting the transfers made to poor countries – adding new loans to its list of
achievements without subtracting the repayments.
70
   In formulating this agenda Taylor was influenced by the Meltzer Commission, which had considered
World Bank as well as IMF reform. Its report had called for curtailing bank operations in middle-income
countries and for replacing loans with grants; Meltzer knew both O’Neill and Taylor, as noted above, and
once had an office on the same corridor as Lindsay and Hubbard at the American Enterprise Institute.
Taylor cites the Meltzer report in his book when discussing the need for World Bank reform. Taylor
(2007), p.135.


                                                     36
        But O’Neill’s influence was in decline, and the argument that foreign aid was

more than an act of altruism was compelling in the wake of 9/11.71 In the spring of 2002,

the Bush administration performed a U-turn. At the Monterrey summit it promised an

extra $5 billion in aid over three years (later changed to an extra $5 billion a year,

indefinitely). Evidently Wolfensohn’s line that Bank assistance was critical to the war on

terror trumped O’Neill’s skepticism. This was the origin of the Millennium Challenge

Corporation (MCC), an Administration initiative to tilt aid toward countries that met 16

benchmarks of good governance and policy.

        The problem was finding countries and projects that satisfied these conditions. It

was as if lending would be limited to countries that had removed the fundamental

obstacles to growth and development – thereby rendering development assistance

redundant.72 The principle that only countries with reasonably strong controls and

policies can make productive use of additional grants in aid may be appealing, but the

result has been to limit disbursements to a trickle. Other initiatives have produced greater

results: these include the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief in Africa (Pepfar) and more

attention to problems like malaria.

        Nor was the war on terror an unmitigated blessing for the World Bank. In the

summer of 2003, the U.S. pushed Wolfensohn and the Bank to lend to Iraq. Snow called

for this publicly. Taylor telephoned to request that the Bank pledge billions in loans to

Iraq’s budget. Wolfensohn objected that there was no government that had been

recognized by a UN resolution to which to lend. It is hard to see how this initiative could

71
   This idea was explicitly incorporated into successive national Security Strategies. It was also the
motivation behind Secretary Rice’s “transformational diplomacy” push.
72
   The Administration addressed this by creating Threshold Program Agreements, or contracts between the
U.S. government and a country that provide for financial assistance to help improve a low score one one of
the MCC’s 16 policy indicators.


                                                   37
have avoided undermining the administration’s emphasis on lending only to countries

with efficient governments.73

        It was against this background that the nomination of Paul Wolfowitz to the

presidency of the Bank was so controversial. As Bush’s former deputy defense secretary,

Wolfowitz was associated with the administration’s war on terror. Anti-poverty and

environmental groups criticized nomination of a figure who they feared would use the

Bank to advance U.S. foreign policy. On taking office, Wolfowitz incited controversy

for his campaign against corruption and graft.74 The campaign was certainly consistent

with earlier administration criticism of the Bank: Secretary O’Neill had pointed to these

and other problems when criticizing the Bank’s inefficiency, and control of corruption

had been one of the 16 indicators enumerated by the Millennium Challenge Corporation.

Wolfensohn, for his part, had already highlighted the corruption issue during his tenure.

But it became controversial once Wolfowitz charged Americans with Republican Party

ties with heading up the program and failed to develop an open process and transparent

criteria. Bank staff referred to an atmosphere of suspicion and criticized program

administrators for their failure to consult.75 South Africa complained that the anti-

corruption agenda threatened to compromise the Bank’s key mission of poverty

reduction. Once this spat went public, the Development Committee (of governmental

overseers of the Bank) insisted on revisions in the anti-corruption paper.76




73
   In any case, two weeks later the issue was rendered moot by the car bombing of the UN’s Bagdad
headquarters, including the World Bank’s offices. The Bank then understandably withdrew its staff.
74
   “Bribes, kickbacks, manipulation of the contracting process, fraudulent procurement.”
75
   See Balls and Alden (2006).
76
   The DC endorsed the revised paper at its meeting in Singapore in September 2006 but insisted on yet
further revisions, to be delivered in the spring of 2007.


                                                   38
        If the goal was to normalize the operations of the Bank and put the turbulence and

personalization of policy characteristic of the Wolfensohn years behind it, then it cannot

be said that this objective was achieved. Nor did the administration succeed in

cultivating the support of other governments for its reforms: both the Europeans and

developing countries resisted its proposals out of suspicion of its motives.

        That said, there were achievements. The Bank strengthened its systems to

measure the results of its programs. European opposition to substituting grants for loans

was partially overcome.77 There was agreement on the U.S. proposal to forgive the IDA

debt of the poorest countries over initial European objections that this would further limit

World Bank resources. To make this palatable the Administration agreed to increase its

funding for IDA and tabled its proposal to graduate middle income countries.



4. Legacy for the Next Administration

        Given how U.S. foreign economic policy is constrained by interests and

structures, the broad ambitions of the early Bush administration soon ran against

formidable obstacles. We suspect that the options available to the next administration

will be similarly limited. Like its predecessors, the next administration will confront

WTO ministerial meetings on a two-year cycle, farm bills on five-year cycle, pressure

from industry for more vigorous trade law enforcement, and the battle to renew its

negotiating authority. Although it will have some latitude in responding, it will have to

respect existing U.S. government positions on these issues.



77
  The decision that 21 per cent of IDA funds would be used for grants was a compromise between
European insistence of using no more than 10 per cent of Bank resources in this way and the
administration’s opening bid of 50 per cent.


                                                  39
        The next administration will also inherit unresolved issues, including the loss of

trade promotion authority and the fate of the Doha round. Bush administration officials

were powerless to produce an early harvest from Doha without a willingness on the part

of the European Union to compromise on its agricultural subsidies and on the part of

India and Brazil to agree on market opening. With a WTO of more than 150 countries

divided, reaching an agreement will remain difficult. Moving quickly is not a hallmark

of international trade negotiations.78

        Equally important will be the increasingly sour domestic political environment for

trade. A constellation of factors portends a long pause in activist U.S. trade policies.79

The incoming president is likely to lack trade promotion authority. Although trade

negotiations can conceivably take place even if the president does not have such

authority, U.S. negotiators will lack credibility with their foreign counterparts. The next

administration will almost certainly want trade promotion authority, so the question is

whether Congress can be persuaded to go along, and if so on what terms such authority

will be granted. Congress has become hostile to pro-trade measures: the trade agenda has

been complicated by fears about offshoring of American service jobs, growing concerns

about income inequality and the distribution of the gains from globalization, and the large

bilateral deficit with China.




78
   The Kennedy Round of the GATT took four years (1964-67) to complete, while the Tokyo Round took
six years (1973-1979) and the Uruguay Round took seven years (1986-1993). The Doha Round is on track
to break these records.
79
   Even if an internationalist Democrat such as Bill Clinton succeeds in taking the White House, economic
nationalism is rampant among Congressional Democrats, potentially blocking any action on trade. Such
Democratic divisions are not be new; the Roosevelt administration was deeply divided between liberal
internationalists such as Secretary of State Cordell Hull and other economic nationalist New Dealers who
thought trade liberalization would undermine domestic price supports and other measures to regain full
employment. Hull battled long and hard to ensure his views became established administration policy.


                                                   40
        An unfortunate characteristic of the Bush years has been sharply divisive, partisan

Congressional votes on TPA and various FTAs. The Bush administration did not

cultivate a consensus for open trade but sought to push through trade legislation by force.

A domestic consensus might be restored with greater social insurance measures to help

those adversely affected by imports or by coupling trade agreements with stronger labor

and environmental provisions, as Democrats propose.80 The catch is that a move by

Congress to require meaningful labor and environmental standards in trade agreements

will be greeted with suspicion by developing countries. They have resented Western

demands for such standards in the past, viewing such requirements as providing an

additional avenue for the United States and other advanced countries to close their

markets.

        Pushing new trade initiatives requires a president to spend political capital. There

may be opportunities for achieving long-standing U.S. goals: recent high commodity

prices could open the door to the reform of agricultural subsidies, and U.S. trade barriers

are now at such low levels that trade agreements involve much more opening for U.S.

exporters than exposure of domestic industries to new foreign competition.

        However, if such initiatives encounter domestic resistance and lack a compelling

foreign policy rationale, trade could easily be put on the back burner. All this portends a

pause in activist U.S. trade policies geared toward trade liberalization. At best this would

mean the status quo remains intact. Continued drift in or even collapse of the Doha

round could mean a missed opportunity but perhaps nothing more. The next

administration may well encounter stiffer domestic opposition to trade-expanding actions


80
 As well as others; see the proposal by Scheve and Slaughter (2007). Slaughter served as a Member of
Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers.


                                                  41
but is unlikely to seek to withdraw from the WTO. The rules and procedures of the WTO

will therefore continue to constrain domestic trade policy.

       The greater risk is that past gains from liberalization will get whittled away. If the

political climate for trade liberalization deteriorates further, with greater domestic income

inequality and job losses linked in the public mind to factors emanating from the world

economy, Congress may be tempted to enact anti-trade legislation. And if such

legislation seriously violated America’s commitments under the WTO, the United States

could not only face retaliation from abroad but spawn a weakening of WTO

commitments by other countries, leading to a general unraveling of the multilateral

system. Although a full-blown trade war is unlikely, a gradual breakdown of WTO

disciplines would take many years to repair and could have significant negative

consequences for the United States. The next president may end up playing a defensive

trade policy against Congress rather than pursuing an offensive trade policy with other

countries.

       America’s large current account deficit and dependence on foreign central banks

and governments for finance are continuing sources of vulnerability. The fact that much

U.S. foreign finance is provided by central banks and governments of countries like

China and Saudi Arabia means that anything that upsets U.S. foreign relations could

upset the U.S. economy and gives other governments a lever with which to influence U.S.

policy. Imagine a conflict over Taiwan or over U.S. policy in the Middle East. If China

or Saudi Arabia curtails its accumulation of dollars and alters the composition of its

reserve portfolio, the dollar will fall sharply and the U.S. current account deficit will have




                                             42
to be compressed.81 This is not to argue that American foreign policy will be dictated by

foreign financial leverage but to suggest that this dependence will complicate the foreign

policy of the next administration.

        In addition, a chronically weak currency would encourage foreign central banks,

governments and corporations to consider alternatives to the dollar as a medium in which

to hold reserves, price petroleum and invoice trade. Estimates of the value to the United

States of the dollar’s international currency status vary, but the country clearly will be

worse off when that status is no more.

        Following the 2004 presidential election, with the economy expanding strongly,

there was an opportunity to address these vulnerabilities by pursuing revenue

enhancement. Now that the macroeconomic cycle is turning, there is no longer scope for

tax increases; to the contrary there is every expectation that automatic stabilizers and

discretionary tax cuts will again widen the deficit. The next administration will inherit a

mandate to provide universal health care and reform the Alternative Minimum Tax and

face other familiar spending pressures. Winding down U.S. involvement in Iraq will

create fiscal savings, but the pressures of military and homeland security-related spending

will remain intense. The window for proactive adjustment having closed, the next

administration will to pray that foreign finance for the U.S. current account continues to

flow while the dollar declines smoothly, crowding in exports, and that the absence of

capital gains on housing encourages more saving by American households. Crossing

one’s fingers and hoping for the best is not an attractive position, but such is the

inheritance.


81
  Conceivably as the result of a recession. The mechanism would be imported inflation leading to higher
interest rates and thereby lower consumption and investment.


                                                   43
        An orderly adjustment that limits U.S. external vulnerabilities would be facilitated

by rebalancing demand in Asia. If U.S. spending must decline relative to U.S. output,

Asian spending will have to rise relative to Asian output if there is any hope of avoiding a

negative shock to global growth. China-bashing is unlikely to produce the desired

changes; a continuation of the Paulson strategy of gently encouraging reformist interests

in the country has greater prospects of success. There may also be some scope for

playing “good cop, bad cop” by warning that if China fails to reduce dependence on

exports and stimulate domestic demand it may prove impossible to contain protectionist

sentiment in Congress.82 That said, the effectiveness of U.S. pressure for Chinese policy

adjustments will be limited by what Lawrence Summers has dubbed “the balance of

financial terror.” China can always push back by hinting that it might sell U.S. treasury

bonds or even just slow their rate of accumulation.

        This suggests that pressure for policy adjustments in China can be more

effectively applied by a coalition of like-minded countries, perhaps through the IMF.

The Bush Administration came to office suspicious of the IMF and World Bank and

sought to address economic and financial issues with other countries through bilateral

channels. Economic relations with China, not unlike U.S. experience in Iraq, then

demonstrated the limits of going it alone. This led to efforts to address the China

problem not only bilaterally but also through the IMF’s Multilateral Consultations

Initiative and by encouraging the adoption of a new surveillance decision enhancing the

powers of the Fund to identify misaligned exchange rates. It led the Bush Treasury to

accept a modest reduction in the U.S. quota share as its contribution to the reforms


82
  Of course, a president who had campaigned in favor of anti-China trade measures could not credibly
adopt this posture.


                                                   44
designed to enhance the legitimacy of the institution. It led to agreement on the

Monterrey Consensus. The next administration will almost certainly continue down this

road.

        But American relations with the Bretton Woods institutions, like the country’s

relationship to the United Nations, remain uneasy. The next administration will still have

more fences to mend in the wake of the Wolfowitz affair at the World Bank. Here the

decision to nominate Robert Zoellick to replace Wolfowitz, however qualified the

candidate, was an opportunity lost. By insisting on its historical privilege to nominate the

president of the World Bank, the Bush Administration did nothing to enhance the

legitimacy of the institution among emerging markets. It encouraged the Europeans to

insist that sauce for the goose was sauce for the gander and that they had the right to

nominate the successor to Rodrigo de Rato as managing director of the IMF. The idea

that the United States can work through these institutions to advance global economic

prosperity and stability, and not incidentally its own foreign economic policy, presumes

that these institutions are taken seriously elsewhere in the world.83 An illegitimate

leadership selection process undermines this presumption. Why should China accept the

IMF as umpire for exchange rates when it has no say in the appointment of that

institution’s director? A simple and effective initiative for the next administration would

thus be to announce on taking office that it would not seek to nominate Zoellick’s

successor when his term expires and that it expected analogous concessions of Europe.



5. Conclusions

83
  U.S. support for quota increases for egregiously underrepresented emerging markets and Treasury’s
commitment that the U.S. would not demand a quota increase itself as part of this process can be seen
recognition of this fact.


                                                   45
       Our analysis of the Bush administration’s international economic polices stresses

continuities rather than breaks with its predecessors. In trade policy the administration

sought to push a free trade agenda but found it difficult to avoid compromises – just like

its predecessors. In financial policy the administration foreswore bailouts of financially-

distressed developing countries but ultimately yielded to the perceived necessity of

lending assistance – just like its predecessors. It came to office hostile to the extension of

foreign aid but ultimately offered a new aid initiative – just like many of its predecessors.

       We see the next administration grappling with the same problems under

analogous political and policy constraints. Its challenges will be broadly similar to those

that faced the newly installed Bush administration: deadlock at the WTO, EU resistance

to agricultural reform, Chinese trade tensions, the risk of a disorderly unwinding of the

U.S. current account deficit, and ongoing World Bank and IMF reform.

       While the nature of U.S. interests and the structure of international institutions

and U.S. policy making suggest that there will be broad policy continuities, some issues

will undoubtedly have a partisan flavor. The ability of future administrations to pursue

free trade agreements will almost certainly be more limited.

       But partisan differences notwithstanding, we still expect continuity to be the rule.

The institutions and interests in which the policy-making process is embedded shape

outcomes too powerfully for any other forecast to be credible.




                                             46
                                        References


Balls, Andrew and Edward Alden (2005), “World Bank Turmoil over Wolfowitz
Crusade,” www.ft.com (23 January).

Bergsten, C. Fred (1996), “Competitive Liberalization and Global Free Trade: A Vision
for the Early 21st Century,” Working Paper No. 96-15, Institute for International
Economics.

Bernanke, Ben (2005), “The Global Savings Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
(10 March), Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, (2008), Termites in the Trading System: How Preferential
Agreements Undermine Free Trade, New York: Oxford University Press.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and Arvind Panagariya (1996), The Economics of Preferential Trade
Agreements. Washington, D.C., AEI Press.

Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi (2006), “Rebalancing Growth in China: A
Three Handed Approach,” unpublished manuscript, MIT.

Bloomberg (2007), “China Says it May be Flexible with Yuan,” New York Times (8
January), p.C2.

Blustein, Paul (2005), And the Money Kept Rolling in (and Out), New York: Public
Affairs Books.

Buchheit, Lee C. (1990), “The Sharing Clause as a Litigation Shield,” International
Financial Law Review 9 (10), pp.15-16.

Bush, George (2000), Speech on Latin America, August 25,
http://www.newsmax.com/articles/?a=2000/8/26/195405

Cooper, Richard (1968), The Economics of Interdependence, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Cooper, Richard (1972), “Trade Policy is Foreign Policy,” Foreign Policy 9, pp.18-36.

Cooper, Richard (2004), “U.S. Deficit: It is not Only Sustainable, It is Logical,”
Financial Times (31 October).

DeLong, J. Bradford and Barry Eichengreen (2002), “From Meltdown to Moral Hazard:
The Intenational Monetary and Financial Policies of the Clinton Administration,” in




                                            47
Jeffrey Frankel and Peter Orzag (eds.), American Economic Policy in the 1990s,
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp.191-254.

Eichengreen, Barry (2006), “The Blind Men and the Elephant: Perspectives on Global
Imbalances,” Brookings Policy Briefs in International Economics 1 (January).

Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes (1995), Crisis? What Crisis? Orderly Workouts
for Sovereign Debtors, London: CEPR.

Eichengreen, Barry (2003), “Restructuring Sovereign Debt,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17, pp.75-98.

Evenett, Simon J., and Michael Meier (2008), “An Interim Assessment of the U.S. Trade
Policy of ‘Competitive Liberalization’,” The World Economy 31: 31-66.

Foer, Franklin. 2002. “Fabric Softener.” The New Republic. March 4 & 11, 19-21.

Gelpern, Anna and Mitu Gulati (2007), “Public Symbol in Private Contract: A Case
Study,” Washington University Law Review (forthcoming).

Group of Ten (1996), “The Resolution of Sovereign Liquidity Crises,”
http://www.bis.org.publ/gten03.pdf.

Group of Twenty Two (1998), “Report of the Working Group on International Financial
Crises,” http://www.bis.org/publ/othp01d.pdf.

Hubbard, R. Glenn (2002), “Enhancing Sovereign Debt Restructuring,” Remarks of R.
Glenn Hubbard, Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors, to the Conference on
the IMF’s Sovereign Debt Proposal, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute
(October).

International Financial Institution Advisory Commission (2000), Report, Washington,
D.C.: GPO.

Irwin, Douglas A. (1998), “From Smoot Hawley to Reciprocal Trade Agreements:
Changing the Course of U.S. Trade Policy in the 1930s,” in Michael Bordo, Claudia
Goldin, and Eugene White (eds.), The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the
American Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Klau, Marc and San Sau Fung (2006), “The New BIS Effective Exchange Rate Indices,”
BIS Quarterly Review (March), pp.51-65.

Krueger, Anne (2001), “International Financial Architecture for 2002: A New Approach
to Sovereign Debt Restructuring,” Address by Anne Krueger, First Deputy Managing
Director, International Monetary Fund, Given at the National Economists’ Club Annual




                                          48
Members’ Dinner, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C. (26 November),
http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2001/112601.htm..

Krueger, Anne (2002), “New Approaches to Sovereign Debt Restructuring: An Update
on Our Thinking,” Address by Anne Krueger, First Deputy Managing Director,
International Monetary Fund, Given at the Institute for International Economics
Conference on Sovereign Debt Workouts, Washington,D.C. (1 April),
http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2002/040102.htm.

Macmillan, Rory (1995), “New Lease on Life for Bondholder Councils,” Financial Times
(15 August), p.11.

Mallaby, Sebastian (2004), The World’s Banker: A Story of Failed States, Financial
Crises and the Wealth and Poverty of Nations, New York; Pengiun.

Moore, Michael (1996), “The Rise and Fall of Big Steel's Influence on U.S. Trade
Policy,” in Anne O. Krueger (ed.), The Political Economy of American Trade Policy
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mussa, Michael (2002), Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy,
Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

Mussa, Michael (2006), “Follow the Money,” in Michael Mussa (ed.), C. Fred Bergsten
and the World Economy, Washington, D.C.: Petersen Institute for International
Economics, pp.275-312.

Rajan, Raghuram (2006), “Perspectives on Global Imbalances,” www.imf.org (23
January).

Read, Robert (2005), “The Political Economy of Trade Protection: The Determinants and
Welfare Impact of the 2002 US Emergency Steel Safeguard Measures,” The World
Economy 28, pp.1119–1137.

Rogoff, Kenneth and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2002), “Early Ideas on Sovereign
Bankruptcy: A Survey,” IMF Staff Papers 49, pp.471-507.

Roubini, Nouriel and Brad Setser (2004), “The U.S. as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability
of the U.S. External Imbalances,” unpublished manuscript, Stern School of Business,
New York University.

Rubin, Robert and Jacob Weisberg (2002), In an Uncertain World, New York: Random
House.

Scheve, Kenneth F., and Matthew J. Slaughter (2007), “A New Deal for Globalization,”
Foreign Affairs 86: 34-47.




                                          49
Sevastopulo, Demetri and Andrew Balls (2005), “Wolfowitz Won’t Impose U.S. Line at
World Bank,” www.ft.com (17 March).

Suskind, Ron (2004), The Price of Loyalty, New York: Simon & Schuster.

Taylor, John (2002a), “Sovereign Debt Restructuring: A U.S. Perspective,” Treasury
News, www.treas.gov/press/releases/po2056.htm (2 April).

Taylor, John B. (2007), Global Financial Warriors, New York: Norton.

Sachs, Jeffrey (1994), “Do We Need an International Lender of Last Resort?”
unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.

Zoellick, Robert B. (2000), “A Republican Foreign Policy,” Foreign Affairs 79, 63-78.

Zoellick, Robert (2002), “Unleashing the Trade Winds: A Building Block Approach,”
The Economist, December 7.




                                          50
