                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE COGNITIVE LINK BETWEEN GEOGRAPHY AND DEVELOPMENT:
         IODINE DEFICIENCY AND SCHOOLING ATTAINMENT IN TANZANIA

                                              Erica M. Field
                                               Omar Robles
                                              Máximo Torero

                                          Working Paper 13838
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13838


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2008




We thank Lisa Vura-Weis and Sonali Murarka for exceptional research assistance. We are grateful
to Anne Case, Angus Deaton, Hank Farber, Seema Jayachandran, Michael Kremer, Duncan Thomas,
and seminar participants at Princeton, University of Michigan, Penn State, Columbia, Yale, NYU,
SITE and BREAD for helpful comments and suggestions. Please direct correspondence to efield@latte.harvard.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Erica M. Field, Omar Robles, and Máximo Torero. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Cognitive Link Between Geography and Development: Iodine Deficiency and Schooling
Attainment in Tanzania
Erica M. Field, Omar Robles, and Máximo Torero
NBER Working Paper No. 13838
March 2008
JEL No. I1,I21,O12,O55

                                               ABSTRACT

An estimated 20 million children born each year are at risk of brain damage from in utero iodine deficiency,
the only micronutrient deficiency known to have significant, non-reversible effects on cognitive development.
Cognitive damage from iodine deficiency disorders (IDD) has potentially important implications for
economic growth through its effect on human capital attainment. To gauge the magnitude of this influence,
we evaluate the impact of reductions in fetal IDD on child schooling attainment that resulted from
an intensive distribution of iodized oil capsules (IOC) in Tanzania. We look for evidence of improvements
in cognitive ability attributable to the intervention by assessing whether children who benefited from
IOC in utero exhibit higher rates of grade progression at ages 10 to 14 relative to siblings and older
and younger children in the district who did not. Our findings suggest that reducing fetal IDD has
significant benefits for child cognition: Protection from IDD in utero is associated with 0.36 years
of additional schooling. Furthermore, the effect appears to be substantially larger for girls, consistent
with new evidence from laboratory studies indicating greater cognitive sensitivity of the female fetus
to maternal thyroid deprivation. There is no indication that IOC improved rates of illness or school
absence due to illness, suggesting that IOC improves schooling through its effect on cognition rather
than its effect on health. However, there is weak evidence that the program also reduced child but
not fetal or infant mortality, which may bias downward the estimated effect on education. Cross-country
regression estimates corroborate the results from Tanzania, indicating a strong negative influence of
total goiter rate and strong positive influence of salt iodization on female school participation. Together,
these findings provide micro-level evidence of the direct influence of ecological conditions on economic
development and suggest a potentially important role of variation in rates of learning disability in explaining
cross-country growth patterns and gender differences in schooling attainment.


Erica M. Field                                         Máximo Torero
Department of Economics                                IFPRI
Harvard University                                     2033 K st NW Washington DC 20006
M30 Littauer Center                                    m.torero@cgiar.org
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efield@latte.harvard.edu

Omar Robles
Department of Economics
Harvard University
orobles@fas.harvard.edu
1 Introduction
        There is an unresolved debate in the economic growth and development literature regarding the
role of geographic variation in health environment on long-run economic outcomes. A number of recent
cross-country studies provide evidence that ecological conditions related to health environment, such as
malaria transmission rates, have a direct effect on economic growth (Sachs, 1997; Sachs and Gallup,
1998, 2002). One critical aspect of health environment that has received little attention in the literature is
the concentration of trace elements in soil and rock, which differs widely across settings as a result of
geographic variation in the age of surface rock (Marett, 1936). Among minerals found in soil, iodine is
potentially one of the most important for human growth and development since it is the only
micronutrient known to have significant, irreversible effects on brain development (Cao et al., 1994;
Hetzel and Mano, 1989; Pharoah and Connolly, 1987).
        If dietary iodine is indeed a key determinant of cognitive capacity in humans, its deficiency could
have important consequences for human capital accumulation and labor productivity in afflicted settings.
Given that an estimated one billion people globally are at risk of brain damage from iodine deficiency
disorders (IDD) worldwide, this influence may account for a significant fraction of unexplained variation
in cross-country growth rates. Iodine deficiency may also constitute an important missing link in
explaining abysmal rates of growth in Africa: Geological “shields”, which cover a large and populous
ring of Central Africa, are associated with particularly low concentrations of iodine in soil and ground
water due to their geological age.1 Although dietary patterns vary geographically with respect to a variety
of micronutrients important for human development, iodine availability is likely to exert a stronger
independent influence on economic outcomes than dietary prevalence of other micronutrients and many
climatic conditions due to the fact that it has little correlation with local food availability. Hence, while
other micronutrient deficiencies are likely to be resolved with economic development by way of rising
caloric intake, iodine deficiency is more likely to exert a persistent influence on economic outcomes.
        This research looks for evidence of the influence of iodine deficiency on rates of learning
disability by examining the effect on child schooling of an intensive and repeated distribution of iodine
supplements in several districts of Tanzania between 1986 and 1997. Since iodine is thought to matter
most at the time of fetal brain development, we look for evidence of improvements in cognitive ability
attributable to the intervention by assessing whether children who benefited from supplements in utero
exhibit higher rates of grade progression ten to fourteen years later. Since supplements offer protection for
two years but distribution rounds occurred less frequently, we exploit gaps in coverage specific to each
district using household and district fixed effects models that compare children likely to benefit from the

1
 Shields are large areas of exposed Precambrian rocks. These areas have been relatively unaffected by tectonic
processes, which tend to occur near plate boundaries, so the age of surface rock is at least 570 million years.


                                                    -2-
program in utero based on month and year of birth to slightly older and younger cohorts within the district
who were in utero during program gaps and delays.
         In addition to providing evidence of a direct link between geography and development our
analysis contributes to the growing body of micro-level studies on the effects of malnutrition on schooling
and labor outcomes.2 Assessing the importance of physiological determinants of schooling informs a
fundamental debate in the literature on barriers to educational attainment in developing countries
surrounding the importance of supply-driven explanations for low levels of human capital investment
relative to differences across settings in returns to education. Schooling responses to reductions in fetal
brain damage provide evidence that patterns of human capital investment also reflect biological
differences in the cognitive cost of schooling. Since fetal IDD permanently limits intellectual functioning,
its impact is likely to be particularly acute and persistent.
         Of particular interest is the possible role of iodine deficiency in explaining gender differences in
schooling outcomes in light of recent scientific evidence of biological differences between males and
females in iodine sensitivity in utero. If girls are more susceptible to IDD in utero, geography may
contribute directly to gender disparities in schooling outcomes by way of sex differences in rates of
learning disability. This is a particularly compelling explanation for gender differences in schooling in
Tanzania, where lower female attainment is almost entirely accounted for by the extremely low rate at
which girls pass the national secondary school qualifying exam.
         The long-run effect of fetal iodine intake is also of interest in light of recent worldwide progress
in reducing IDD through universal salt iodization (USI) legislation passed in many countries during the
1990s. Between 1980 and 2000, at least 28 countries reduced goiter, a common indicator of IDD, by more
than 20% through national salt iodization, and several others that lack data are believed to have made
similarly important gains. Because children born after the majority of these changes are only now
reaching school age, there has been little opportunity to evaluate the impact of these reforms on health
and well-being or to determine whether resulting reductions in IDD will alter the global pattern of
schooling attainment in the near future.
         Although a number of countries undertook iodine supplementation programs during the 1990s,
there are two important advantages to studying the case of Tanzania. First, Tanzania was one of the
largest and most intensive programs, ultimately reaching approximately 25% of the population. As a
result, an estimated 1.9 million babies born during and immediately after the program were protected

2
  The relationship between macro-nutrients (energy and protein intake) and education has been examined through
subsidized school meal programs in Kenya and nutrition supplements in Guatemala, which were found to increase
school participation and test scores (Vermeersch, 2003; Behrman et al, 2003). While little attention has been paid to
the effect of specific micronutrients on schooling, many studies have examined the benefits of micronutrient
supplements on health and labor productivity (Thomas et al, 2003; Basta et al, 1979; Husain et al, 1981; Sommer et
al., 1986, 1981; West et al., 1995; Glasizou et al, 1993; Beaton et al, 1992).


                                                    -3-
from fetal IDD.3 The breadth of the program and well-defined target population are critical for
retrospective evaluation because they enable follow-up studies of these cohorts based solely on year and
district of birth. Second, Tanzania was one of the earliest countries to distribute iodine supplements.
Hence, evaluation of the initial effect on children born during the program provides a first glimpse of
long-run patterns that can be expected to emerge over the coming decade in a number of other settings.
           Our findings suggest that reducing fetal IDD has significant benefits for children’s cognitive
capacity as evidenced by its effect on schooling attainment: Children likely to be protected from iodine
deficiency during their first trimester in utero attain an average of 0.36 – 0.51 years of education above
siblings and older and younger children in their district who were not. This result supports the common
claim that the first three months of fetal growth are a critical period for cognitive development.
Furthermore, the estimated effects are substantially larger and more robust for girls, indicating a
potentially important role of micronutrient deficiencies in explaining gender differences in schooling
attainment in many parts of the developing world. The finding is consistent with new evidence from
laboratory studies in animals which find greater sensitivity of the female fetus to maternal thyroid
deprivation on cognitive development. The pattern of results is similar in household and district fixed
effects models and consistent across datasets and points in time. In addition, the observed variation in
estimated effects matches predictions regarding the relative vulnerability of specific subpopulations to
fetal IDD based on local diet. Finally, our results indicate that the program reduced child but not fetal or
infant mortality. Since there is no evidence of gender differences in the program effect on survival or of
program effects on the average health status of survivors, this influence is unlikely to account for the
schooling results and could bias downward the estimated effect on education.
           To examine the implications of our findings at a macro level, we estimate cross-country
regressions of school participation on baseline IDD and fraction of population consuming adequately
iodized salt, two measures that have not been considered previously in the empirical growth literature.
The results reveal a negative correlation between baseline iodine deficiency and female secondary
schooling, and indicate that early salt iodization has already had a positive effect on female primary
schooling attainment. Based on our micro-level estimates from Tanzania, we calculate that the average
increase in schooling attainment in Central and Southern Africa attributable to USI could ultimately be as
large as 7.2% of baseline average schooling levels.
           A remaining policy question is the value of devoting further resources necessary to fully eradicate
IDD. Although USI is arguably the most successful micronutrient intervention in world history, legal
regulations on salt production are rarely sufficient to guarantee dietary change among rural populations
that consume mainly subsistence food products. In several African countries less than 30% of households

3
    Estimate based on 1988-1994 population and crude birth rate.


                                                     -4-
presently consume iodized salt despite universal legislation, and even iodized salt may be insufficient to
reduce IDD in populations whose diets contain sufficient amounts of iodine-depleting foods (UNICEF,
2005). With respect to the estimated 10% of the population that remains at risk in spite of salt iodization
legislation and the more than 40 countries that have yet to undertake any control program, the magnitudes
of our estimated returns to eliminating IDD well justify more costly approaches.4


2 Background
2.1 Iodine Deficiency
        Iodine is produced in the ocean and deposited in the soil, where it is stored in underground rock
layers. Hence, dietary iodine availability is determined primarily by soil composition and amount of
seafood consumed. Because soil is depleted of iodine gradually over time, older soil surfaces are more
iodine deficient, so rates of IDD increase with distance to coast and altitude and decrease with level of
recent tectonic activity. For this reason, Precambrian rock shields are associated with particularly low
concentrations of iodine. Since iodine deposits are concentrated in deep soil layers, well water is also an
important source in places where bedrock is rich in iodine (Hetzel, 1989).
        Humans require iodine for the biosynthesis of thyroid hormone. Although thyroid hormone plays
a role in daily metabolism and nervous system activity, the human body is most sensitive to thyroid
hormone availability during fetal development: In utero development of the central nervous system
required for intellectual functioning depends critically on an adequate supply of thyroid hormone, which
influences the density of neural networks established in the developing brain (Lamberg, 1991).5 In
contrast, morbidity from child and adult thyroid fluctuations is relatively low. Cretinism, a relatively rare
form of mental retardation that occurs under extreme deprivation, is the most severe manifestation of
cognitive damage from insufficient maternal thyroid hormone.6 IDD has also been associated with
physical impairments in the fetus other than brain damage such as congenital anomalies, perinatal
mortality and deaf mutism, as well as retarded physical development, although the evidence is mixed.7 In
general, evidence from human studies suggests that damage from fetal IDD is overwhelmingly cognitive
and that physical birth defects occur only under extreme deprivation (Zimmerman, 2005; Hetzel, 1983).
Furthermore, animal studies indicate that cognition is sensitive to iodine deficiency exclusively during
early fetal life (prior to mid-gestation) whereas growth and psychomotor development are believed to be

4
  Hetzel (2000) estimates that less than half the population in 83 developing countries consumed adequately iodized
salt in the mid-1990s.
5
  Recommended daily iodine intake is 50 μg for infants under 12 months, 150 μg for adults and 200 μg for pregnant
and lactating women (WHO, 1996). Epidemiological criteria for sufficient iodine intake is 100 μg or above.
6
  Though cretinism is rare, severely affected populations may have rates as high as 15%, imposing a major social
and economic burden on the community (Boyages et al., 1988; Halpern et al., 1991; Pandav et al., 1982)
7
  See Allen and Gillespie (2001) for a review of the evidence.


                                                   -5-
most affected by iodine deficiency in infancy (Cao et al., 1994a; Zaleha et al., 2000).
        Although iodine deficiency has been associated with goiter and cretinism for centuries, only
during the past decade have IDD been widely recognized as a leading cause of intellectual impairment
(Merke, 1984; Delange, 2000; Haddow, 1999).8 Furthermore, the effect of iodine deficiency on mental
development is no longer believed to be limited to rare cases of severe mental retardation from extreme
deprivation. Recent evidence from laboratory studies indicates a continuous process by which fetal brain
development is sensitive to minor adjustments in thyroid hormone (Lavado-Autric R, 2003; Sundqvist et
al, 1998; Dugbarty, 1998; Pop et al, 1999). As a result, even mild maternal iodine deficiency is now
hypothesized to reduce intelligence quotients by a noticeable margin.
        While there have been no experimental or large-scale observational studies of the cognitive
effects of moderate iodine deficiency in humans, there is suggestive but mixed evidence from
community-based assessments of iodine intervention trials that supplementation can improve performance
on cognitive tests (Bleichrodt et al., 1994; Bautista et al., 1982). One oft-cited study in Ecuador found a
10-15 point difference in IQ between 50 offspring of women given iodine prophylaxis in early pregnancy
compared with children in untreated communities (Shrethsa, 1994). To our knowledge, the long-term
impact of in utero iodine on children’s human capital attainment has not been measured in any setting.


2.2 Gender Differences in Iodine Deficiency
        Evidence from multiple sources indicates gender differences in the importance of iodine for brain
development. Notably, in both of the above studies that analyzed results by gender, cognitive
improvements were only found among girls, although in both cases the findings were merely suggestive
given limited numbers of subjects and lack of statistical significance (Bautista et al., 1982; Shrethsa,
1994). Similarly, practitioners have noted that adolescent IDD, including rates of goiter and average
severity among sufferers, is systematically higher among females (Allen et al, 2001; Simon, 1990). A
central limitation of observational studies is their inability to attribute gender differences in IDD to
physiological sex differences in iodine sensitivity as opposed to sex-specific dietary patterns.
        More conclusive evidence of biologically-driven gender differences in iodine sensitivity comes
from recent laboratory experiments of maternal thyroid deficiency in animals. Scientific investigation of
gender differences in in utero iodine sensitivity has only recently been undertaken, consistent with the
general absence of research into the role of maternal biochemicals on sex differences in fetal
neurodevelopment (Friedhoff et al., 2000). However, two studies lend strong support to the hypothesis of
sex-specific sensitivity to iodine deficiency in utero. First, Friedhoff et al. found that the effect of

8
 The World Health Organization labeled IDD “the most common cause of preventable mental retardation (WHO,
1992).”


                                                 -6-
artificially restricting maternal thyroid hormone in utero on fetal neurodevelopment and behavioral
outcomes was significantly larger in female relative to male rat progeny. Although the mechanism
underlying sex-selective effects of maternal nutrient deprivation on brain development could not be
directly addressed by their experiment, a recent study of gene expression in nutrient deprived fetal guinea
pigs by Chan et al (2005) provides insight into the cellular pathways. In this experiment, in utero nutrient
deprivation led to a significant increase in the male fetal brain and decrease in the female fetal brain of
mRNA expression of nuclear thyroid hormone receptors (TRs), which mediate thyroid hormone action.
Increased TRs in key regions of the fetal brain help regulate thyroid hormone during development and
thereby have the potential to compensate for lower maternal thyroid transfers. Although the biological
pathway underlying the gender difference is not fully understood, the finding was hypothesized to be
related to elevated male androgen levels at the height of neural TR expression, a gender difference also
found in humans.


3 Setting

3.1 Iodine deficiency in Tanzania

        Our study examines the long-run impact of an iodized oil supplementation program in Tanzania.
Tanzania, like many countries on the African continent, traditionally suffered high rates of IDD.
According to a nationwide survey of iodine levels in the early 1970s, about 40% of the Tanzanian
population, or 10 million people, lived in iodine-deficient areas and 25% of the population was estimated
to suffer from IDD, including 3% with severe and 22% with moderate symptoms. In endemic regions,
13% of children under five and 52% of pregnant and lactating women showed manifestations of iodine
deficiency prior to the intervention (van der Haar et al., 1998).


3.2 Schooling in Tanzania
        The Tanzanian formal education system involves seven years of primary education, four years of
junior secondary (ordinary level), and two years of senior secondary (advanced level). Although primary
enrollment rates have been high since the late 1990s, very few children transition to secondary school. In
2001, gross enrollment in primary school was 85% but only 7% in secondary school, largely due to an
insufficient supply of secondary schools. In 2001, one quarter of rural households reported being over 20
kilometers from a secondary school (THBS, 2001), while only 8% reported the nearest primary school to
be more than 6 kilometers away.
        Throughout the country, primary schooling is characterized by high variation in age of entry, high
rates of grade retention and intermittent enrollment. Particularly in rural areas, gross enrollment ratios are



                                                 -7-
substantially higher than net ratios because many over-age children are present in primary schools due to
beginning schooling late and progressing slowly. Although teachers have some room to retain students for
attendance and behavioral problems, the main reason for repetition in primary school is exam failure, and
repetition rates are highest in grades at which students take national standardized tests and in grade 1. The
National Examinations Council of Tanzania (NECTA) conducts two primary school examinations used
for promotion at the end of Standard 4 and Standard 7 (MOEC, 1995). In examinations at both levels,
failure rates are high and girls perform significantly worse than boys (United Republic of Tanzania,
MoEC, 2003). In 2002/2003 over 20% of students repeated the Standard 4 exam (United Republic of
Tanzania, MoEC, 2003b). Pass rates for the Standard 7 Primary School Leaving Exam (PSLE), which is
required for admittance to any lower secondary school in the country, are even worse: Despite the
government’s ongoing goal of increasing the proportion of children passing to 50%, in 1997 only 20.1%
of pupils who sat for the PSLE passed the examination, which has since increased to 22.0% in 2000 and
28.6% in 2001.
        Despite the fact that there is no national examination in the first year of school, Standard 1 has the
highest repetition rate of all grades (12.3% in 2000). The large fraction of children that fails to pass
school-specific Standard 1 assessments is attributed to repetition-related overcrowding in grade 1, and
high variation in preparedness at school entrance on account of differences in age of entrance and access
to preschool education (World Education Forum, 2000). Retention is lower in grades 2 and 3, but then
jumps again in grade 4 when students take the Standard 4 exam.
        Although gender parity in primary enrollment was more or less achieved by 1998, female
students represented only 36% of the secondary level student population in 2000. In the standard primary
age group of 7 to 13, boys have a slightly lower participation rate than girls because they start school
slightly later, while the reverse is true for older children since girls drop out earlier. Not all of this is due
to faster progression. Girls are less likely than boys to be in school beginning at 13, and the difference
increases steadily thereafter as a disproportionate fraction of boys proceed to secondary school.
        Gender differences in secondary enrollment are almost entirely accounted for by differences in
PSLE pass rates. Alarmingly, although in 2001 roughly the same numbers of boys and girls completed
primary school and sat for the PSLE, boys were 69% more likely to pass. In total, only 21.4% of female
and 36.2% of male test-takers passed the exam. By 2004, the pass rate had improved considerably, most
likely due to a reported (though poorly documented) change in the grading policy: 43% of female and
57% of male test-takers passed the exam in 2004, reducing the gender difference considerably in terms of
pass rates while maintaining roughly the same percentage point gender gap. As there is cost and no
benefit other than admission to taking the test, this pattern alone suggests that parental preferences for
male over female schooling are not fully responsible for gender differences in education.



                                                  -8-
3.3 Iodized Oil Capsule (IOC) Distribution in Tanzania
         Tanzania was targeted for iodine supplementation early compared to similarly afflicted countries.
In 1986, a massive supplementation intervention was scheduled to begin in the most affected districts of
the country as a short-term measure until nationwide production of iodized salt could be phased in in the
mid-1990s. The objective of the program was to cover all iodine deficient sub-populations for ten years
with iodized oil capsules (IOC). Iodized oil, taken either orally or through injection, is considered one of
the most effective short-term measures for combating IDD on account of the immediacy of health
improvements and duration of coverage, which lasts from one to four years depending on the dosage
(Delange, 1998). Program districts were chosen based on 1984 field measurements of visible goiter rate
(VGR) among school children. The minimum VGR for inclusion was 10%, which resulted in 25
treatment districts encompassing 25% of the country’s population (Peterson, 2000).9 As shown in Figure
1, intervention districts were spread across ten regions of the country but concentrated geographically in
the lake district of the western border, opposite the coast, which corresponds to a major geological shield
and region of endemic IDD.
         In program districts, all women of child-bearing age were targeted to receive 380 mg capsules
once every two years, the expected duration of protection from this dose.10 From 1986–1994,
approximately five million women and children received at least one supplement through the program.
Program roll-out and coverage rates across districts, collected from the archives of the Tanzania Health
and Nutrition Office annual reports of program activity, are detailed in Table 1. Although all districts
were scheduled to begin IOC by 1988, in practice there were significant delays in program
implementation in many of them. Only ten of the districts had begun by 1988, and three did not start until
1992. Finally, districts were reached less frequently than once every two years due to administrative
problems and caution over administering supplements frequently (Peterson, 2000). Penetration rates were
lower than planned but still relatively high, ranging from 60 – 90% of the target population with average
coverage across all districts and all years of 64%.11
         Although the long-term impact of the program has not been evaluated, the program was deemed a
success early on due to the number of IOC distributed, overall cost-effectiveness (the average cost per
dose was $0.51–$0.56), and a handful of initial studies indicating that visible and total goiter rates (VGR
and TGR) had decreased among children who received supplements directly. A 1991 evaluation in three
districts found that VGR had decreased by over 50% and TGR by over 25% (Peterson, 2000). Among

9
  Two districts, Bukoba Rural, Kagera, and Mbinga, Ruvuma, were added late and are excluded from the study.
10
   The target groups for supplementation were, in order of importance: 1) women of childbearing age; 2) children 1-
5 years; 3) older children; and 4) adult men 15-45 years of age (Peterson, 2000). In people older than 45, iodized oil
was not encouraged due to increased risks of hyperthyroidism (Dunn 1987b).
11
   The average coverage rate among districts and years included in our analysis sample was 68%, although the
coverage rate among the target population of women of child-bearing age in unknown, and likely to be higher.


                                                     -9-
school children aged 7-18 in the district of Mahenge, TGR was 74.9% before IOC and 51.9% three years
after (Kavishe, 2000). In light of the importance of adequate thyroid hormone during brain development
and increased need for iodine during pregnancy, the implied program impact on children of women
protected from IDD during pregnancy is substantially higher.


4 Empirical Analysis
4.1 Data
        We examine the program effect on children born to mothers targeted for IOC during pregnancy
using micro-level data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey (THBS) and the 2004
Tanzanian Demographic and Health Survey (TDHS), to which we append the district-level information
from Table 1 on timing of IOC distribution rounds in intervention districts. The THBS is a nationally
representative survey of 22,178 households conducted by the National Statistics Office of Tanzania,
25.2% of which live in districts targeted for IOC. The 2004 TDHS covers a total of 4,987 households,
1,034 of which reside in intervention areas. Both surveys collect individual information on school
enrollment and grade attainment of all household members in addition to a variety of community and
family background characteristics. The THBS has particularly rich information on household
consumption and production and childhood health status, while the TDHS focuses heavily on
reproductive health histories, including fertility and infant health.
        Although the TDHS sample is considerably smaller than the THBS, it has two principal
advantages. First, information on month of birth allows us to construct a more precise indicator of IOC
treatment, described in the proceeding section. Second, the data capture schooling outcomes for children
born during a wider set of program years, allowing us to make use of greater variation in program activity
within and across districts. In particular, as a result of the delayed start of the program in ten districts,
only 17 districts contain program activity that affects children in the 2000 sample, while treated kids are
found in all 25 districts in 2004.


4.2 Analysis Sample
        For the empirical analysis, we restrict the analysis samples to all children between ages 10 and 13
in 2000 or between 10 and 14 in 2004 who are residing in the household and who could be linked to
mothers in the household. In the THBS, 20.8% of children were dropped because they could not be
matched to mothers based on age and relationship to household head, and in the TDHS, 20.1% of children
are missing month of birth data.12,13 Excluding non-resident children is necessary due to the fact that in

12
 Birth month is missing for 1,313 (~20%) children of the head between 9 and 17 in the THBS either because their
mother did not live in the household or because she did not participate in the birth history survey.


                                                 -10-
both data sets schooling outcomes are only available for household members. Excluding observations that
cannot be linked to mothers is necessary to minimize the number of children born outside the district
given relatively high incidence of orphanhood in rural Tanzania. However, as a robustness check we run
analogous regressions on the full sample.
         The lower bound on age was based on the modal age of school enrollment, which peaks at 10 for
both boys and girls. Across the entire rural THBS sample, only slightly over 50% of nine-year-olds were
enrolled. Restricting the sample to ages by which most children have entered school maximizes the
predictive power of our treatment variable, particularly if IDD reduces schooling attainment through
grade retention as well as age of entry.14 As a robustness check, we verify that the findings are statistically
robust to including children as young as 6 and present evidence that both retention and age of entry matter
by examining the effect of treatment on school enrollment and grade-by-grade attainment among the
larger sample of kids 6-13.
         The upper age limit in 2000 reflects the fact that oldest children in intervention districts affected
by the program are 13 in 2000. In 2004, the upper age limit is driven by the fact that children in the
sample leave their parents’ household at high rates beginning at age 15, and reasons for leaving are likely
to be systematically different for boys and girls and highly correlated with schooling attainment.15
Because schooling data were collected only for children living in the household, and because district of
birth is not available for children living outside of their birth household, it was necessary to restrict the
sample to children under the age of 15 to avoid sample selection issues arising from age- and sex-specific
attrition rates.
         The primary THBS analysis sample contains 1785 children in 1352 households living in the 25
intervention districts that began IOC by 1992. Within-household estimates reduce this sample to 846 kids
in the 413 households that have more than one family member aged 10-13. Sex-specific estimates, which

13
   In the THBS sample, we matched mothers to children with the following algorithm: A woman was considered the
mother of the child of the head or spouse if she herself was the head or spouse and fell within the right age range (12
to 45 at birth of that child). Out of 3397 kids 8 to 14, 725 could not be linked to mothers; of these, 342 are not the
child of the head, 191 live in households in which there are no eligible women (no female head or no spouse in right
age range), and 192 live in households in which there is more than one eligible mother due to polygamy. By this
method, some fraction of mother-child pairs is likely to be matched incorrectly, reducing the precision of the
estimates without introducing any obvious bias. In contrast, incorrectly matching sibling pairs in the household fixed
effects estimates is unlikely to matter for either the efficiency or consistency of the estimates since the predictions
regarding fetal iodine deficiency are the same for children born in the same district.
14
   The signal-to-noise ratio of grade attainment as an indicator of cognitive capacity will automatically improve with
age over this pre-drop-out range (6-10) even if grade differences are driven entirely by differences in age of entry.
However, if retention rates are also an important mechanism by which cognition influences school progression, the
relationship between grade attainment and cognition will be particularly weak at young ages.
15
   Comparing birth history data to the household roster for children of the respondent, 32% of 15-year-olds are no
longer in the household. Furthermore, beginning at 15 boys are significantly more likely to have left the household
than girls. At 15, they are 25% more likely and at 17 they are 64% more likely to have left. The most common
reasons for leaving are likely to be marriage for girls and high school attendance for boys.


                                                    -11-
further restrict the analysis sample to households with more than one child of the same sex in this age
distribution, are limited to 251 boys and 231 girls. Among children in our sample, 89% are enrolled in
Standards I to VII (primary school) and 11% are not studying.16
         The TDHS analysis sample contains 3672 children ages 10-14 in 2521 households across the
country, 515 of which reside in intervention districts. Within-household estimates reduce this sample to
2160 kids in 1009 households with more than one family member aged 10 to 14, and sex-specific
estimates reduce the sample to 643 boys and 534 girls. In the 2004 sample, 85.4% is enrolled in Standards
1 to 4, 4.3% is enrolled in Standards 5 to 7 and 9.76% are not studying. Since less than 5% of our 2004
analysis sample has entered high school (consistent with the modal age of high school entrance of 16),
there is little ability to observe transitions to secondary school with available data.


4.3 Definition of Program Participation
         To analyze the impact of IOC distribution, we defined an indicator of treatment based on the
likelihood that the mother of a child was protected from IDD at some point during her first trimester of
pregnancy given an IOC dosage of 380mg.17 First trimester was chosen based on numerous laboratory
studies indicating that maternal hypothyroxinemia increases the risk of neuro-developmental deficits of
the fetus only prior to mid-gestation, a period during which the mother is the only source of thyroid
hormone (Cao et al., 1994a; Hetzel & Mano, 1989; Pharoah & Connolly, 1987).18 Furthermore, since
brain development of the fetus takes place during the first month of pregnancy, it is believed that most of
the consequences become permanent by the second trimester. This view is consistent with a wider body
of scientific thought regarding the importance of micronutrients during the “critical period” of the first
three months of pregnancy (Barker, 1992, 1995; Painter et al., 2005).
         The likelihood that the mother of a child born t months after a program year p was protected from
IDD at any point during the first trimester of pregnancy is equal to the probability that the mother
received IOC on or before t-7 (in time to protect the child prior to end of the first trimester given 9-month
gestation) multiplied by the probability that sufficient stores of maternal iodine (≥6.5mg) were remaining
at t-9 to protect the child for at least one month of this critical period. Without data on month of IOC
distribution, the first probability calculation requires an assumption regarding the length of distribution
periods, which we assume to be three months based on project reports, and the timing of distribution

16
   Three 13-year-olds report enrollment in secondary school.
17
   According to program rules, women under age 23 were instructed to receive half the dosage of older women
(200mg). However, according to one program report, this rule was rarely followed on account of the distribution
scheme designed to administer as many pills as possible in a short amount of time (Peterson et al., 1998).
18
   In addition, one experimental study in humans on the timing of iodine supplements for preventing cretinism found
that iodine treatment during the first trimester protects the fetal brain from the effects of iodine deficiency, while
treatment later in pregnancy or after delivery does not improve neurologic status (Cao et al, 1994).


                                                    -12-
periods over the year, which we assume to be uniform (Peterson et al, 1998). This implies that mothers of
children born t months after the start of a program year were treated in time to protect that child with
                          1             1                        1  1 t −9
probability equal to:       if t = 8 ;    if t = 9 ; and min(1,    + +     ) if t > 9 .
                         36            18                       36 18 12
           The second probability calculation, which pertains to kids born 2-4 years after the program,
requires an assumption regarding the depletion pattern of iodine from 380mg supplements, which is
stored in the adipose tissue and excreted gradually from the body. To account for depletion in the
treatment indicator, we make the following assumptions based on existing evidence: First, we assume that
85% of iodine is extracted in urine immediately, implying an initial loss of 323mg of iodine in the first
month, after which point it is depleted hyperbolically.19 Second, based on results from three separate
human studies in settings with comparable levels of IOC, we assume that iodine stores adequate to fully
protect against fetal IDD remain in the body for 24 months (Eltom et al., 1985; Cao et al., 1994; Furnee,
1997). Given that baseline iodine deficiency varies across treated individuals, the fraction of treated who
are adequately covered will presumably decline after the point of full protection (24 months) at an gradual
and decreasing rate, which can be calculated based on our assumed depletion formula.20 In particular, the
above two assumptions together imply a half-life (at 1) of 3 months, which means that iodine levels will
continue to fall for an additional 14 months after t=24 until they reach ineffective levels to protect anyone
in the population (>4.2mg) at t=38. Figure 2 illustrates the pattern of iodine depletion implied by our
assumptions, and exact probabilities for each birth month are described in Appendix A and presented in
Figure 3. Importantly, the implied half-life is consistent with four studies of the approximate half-lives of
urinary iodine excretion after oral oil administration to iodine-deficient human populations (Wolff, 2001).
           For the analysis sample without month of birth data, we calculate the birth-year-specific
likelihoods of receiving adequate coverage by averaging the monthly probabilities weighted by district-
specific seasonality in births observed between 1996 and 2004 in the 2004 TDHS (after the intervention).
The unadjusted and seasonality adjusted likelihoods for children born x years after IOC are the following:

     Birth year - program year (x):                                  -1        0     1        2       3       4
     Likelihood of IDD protection in trimester 1, immediate
     depletion of 223mg followed by simple hyperbolic                0        0.072 0.806 0.997 0.668 0.099
     depletion with half-life of 3 at t=1 (380mg):
     Seasonality-adjusted likelihood, averaged across districts:     0        0.070 0.802 0.997 0.696 0.101

19
   Several studies have established that iodine stored in fatty tissue is depleted hyperbolically with the majority of
urinary extraction occurring in the first week and then tapering off gradually. See Wolff (2001) for a review of the
literature. Hyperbolic depletion implies a fast initial rate of depletion that slows quickly. In calculating iodine stores,
we use the following simple hyperbolic discounting formula: V = A , where k-1 is the half-life of iodine.
                                                                     1 + kt
20
  Based on the recommended daily allowance for pregnant women (2 mg, of which 90% is depleted per day, unlike
iodine stores), 6.5 mg is considered the minimum level of iodine stores in adipose tissue sufficient to ensure at least
1 full month of coverage in the population (~0.2 mg RDA for 31 days).


                                                      -13-
         While there is arguably insufficient information on which to base the assumed depletion pattern,
it is important to note that our estimation strategy does not depend on any of the above assumptions.21
First, we introduce flexibility into the regression equation to account for misspecification by including a
correction factor for potential measurement error in the estimated treatment probability due to incorrect
assumed rate of depletion. This variable is equal to the number of months (or years, when month is not
available) after the point of full protection a child was born, relevant only for kids born 3-4 years after a
distribution round. We also include a correction factor that accounts for the possibility that women under
age 23 at the time of distribution received half the amount of IOC, an initial program guideline that was
reportedly followed very rarely. This is simply the previous correction factor interacted with an indicator
that the child’s mother was under 23 at the time of IOC.
         In addition to the above measure of protection based on annual likelihood, we also construct a
binary indicator that treats only those individuals born one to three years after IOC distribution as
protected from IDD in utero. Since the binary measure encompasses a wide range of alternative depletion
assumptions, the robustness of our results to this treatment indicator confirms that the estimates are
insensitive to the exact choice of depletion function. To check our assumption about the point of full
protection, we also estimate the effect of IOC assuming 12 rather than 24 months of maximum coverage
using an indicator of being born 1-2 years after the program. The results consistently indicate a significant
effect of IOC that begins to decline after month 24, supporting the assumptions presented here.22


4.4 Estimation Strategy
         We estimate the effect of IOC on child schooling in a regression analysis in which the primary
outcome of interest is years of completed schooling. In Tanzania, as in many African countries, there is
high variance in the rate at which children progress through primary school. Meanwhile, since few
children drop out in the age range to which our analysis is restricted (primary school), progression is
presumably a considerably more sensitive indicator of final schooling attainment than enrollment.
         Table 2 presents summary statistics from the full THBS sample divided according to the timing
of IOC. Comparisons across intervention and non-intervention districts show clearly that the program
favored needier areas, as was its intention. Relative to non-participating districts, IOC districts are more
rural, have fewer households with private sources of drinking water and solid floors, have greater distance
between households and secondary schools, and have lower consumption of fish, a rich source of iodine.

21
   Large variance across populations and individuals in the speed of iodine depletion has been documented and few
scientific studies follow subjects for more than a year. Patterns of iodine extraction have been found to be specific to
the amount, method of delivery, and population characteristics. One study in Malawi found that the type of iodized
oil, goitre, intestinal parasites, sex, adipose tissue, cassava consumption and seasonality all influence the duration of
effectiveness of IOC (Furnee, 1997).
22
   These results are available in a working paper posted on the author’s website (Field, 2006).


                                                     -14-
Such differences clearly bias comparisons between participating and non-participating districts.
Comparisons among participating districts according to program timing are less clear. School enrollment
and access to safe drinking water fall monotonically with program start date, while illness due to fever or
malaria and average distance to school are significantly higher for districts in which the program started
late. In contrast, the average annual consumption of durables is significantly higher in late districts, while
the average number of meals and frequency of fish consumed are relatively constant across program start
dates. Nonetheless, the general patterns suggest that the districts in which IOC began early were better off
than late districts. Hence, program effect estimates based on comparisons across participating districts are
also likely to be biased towards finding a program effect.
        For this reason, we restrict our regression estimates to within-district comparisons with the
following fixed-effects regression:

                          gradeif = α + β1 (Tif ) + β 2 (A if ) + β 3 (X if ) + μ f + ε if             (1)

        Here Ti is the continuous or binary likelihood child i in family f was protected from IDD during
the first trimester described in the last section, A is a vector of birth year dummies, and X includes binary
controls for gender and sex-specific birth order. The only difference in regression specification across the
2000 and 2004 analyses is the use of birth month data in the 2004 estimates, which is used to refine the
definition of treatment and added to the set of controls to account for the independent effect of small
differences in age on school entrance or progression. To examine whether the fetal effects of IDD are
stronger for females, we also run the above regression separately by gender. The household fixed effects
model minimizes the potential confounding role of unobservable cohort effects that might vary
systematically with treatment and district and increases the precision of our estimates by holding family
background constant. However, these estimates are necessarily restricted to the subset of households with
more than one child in the relevant age range and the gender-specific regressions are run on the subset of
families with at least two children of the same gender, which gives rise to potential selection issues
relevant for comparison across estimates. To gauge the program effect among the larger and constant set
of households, we also estimate the above regression replacing household with district fixed effects and
clustering standard errors at the household level.
        Since within districts and households treatment is determined entirely by age, in the above
equation β1 reflects the program effect averaged across all treated cohorts. As in all fixed effect
estimates, identification of the causal effect of T requires that the error term be uncorrelated with
treatment conditional on the observables contained in X and district or sibling average grade attainment
( μf ). If cohort differences in treatment are positively correlated with other trends that affect grade
attainment, the estimates will overstate the true effect of iodine on schooling.


                                                  -15-
4.5 Program Effects According to Local Diet
         Our analysis also makes use of anticipated variation in the impact of iodine supplementation
based on district variation in baseline iodine deficiency. Given that the level of iodine provided through
IOC supplements was uniform across districts, the relationship between baseline IDD rates and program
impact is likely to be non-linear. In other words, we anticipate a threshold level of IDD below which rates
are too low to observe a significant average treatment effect in the district population, and a second
threshold above which 380 mg of iodine will be insufficient to protect against maternal iodine deficiency
due to factors that raise daily requirements for iodine intake.
         We test this prediction by examining variation in program effect by level of consumption of
goitrogenous foods. Goitrogens – including cabbage, legumes, chaya leaves, and cassava – are foods that
contain cyanogenic glycosides, which impede absorption of iodine by the thyroid gland (Bourdoux et al,
1978). Frequent consumption of such foods is one of the leading causes of IDD, and diets high in natural
goitrogens can induce IDD even if the diet is rich in iodine (Gaitan 1990; Thilly 1992). Consistent with
this, laboratory evidence suggests that goitrogens play a significant role in influencing biochemical events
unique to the developing brain (Rao and Lakshmy, 1995).
         Cassava is a staple in much of Africa and a large part of the diet in rural Tanzania. According to
the 1991 THBS data, which contain detailed information on household food items consumed, cassava
(either flour, dried or fresh) was the second most important food product after maize in terms of calories
per day, and in 2000 was ranked third after maize and sorghum.23 As one of the most goitrogenic food
products, cassava has the potential to significantly decrease iodine absorption if not properly
fermented.24,25 Although the need for iodine increases with consumption of goitrogenous foods, so does
the rate at which iodine – including that provided by the supplement – is depleted from the body by
regular intake of goitrogens. Hence, in addition to serving as a central explanatory factor for baseline rates
of IDD in the study population, the cyogenic effect of high cassava consumption is likely to have
impaired the effect of IOC in certain districts.
         The district rate of cassava production is used to proxy for variation in dietary intake 10 to 15
years prior. Geographic variation in local produce availability is likely to constitute a reasonable predictor
of dietary differences a decade earlier, and is arguably a preferable proxy of past diet than is current diet

23
   For a description of these data, see Appendix 3. CALCULATING THE FOOD POVERTY LINE IN 2000/01 of
the IFPRI document, “Analysis of the Tanzanian Household Budget Survey – Income poverty: Technical note on
estimating poverty levels in Tanzania” prepared by Trudy Owens in March 2002.
24
   According to Hetzel (2000), “Although a number of other staple foods contain potential goitrogens, in contrast to
cassava the goitrogens are in the inedible portions of the plants and do not contribute importantly to IDD.”
25
   While the adverse effects of cassava can be countered with proper processing, there have been few efforts to train
local communities in alternative processing methods and ignorance over the health effects of highly goitrogenous
diets remained high in the 1990s (Bilabina et al, 1995; Delange et al, 1994). In one study in Tanzania, insufficient
cassava processing was correlated with TGR (Peterson, 1994).


                                                   -16-
given recent changes in household diet. To construct this measure, a household was defined as a cassava
producer if they reported consuming during the past month any fresh or dried cassava or cassava flour
that was produced at home, and districts were classified according to the fraction of households in the
district that reported consuming home-produced cassava. In the regressions districts are divided into
terciles of cassava production. In high production regions, between 41 and 60% of households grow
cassava, compared with between 11 and 40% in medium production regions and fewer than 10% of
households in low productions districts.


5 Results
5.1 Grade Attainment
        Regressions of grade attainment on program participation yield large and significant estimates of
the impact of IOC on progression through school, presented in Tables 3-4. In household fixed-effects
regressions from 2000 (Table 3), adequate maternal iodine in utero is associated with 0.358 years of
additional schooling relative to siblings who are unprotected among children living in households with
more than one child 10-13 (column 1). When the regressions are run separately by gender, the estimated
effect is twice as large and statistically significant among girls but not boys in households with more than
one sibling of the same sex aged 10-13. When the binary measure of program participation is used in
place of the likelihood measure (columns 4-5), the results are almost identical in magnitude and retain
significance. Furthermore, results are robust to the inclusion of the ~20% of children that could not be
precisely matched to mothers (columns 6-7), suggesting that orphaned or fostered children are likely to
live in districts where they were born.
        In district fixed effects regressions that include all children 10-13 the estimated treatment effect is
once again only significant for girls but considerably smaller than the household fixed effect result
(columns 8-9). The difference between the two specifications appears to reflect greater vulnerability to
IDD among households with many children close in age relative to smaller households, likely due to the
correlation between family size and poverty. This is evident from the fact that the difference between
household and district fixed effects estimates disappears when the latter is restricted to households with
more than one child (columns 10-11).
        The 2004 estimates of schooling attainment detailed in Table 4 are strikingly consistent with the
2000 estimates despite the fact that sample members were born in different years and enumeration areas
from the THBS sample. Across the pooled sample of children with siblings close in age, the estimated
program effect is slightly larger (0.52 years) but not statistically distinct from the Table 3 estimate, and
gender-specific estimates are once again large and significant for girls but not boys. Once again the
district fixed effect estimate on the full sample is half the size of the household fixed effect estimate (0.29



                                                -17-
years), but in this case it retains significance at the 10% level. Since treatment status pertaining to kids of
a given age and district is not constant across samples, the similarity of 2000 and 2004 estimates alone
indicates that the findings are not driven by time-invariant patterns of grade attainment by age that are
spuriously correlated with treatment.
        In both sets of results, the coefficient estimates on the correction factors for rate of iodine
depletion 3-4 years after the program are insignificant and close to zero in nearly all regressions,
indicating that coverage falls at the assumed rate and that the majority of women received 380mg
supplements regardless of age, as was claimed in program reports. The coefficient estimate on the
indicator of young mother is only significant in the district fixed effect regression on the female sample,
and the finding is not robust to the more precise measure of depletion in 2004 that makes use of birth
month. The same regression yields the only high point estimate on the rate of iodine depletion in years 3
and 4. Since the average effect during years 3-4 is the weighted sum of these two coefficient estimates –
which is close to zero – there is consistent evidence across all regression estimates that the depletion
assumptions during years 3 and 4 are correct. More general robustness checks verify that the program
effect is robust to excluding treatment interactions (Table 6, columns 1-4), and to including children as
young as 6 (Appendix B, columns 1-6).
        Since there is virtually no drop-out over this interval, the results presumably reflect the influence
of fetal IDD on children’s rate of progression through school, a function of age of entrance, attendance,
and grade retention. As described in Section 3.2, in rural Tanzania, all such mechanisms are likely to
matter. Without information on age of entrance or attendance, we cannot disentangle the precise
mechanism by which educational attainment increases with treatment, however using the larger sample of
children 6-13 we look for evidence of the first mechanism by regressing the binary indicator of whether a
child has started primary and pre-school on the treatment variable (Appendix B, columns 7-10). These
results provide weak evidence of treatment influence on age of entry into primary but not pre-school,
which appears to be larger for girls.
        Regressions on grade-by-grade attainment (Appendix C) provide stronger evidence of a treatment
effect on retention rates. In particular, there is a large estimated effect of treatment on the likelihood of
passing at least one primary school grade (column 1), no observed treatment effect on completing early
primary school (column 2), and a large estimated treatment effect on the likelihood of starting late
primary school (column 3). As described in Section 3.2, children take their first national standardized test
at the completion of Standard 4, which determines entry to Standard 5 (traditionally middle school). The
pattern of regression results in Appendix C indicates that, if age of entry is indeed lower for protected
kids, unprotected kids catch up in terms of grade attainment by the end of early primary school and then
fall behind again at Standard 4 exams. This pattern of results implies that test-taking ability conditional on



                                                -18-
grade 4 attainment is sensitive to in utero iodine availability, which is inconsistent with a story in which
the effect of IOC on completed schooling operates exclusively through earlier entrance among the treated.
           The measured effects underestimate the cognitive impact of IDD to the extent that not all
pregnant women in a district were reached by the program. Data on program coverage rates by district
(Table 1) indicate that 68% of the target population was reached in program areas between 1986 and 1990
and 65% between 1986 and 2004.26 Since program personnel were instructed to administer and not just
hand out pills (when they reached their turn in line, a patient was handed a capsule with a cup of water
and instructed to swallow), this rate is likely to reflect true rate of treatment exposure. If the rate applies
equally to pregnant women, the estimates imply an average effect of IOC of 0.52-0.76 years. However,
for three reasons it may be inappropriate to inflate the baseline estimate by average coverage. First,
women of childbearing age were reportedly first in the priority list for receiving IOC, so are likely to have
been targeted more aggressively. Second, coverage is likely to be higher than average among pregnant
women since they are more likely than men to visit village health centers where IOC were frequently
distributed. Third, an evaluation of program implementation suggested that coverage rates were higher in
areas with higher incidence of goiter, which also implies that effective coverage (coverage of those in
need) was over 68% (Peterson, 2000).
           One of the most striking patterns in both sets of results is the consistently higher estimated
program effect on girls. In both within-sibling and within-district estimates, girls appear to benefit twice
as much as boys from IOC in utero, although the difference is only significant in the district-level fixed
effects regressions. In the household fixed effect model, girls gain an estimated 0.81-0.90 years of school
with in utero IDD protection, which is statistically significant throughout, while boys gain an estimated
0.29-0.43 years that is not statistically distinguishable from zero. Including households with only one girl
10-13, the estimated effect of IOC is 0.36-0.42 years and again close to zero and insignificant for boys.
Inflating by average coverage, this implies an effect of IOC on girls’ schooling of 1.2 years.
           Importantly, the above estimates of grade attainment are biased measures of the program effect
on final schooling attainment since education outcomes are unobserved, although the direction of bias is
ambiguous. In general, differences in grade attainment widen over time as a disproportionate number of
slow achievers drop out of school. On the other hand, if there is sufficient catch-up at the point of primary
school transition, the program effect on final schooling attainment could be significantly lower.
Unfortunately, treated children in all available datasets are too young to enable examination of secondary
school outcomes, and censored data models are unlikely to be appropriate for estimating the total effect of
the program on schooling attainment given the substantial barriers to secondary school enrollment which
are likely to generate sharp discontinuities in grade attainment around age 14.

26
     Rate calculated by multiplying a district’s coverage rate by district’s fraction of children in our sample.


                                                        -19-
        In the 2004 TDHS estimates we gauge the nature of the bias by including in the regression the
interaction between program year and age to determine whether the program effect widens or narrows
over time (columns 7-12). In this specification, the baseline program effects are larger and more precise in
both district and household fixed effects models, while the coefficient estimate on the interaction term
between age of child and IOC is strongly negative, suggesting that the results overestimate the effect of
IOC on final schooling attainment. Furthermore, the gender difference is particularly stark – and
statistically significant – when the program effect is allowed to vary by age. This indicates possible
“catch-up” on the part of slower girls as those who progressed rapidly through primary school begin to
drop out at the point of secondary school transition. The pattern is illustrated graphically in Figure 4,
which plots average grade progression by gender and the binary indicator of treatment status. Although
between ages 10 and 12 boys in program districts who received IOC have significantly lower schooling
attainment than boys who did not benefit from the program, there is no significant difference in girls’ rate
of progression through school according to in utero IOC at the same ages. However, at ages 13 and 14,
girls’ schooling in program cohorts and districts falls below that of untreated girls, possibly indicating
drop out at primary school completion beginning at 13.
        While observed gender differences in the impact of IOC may reflect physiological differences in
the importance of iodine for fetal brain development similar to those observed in animal studies, there are
two other possible interpretations for the gender findings. First, gender differences may reflect the fact
that girls in Tanzania systematically enter school at an earlier age than boys, a pattern observed in the
1988 Census data as well as the 2000 THBS and 2004 TDHS data. Hence, by a given age they have
already reached a higher grade than their male peers. If the importance of cognitive ability on school pass
rates increases with grade, as is likely to be the case, girls between 10 and 13 will benefit more from the
intervention simply because they are more likely to be on the margin of influence. Although the two
trends are impossible to separate without information on age of entry (unavailable from these sources), it
is important to note that baseline gender differences in age of entry are quite small. To account for the full
gender difference in IOC, a 0.2 year difference in age of entry would have to correspond to twice the
effect of IOC on attainment, which could only happen if the influence of ability on pass rates were highly
non-linear with age.
        The third possible reason we might observe differences across girls and boys in the impact of IOC
in utero is that parents’ decision to invest in girls’ schooling may be more sensitive to differences in
cognitive capacity. This could be the case if, for instance, the cost of enrollment is higher for girls than for
boys due to girls’ higher productivity at home or greater opportunities for marrying young. If this is true,
boys and girls might experience the same cognitive benefits of IOC at a biological level, but these
benefits translate into greater schooling improvements for girls. Unfortunately, without data on cognitive



                                                 -20-
capacity, there is no simple way to distinguish the last story from a disproportionate improvement in
female cognitive capacity. Section 6 takes a further step in this direction by utilizing information on the
rates at which students pass the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE).
        The final regression exercise divides districts in the sample according to cassava production in
order to test predictions regarding heterogeneity in program effect according to local diet. Estimates in
Table 5 reveal an inverted u-shaped relationship between amount of goitrogens consumed and impact of
IOC on fetal development, consistent with our predictions. In areas with highly goitrogenous diets the
program appears to have had little effect, suggesting that maternal iodine levels were depleted by intake
of cassava. Meanwhile, in areas with relatively little cassava in the diet, the program effect is also small,
which presumably reflects the fact that these were districts with the lowest TGR at the start of the
program. Figure 5 splits the sample even further into five categories of cassava production and plots
coefficient estimates from regressions on the separate sub-samples. These results indicate that only the
extreme outliers were unaffected by the intervention. Most striking is the indication that the areas with the
highest TGR appear to receive no benefit from even a program as intensive as IOC.


5.2 Robustness Checks
        Importantly, our estimation strategy leaves little room for omitted factors to bias the results, and
simple robustness checks rule out obvious competing stories. First, the consistency of the treatment effect
across sample years provides strong evidence that the estimated program effects are not driven by time
invariant district-specific patterns of schooling attainment by age. We also confirm that the treatment
effect is absent in a placebo regression run on children too old to benefit from IOC in utero by regressing
grade attainment among children in sample districts who were 10 to 13 in 1988 on a pseudo-indicator of
IOC that pertains to kids of the same age and district in 2000. In the results presented in Appendix D, all
household fixed effect regressions yield small and insignificant estimates of the effect of program
participation on 1988 schooling. In the district fixed effects estimates, due to very large samples estimated
treatment effects achieve statistical significance but the point estimates are close to zero and of the
opposite sign as the previous results, so cannot explain the treatment effects observed in 2000 and 2004.
        Second, we confirm that the treatment effect can be separately identified off of both program gaps
and program delays, which rules out the possibility that our results simply reflect time trends that vary
systematically with program start dates. For instance, the age gap between 10 and 12 year-olds may be
lower in districts in which younger but not older siblings were treated simply because education is
increasing faster in districts that received IOC later. Importantly, because IOC was rarely distributed
according to the intended two-year schedule, there are multiple instances of an older but not a younger
sibling receiving IOC. In total, among all sibling pairs in the 2000 sample in which only one individual



                                               -21-
was treated, the older sibling was treated in 23% of cases.27 This variation in treatment patterns allows us
to check whether the program both reduces the grade attainment gap when a younger sibling is treated
and increases the gap when an older sibling is treated.
           Figure 6 shows the average difference in grade attainment for three categories of siblings
classified according to the binary indicator of treatment: (1) those in which both or neither benefited from
IOC; (2) those in which the older but not the younger sibling benefited from IOC; and (3) those in which
the younger but not the older sibling benefited from IOC. Comparison across these groups reveals that the
program effect is symmetric across the latter two cases: When an older but not younger sibling is
protected from IDD in utero, the difference in schooling attainment widens, and when the younger but not
older sibling is protected, the difference narrows. Regression estimates of grade differences on sibling age
gaps reveal statistically significant (at the 10% level) program effects of the expected sign in both
comparisons (Table 7). Furthermore, the regression results indicate no measurable difference in sibling
attainment gaps when both siblings are treated versus when neither is treated.
           Third, we restrict the control group to children born during a program year in order to confirm
that the results are robust to comparisons between treated children and siblings or peers who were in utero
or recently born at the time of the program (Table 6, columns 5-8). The fact that the treatment effect
remains constant in both size and significance among this subsample significantly reduces the set of
confounding influences that could bias our results. To account for all findings, omitted variables of
concern would have to be factors that impact offspring during early fetal development but not late fetal or
neonatal stages.
           Fourth, we confirm that the estimated treatment effect is at least as strong two years after IOC, as
our biological model implies, by verifying that the estimates are robust in magnitude to excluding from
the treatment group kids born one year after the program (Table 6, columns 9-12). Given that the
estimated treatment effect does not fall within the two-year window, any omitted factor that accounts for
the observed patterns would have to have an equally lasting effect on maternal health.
           This collection of evidence reduces the set of potential confounders to district-specific changes in
early fetal health environment other than iodine that: (1) coincided with multiple rounds of IOC
distribution in timing and duration (i.e. match Table 1), (2) were not accompanied by equally large
improvements in neonatal health, and (3) had a sustained effect on maternal health for 24-36 months.


5.3 Threats to Validity
           Within this set, there are two categories of possible confounding influences. First, treatment may
have influenced early fetal outcomes through channels other than iodine availability, either through

27
     The asymmetry reflects the fact that most variation in program activity arises from delays rather than gaps.


                                                      -22-
interaction with health care workers or the offer of alternative health inputs at the time of IOC. For two
reasons, other aspects of treatment are unlikely to explain our results. First, given the nature of
distribution, in which villagers were assembled on an appointed day to receive supplements en masse, and
the government’s emphasis on quick distribution rounds, it is unlikely that other health services would
have been offered at the same moment (Peterson, 2002).28 Second, it is unlikely that any information or
alternative health inputs that could have been provided in conjunction with IOC would have had a
sustained effect on mother’s physical health or health behaviors for two years after treatment, and those
that could have had a lasting effect would generally also improve outcomes of kids born just after iodine
depletion, contradicting the evidence in Table 7. For instance, Vitamin E supplements or nutritional
supplements given to women at the same time as IOC would only benefit children born very soon after
the program and not those born two to three years after. Similarly, changes in mothers’ behavior as a
result of the treatment are unlikely to affect children born 3 but not 4 years after the program and also not
affect children born during the program.
            A second possible concern is that the timing of distribution rounds was driven by intermittent
declines in the quality of district prenatal (but not neonatal) health services. In this case, children in utero
during program gaps may have experienced other deficiencies in fetal health inputs relative to those born
immediately before or after, which could lead to permanently poorer health – and possibly schooling –
among children who did not benefit from IOC that is independent of reductions in IDD. Similarly, if
program timing was driven by district-level income shocks, children in utero during the program may
have received better nutrition at critical stages of development.
            Once again, the duration of IOC coverage makes such stories difficult to construct. Essentially,
since most treated children are born two to three years after IOC and a significant fraction of control
children are born the year of and the year before IOC, treatment is not well correlated with program
activity. The robustness of our results to restricting the control group to children born during a program
year (Table 6) confirms the limited potential for a treatment effect driven by unobservable district trends
that are correlated with IOC. To illustrate, suppose there are district-level trends in income strong enough
to generate improvements in health care in year t (a program year) followed by a worsening of health care
in year t+3 (a program gap year). In this case, unobservable income should be higher for children born in
t (the control group) when services are upgraded relative to children born in t+2 or t+3 (the treatment
group) when the district fails to replenish services, biasing our estimates downwards if at all.
            Information on sources of coverage delays and gaps also provides qualitative evidence that
variation in treatment was independent of other shocks to fetal health environment. A post-intervention
study by Peterson (2000) provides a detailed account of sources of delay gleaned from IOC program

28
     Nor is there any discussion of this occurring in lengthy program implementation reports (and no incentive to hide).


                                                      -23-
reports and administrative records, interviews with past and present program managers, and supervision
visits to selected districts. The key piece of information from this study is that, in all cases of delay, lags
in program start date were due to administrative delays resulting from the logistical challenges of district-
wide IOC distribution and start date was ultimately determined by an external rather than an internal
force. Delays of one to three years most likely resulted from delayed receipt of IOC from the government,
which sent capsules to district health centers as late as 1989. Meanwhile, the eight districts delayed
beyond 1989 started late because they were slow to organize a distribution system, which was eventually
resolved externally through the establishment by the central government of national district teams.29
Given the central role of external resource provision in determining distribution timing there is little
reason to suspect that variation in program timing was related to income shocks or changes in the quality
of health care services within districts.
         Finally, since all possible sources of bias relate to unobservable influences on health that in turn
reduce schooling, in Section 5.3 we further assess the degree to which either unobservable impacts of
treatment or omitted trends in district income or services pose a threat to our estimation strategy by
testing whether variation in IOC is related to observable health status of children and reported school days
missed due to illness. The latter is a particularly strong test of our identifying assumption since alternative
explanations would almost by definition operate through increased schooling absence due to sickness.
Hence, the absence of observable differences in current health status between treated and untreated
children provides strong evidence that the program effect is driven by IOC. These data also allow us to
explore whether IOC operates through reducing childhood illness rather than improving cognition.


5.4 Health Effects of IOC
         The patterns of results observed in Tables 3-7 are consistent with a change in the cognitive cost of
schooling resulting from lower incidence of fetal IDD. However, since IQ is unobservable and IDD has
also been associated with infant and child health outcomes in some but not all experimental studies in
humans, it is possible that program participation influenced schooling attainment of children in utero by
improving their long-run physical health which in turn increased the ability to progress through school.30
Although iodine deficiency has been demonstrated in laboratory studies to influence fetal brain

29
   Distribution involved organizing mass campaigns on one particular day in each village through one of two
strategies: In addition to IOC, some districts received central funding for fuel and health worker per-diems and set
up a “district team” which toured the area using government vehicles. Other districts initially received only IOC and
were told to integrate distribution into primary health care facilities. Eight of nine districts attempting the latter did
not accomplish this before the capsules were close to expiring. To ensure rapid distribution before expiration, in four
of the eight districts, the central government established “national district teams” in which staff from the national
program initiated and supported distribution with cars, money for fuel and per-diem pay. This discussion and the
empirical analysis ignore two districts that were added late and began 1994 to 1995.
30
   The evidence on the health effects of in utero IDD is mixed. See Allen and Gillespie (2001) for an overview.


                                                     -24-
development much more readily than physical development, it is possible that its influence is distinct in
this particular setting such that the impact on physical health is more acute than the impact on cognition.
Furthermore, even if cognitive damage from IDD exceeds physical health damage, schooling attainment
may be more sensitive to physical health status than to cognitive ability at this level.
         To examine this possibility, we make use of health data on children in utero during the program
from the 2000 and 2004 surveys. The TDHS provides information on age of death of all children born
during the program years as part of each sample members’ reproductive history. Using these data, we
construct a new sample composed of all births to mothers of children in our sample between 1990 and
1995, and regress binary indicators of neonatal (less than 30 days), infant (30 days to 1 year), and child (1
to 15 years) mortality on the same program indicator of IDD protection in trimester 1.31 In addition, we
approximate the influence of IOC on conception and early fetal mortality by estimating the program
effect on births. To do so, we construct a panel dataset in which an observation is a person-month
between 1990 and 1995 and the outcome of interest is whether a woman gave birth, regressed on the
probability of IDD protection 7-9 months earlier (specific to women in a given district and month).
         Coefficient estimates on the variable of interest for each regression are presented in Table 8,
beginning with the fertility estimates. The results indicate no effect of maternal iodine in early pregnancy
on fecundity (births), fetal death rates, or infant mortality rates (columns 1-9). However, there is some
indication that the program influenced child mortality after age 1 (columns 10-12). Regression results
from the pooled sample imply that IOC is associated with a 10 percentage point reduction in the
probability of death between ages of 1 and 15, which is independent of gender. This is strikingly high
given baseline child mortality of 8.9% in treatment districts. The finding that IOC influenced mortality at
older but not younger ages in inconsistent with scientific evidence on the influence of maternal thyroid
hormone on offspring health in which health effects are found to fall with age. A possible explanation is
that differential mortality of children reflects differences in child health inputs according to underlying
cognitive status, although this is impossible to determine without more detailed information on cause of
death and childhood health inputs. However, it is worth noting that observed health effects do not
necessarily reflect a pure physiological effect of IOC on survival. The magnitude of the estimated effect
and the fact that previous studies have only found reductions in child mortality in combination with larger
improvements in neo- and peri-natal mortality suggest that this finding should be interpreted with caution.
         The child mortality result not only provides new evidence of the benefits of IOC, but also has
relevance for the findings on grade attainment. There are three implications worth noting. First, the result

31
  We define child mortality to include deaths occurring up to the highest age of sample members (14) rather than
the standard measure of deaths under age 5 in order to gauge the program effect on attrition at any time prior to the
survey. We use 30 days rather than the standard 28 to define infant mortality in order to account for clumping
around one month intervals.


                                                    -25-
indicates that the education estimates may be contaminated by higher survival among children who
received IOC in utero. However, even if IOC reduced mortality, it is unlikely that higher child survival
would by itself give rise to higher grade attainment at ages 10-13 given that child mortality presumably
selects out the most vulnerable. As a result of survivor bias alone, the average child who benefited from
IOC in utero is likely to have lower anticipated schooling attainment in the absence of the program,
biasing our estimates downward rather than upward. Furthermore there is no indication of gender
differences in the effect of IOC on survival at any age, so survivor bias cannot account for these results.
        However, while differences in rates of child mortality associated with IOC are not likely to bias
our estimates towards finding an effect, it is possible that treatment has an inframarginal effect on health
status, i.e. lower mortality among treated children corresponds to higher average health status among
survivors. In this case, the program effect may operate through differences in health status rather than
cognition, and could also account for the gender difference if girls’ schooling is more sensitive to health
status. To study this more closely, Table 9 presents results from regressions analogous to the Table 3
estimates of contemporaneous child health status and school absence due to illness on program
participation. The latter outcome is a particularly useful test of whether the program effect operates
through illness since, in an environment of near universal primary enrollment, school attendance is the
mechanism through which in utero health damage would most likely account for the observed program
effect on schooling. The following health outcomes are available from the THBS: whether the child
experienced fever/malaria, diarrhea, an ear/nose/throat condition, a skin condition, an eye condition, an
accidental injury or any other health episode during the last four weeks, frequency of illness over the past
month, and total days of work or school missed during the last four weeks due to any sickness or injury.
        Regression estimates indicate that children in utero during the program are no more likely to
experience illness at ages 10-13 conditional on surviving to that age, suggesting no significant program
effect on the average health status of survivors. The estimates indicate no relationship between IOC and
school days missed due to illness (column 10), nor is there any evidence that children covered by the
program report fewer episodes of ill health (column 1). Furthermore, the estimates in columns 2-9
indicate no program effect on a wide range of observable measures of child health at ages 10-13, all of
which have the potential to be influenced by an overall weakening of the immune system resulting from
fetal IDD. This set of findings suggests that the measured program effect of IOC operates through
cognitive rather than physical health improvements.
        Similarly, results from tables 8 and 9 provide evidence that the estimated program effects are not
driven by shocks to fetal health environment other than IOC that coincided with the program. As
discussed in Section 3.4, our principal identifying assumption is that variation in program activity
(including program gaps and delays) is uncorrelated with within-district changes in other fetal health



                                                -26-
inputs that affected schooling through persistent differences in health status. Given that the mortality
results in Table 8 indicate a health effect only several years after the program, it is unlikely that the
pattern could be driven by changes in health inputs such as nutrition. Furthermore, since the effects of
fetal iodine deficiency are thought to be overwhelmingly cognitive whereas deficiencies in other health
inputs are more likely to show up in physical outcomes, the Table 9 results favor the interpretation that
the estimated program effect operates through IOC. Although it is impossible to rule out in utero
cognitive damage resulting from the absence of health inputs other than IOC, there is no obvious
candidate influence on fetal cognition other than IOC.


6 PSLE Test Scores
         In order to better connect our results on schooling attainment to improvements in cognitive
ability, we make use of district-level aggregate data on 2004 Primary School Leaving Examination
(PSLE) pass rates by gender, available from the Ministry of Education for 93 of the 106 districts in the
country.32 PSLE data are available on the number of boys and girls in each district who take the test in
2004, and the number of boys and girls who receive each of five categories of test grade, three of which
constitute passing grades. Test-takers in 2004 are likely to fall between the ages of 14 and 18, so
correspond almost perfectly to the cohort of children most affected by IOC distribution, or kids aged 10-
14 in the 2000 THBS data.
         Our empirical analysis tests whether secondary school transition rates are higher in IOC districts
conditional on district secondary school enrollment reported in the 1988 population census, and whether
transition rates improved disproportionately for girls.33 We examine the fraction of students who take the
PSLE, and the fraction of test-takers who pass and therefore transition to secondary school with the
following set of regressions, run separately by gender:

         ln(testta ker s04 d ) = α + β1 (Td ) + β 2 (ln( pop04 d )) + β 3 (hsrate88 d ) + β 4 ( X d ) + ε d        (2)

         ln(testtpassers04d ) = α + β1 (Td ) + β 2 (ln(testta ker s04d )) + β 3 (hsrate88d ) + β 4 ( X d ) + ε d   (3)

         In both estimates, an observation is a district. The first outcome, testtakers04, is the number of
male or female individuals in district d who take the PSLE in 2004, T is whether there was IOC
distribution in district d between 1986 and 1992, pop04 is the number of males or females in district d
between the ages of 10 and 14 in the 2002 Census (therefore the population of high-school age in 2004),

32
   PSLE data are missing for the islands of Pemba and Zanzibar, and the mainland region of Iringa, comprising 6
districts. No explanation is available from the Ministry of Education for the absence of data from these regions.
33
   Since 2002 Census data is only available in five-year age groups, the transition rate is approximated by dividing
the number of boys and girls passing the exam in 2004 by the number of boys and girls between the ages of 10 and
14 in 2002, or 12 to 16 in 2004. This is slightly younger than the average age of test-takers, which is unavailable in
2004, but the population figures are unlikely to differ across cohorts close in age.


                                                        -27-
and hsrate88 is the fraction of females or males age 21-25 in district d who were ever enrolled in Form 1
or above according to the 1988 Census. In the second regression, the outcome is the number of girls or
boys who pass the 2004 PSLE (achieve a grade of C or above) controlling for the number of test-takers.
In both regressions, Xd contains the following set of district-level controls: 2000/2001 Gini coefficient of
income inequality and percent of population below poverty line.34 Unfortunately, 2002 census data on
school enrollment are currently unavailable, but 2004 PSLE pass rates are likely to be a reasonable proxy
for the secondary school transition rate in the cohort of test-takers. As such, one caveat is that conclusions
about secondary school enrollment drawn from this analysis depend on a low rate at which children who
pass the test fail to enroll in secondary school, which is likely to be the case given the extreme
competition for slots in Tanzanian secondary schools and low PSLE pass rates.
        Results from these regressions are presented in Table 10. The estimates in the first two columns
reveal that the rate at which students take the PSLE is not significantly higher for IOC districts for either
gender. The point estimates are positive but small and fall short of statistical significance, which may
reflect the fact that all students who have access to secondary school attempt to enter. We do, however,
observe that the number of individuals passing the PSLE is significantly higher in IOC districts and
particularly so for females. The point estimates of 0.24 and 0.15 on the coefficients for IOC are
significant at 5% for females and males respectively. While far from conclusive, these results suggest that
the IOC intervention may have positively affected the distribution of scores on the PSLE, particularly the
distribution of female scores. This is also observed in a comparison of test score distributions across
gender and program participation (Figure 7), which reveals little difference in the distribution of male test
scores across program and non-program regions and a significantly lower fraction of scores in the lower
tail of the grade distribution for girls. Corresponding regression estimates suggest that districts that
participated in IOC experienced a significant decrease in the number of individuals receiving the lowest
grade “F” while there is no visible difference in the proportion of individuals in the upper tail of the
distribution (columns 5-8). The decrease is statistically significant for both genders but again larger in
magnitude for females.


7 Impact of universal salt iodization on cross-country comparisons
        The magnitude of the estimated effect of IOC on schooling in Tanzania implies that comparable
reductions in iodine deficiency worldwide that have resulted from universal salt iodization (USI) over the
past two decades should be visible in improvements in aggregate schooling between 1980 and 2000.
Hence, partly as a robustness check, the last section of the paper examines whether cross-country

34
 Data on education come from the 2004 Ministry of Education Basic Education Statistics (MoEC) and the 2000/01
THBS, as reported in R&AWG (2005).


                                                -28-
differences in reductions in iodine deficiency that resulted from differences in the timing and intensity of
USI and differences in baseline levels of IDD are correlated with improvements in schooling attainment
over the same period.


7.1 Global trends in IDD and Salt Iodization
        The International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders (ICCIDD) was
established in 1985 with the single purpose of achieving optimal iodine nutrition worldwide, and has
since worked closely with UNICEF and the World Health Organization towards this objective. The
resulting Universal Salt Iodization (USI) movement was based on the notion that IDD is easily and
inexpensively preventable through iodized salt (Mannar, 1996). In 1990, participants in the World
Summit for Children set a goal to eliminate IDD by the year 2000 through USI. Approximately 40
countries passed USI legislation between 1970 and 2000, the majority during the 1990s, resulting in an
increase of iodized salt intake from 20% of the world population to over 70%. Figure 8 shows current
prevalence of IDD and Figure 9 current estimates of the fraction of households consuming iodized salt.
On account of USI legislation and local distribution efforts, approximately two-thirds of the previously
IDD-affected population of Africa now consumes adequately iodized salt (Unicef, 2005).


7.2 Cross-country regression analysis
        For the cross-country empirical analysis, data were compiled from 81 countries on the following
four key variables: primary and secondary enrollment in 1980 and 2000, which spans the period during
which the bulk of USI activity took place35; the most common indicator of iodine deficiency, total goiter
rate (TGR); and a widely available indicator of recent improvements in iodine coverage, the percentage of
households consuming iodized salt. All countries for which these four measures were available were
included in the analysis. School enrollment information was taken from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators supplemented by the Barro-Lee Educational Attainment Data for the 1980s;
household consumption of iodized salt was gathered from UNICEF’s Global Database on Universal Salt
Iodization; and goiter rates were taken from the World Health Organization’s Database on Iodine
Deficiency and supplemented with Current Iodine Deficiency Status (CIDDS) database maintained by the
ICCIDD.36 To approximate the level of iodine deficiency prior to salt iodization, TGR from a year prior to

35
   The year 1980 is an appropriate pre-legislation measure of schooling for all countries that passed USI after 1975
due to the fact that children even in primary school in 1980 were born prior to the policy change.
36
   WHO data, along with a detailed description of data sources and inclusion criteria are accessible on-line at:
http://www3.who.int/whosis/mn/mn_iodine/. Both sources of TGR information compile estimates from a number of
government and scientific sources, and there is a great deal of overlap. However, whenever more than one estimate
was available, data were taken from the WHO database given that CIDDS estimates of goiter prevalence appear to
be noisier due to the variety of ways TGR is calculated (palpation vs. ultrasound; range of estimated TGR, etc).


                                                   -29-
1980 was used whenever possible, although in many cases it was necessary to include TGR measured
between 1990 and 1995. Figure 10 plots IDD and degree of salt iodization for countries in Africa. As can
be seen in the scatter plot, within Africa alone there is substantial variation in both baseline IDD (TGR)
and policy measures taken to reduce IDD.
        In the first set of estimates, we examine the impact of iodine deficiency on changes in schooling
attainment over the past two decades by regressing male and female primary and secondary enrollment in
2000 on 1980 enrollment along with baseline TGR and a standard set of control variables.37 We then test
whether reductions in IDD over this period are associated with improvements in schooling attainment by
adding to the regression the fraction of households consuming iodized salt in 2000. All cross-country
regression results are presented in Table 11.
        Three important findings emerge: First, iodine deficiency is negatively associated with
improvements in female secondary school enrollment between 1980 and 2000. In particular, baseline
TGR appears to have a significant adverse effect on female secondary enrollment in 2000 conditional on
enrollment rates in 1980. Our results suggest that reducing TGR from 30 to 10 will increase average
female secondary school participation by approximately 7%.38 The point estimates are also negative but
lower and insignificant for males. Surprisingly, the estimated effect of baseline TGR on 1980 and 2000
primary school participation is not significantly different from zero in any of the regressions. This is
likely due to the higher degree of collinearity between TGR and 1980 primary enrollment relative to TGR
and 1980 secondary enrollment. In particular, secondary school enrollment was so low in 1980 in many
affected countries that IDD was less likely to pose a binding constraint.
        Second, reductions in IDD between 1980 and 2000 appear to have had an important positive
effect on both male and female primary school participation, evidenced by the fact that both measures are
increasing in the fraction of households consuming iodized salt. The absence of a concomitant effect of
USI on secondary enrollment is consistent with this interpretation of the estimates given that the bulk of
changes in household use of iodized salt were too recent to affect the cohort of children eligible for
secondary school (children above age 12 in 2000).
        Third, the effect of reductions in IDD on primary school enrollment appears to be significantly
larger for females. The influence of iodized salt on primary schooling enrollment is estimated to be 0.137

37
   Control variables collected primarily from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. All regressions
include the following controls for earliest date available: Malaria prevalence (2001), HIV prevalence (2003), urban
population as % of total population (1990), population density per square km (1990), log GDP per capita (1990), log
GDP per capita squared (1990), and terms of trade (1980 export value index /import value index). Results are robust
to excluding post-1990 controls.
38
   A 10% reduction in TGR is equivalent to a 3 point drop in average TGR from 30.66 in our dataset. We calculate
the average increase in female secondary school participation (0.7) based on the estimated effect of TGR in Table 10
(column 5). We calculate the percentage increase in female secondary school participation (1.5%) by dividing the
increase in participation (0.7) by the average participation rate of 50.71 in our dataset.


                                                   -30-
for females and significant at the 5% level (column 3). This estimate suggests that moving from the
current sample average of 60% to universal salt iodization (100%) would increase female primary school
participation by as much as 7%. Meanwhile, the point estimate remains positive but lower and
insignificant for males (column 4), consistent with our estimated effects of IOC in Tanzania.
         These findings suggest that recent increases in iodine intake have had a beneficial impact on
cognitive development worldwide, particularly for females, and are consistent with the directions and
magnitudes of effects found in the micro-level estimates in Tanzania. Together with the previous results,
they underscore the importance of universal salt legislation for endemic regions, along with
complimentary measures to ensure deeper penetration in countries, including the majority of Western
Africa, for which legislation has failed to provide adequate protection.


7.3 Projections
         Based on the estimated impact of IOC in Tanzania, we calculate the expected gains in education
that should be observed by 2015 among the 42 countries that experienced unambiguous reductions in IDD
through USI legislation passed in the 1980s and 1990s. Baseline levels of TGR in these countries ranged
from 10% to 52%, compared with an average of 30% and range of 10-75% among districts that
participated in the Tanzanian IOC program. In each country, we estimate the number of children that were
newly protected from fetal IDD over the past decade by multiplying the number of children at risk pre-
legislation by the fraction of households using adequately iodized salt in 2000, which varies from 7% in
Niger to 86.1% in Nicaragua. The number of children previously at risk is the population of children aged
5-9 in 2002 times the rate of in utero IDD. The pre-legislation rate of in utero IDD is conservatively
assumed to be twice the baseline TGR among school-age children based on the fact that TGR is
approximately three times more prevalent and the ratio of recommended iodine intake twice as high in
pregnant women compared to school-age children.
         According to our estimates, approximately 41.1 million children between the ages of 5 and 9 in
2002 have benefited from increases in iodine intake over the past decade, with the largest populations of
newly protected children found in Algeria, Indonesia and Nigeria. Based on our previous estimates, the
expected increase in grade attainment for a child protected from fetal IDD is a minimum of 0.73 years.39
Multiplying the expected increase in schooling per treated child by the estimated number of children who
are newly protected, we calculate an anticipated overall impact of USI for each country ranging from
0.5% to 40%, with the largest gains in Africa. Based on our estimates, 13 countries should experience
more than a 10% improvement in schooling attainment by the year 2015. Among all affected countries,

39
  This effect is calculated from the baseline effect (0.36 years) observed in Tanzania adjusted for an average IOC
take-up rate assumed to be 78% and the average rate of maternal IDD (60%) in the target population.


                                                   -31-
the increase in average schooling due to USI amounts to 4.8%. For Central and Southern Africa, the
predicted improvement in average schooling across all countries in the region is 7.5%.


8 Conclusions
        We emphasize three conclusions from this analysis. First, our findings provide micro-level
evidence of an important role of geography in economic development that operates through the influence
of mineral availability on cognition. Variation in iodine availability is likely to play an important role in
growth patterns to the extent that human capital investment falls with rates of learning disability. Even
holding schooling attainment constant, small differences in average IQ at the group level could have large
effects on social and economic outcomes.
        Second, our findings support laboratory evidence that the female fetus is more sensitive to in
utero iodine exposure, such that endemic iodine deficiency may give rise to gender differences in
cognitive ability. The possibility that physiological gender differences exert a significant influence on
schooling has important implications for how we interpret gender differences in schooling attainment
across the globe and over time. An important caveat is that we cannot fully rule out the possibility that
gender differences are driven by sex-specific household responses to improvements in cognition rather
than disproportionate increases in female cognitive capacity. However, the corresponding evidence of
gender differences in fetal sensitivity to maternal iodine levels from controlled laboratory studies in
animals should not be discounted.
        Finally, reduced levels of IDD due to wide-scale salt iodization in the 1990s are likely to have a
visible impact on schooling attainment in previously afflicted areas over the next two decades, and these
changes are likely to disproportionately benefit girls. Our estimates indicate that at least 41 million
children have been affected by these reforms, which could increase average schooling attainment in many
countries by over 10%. In areas with baseline IDD comparable to districts in the middle range of our
sample, universal salt iodization could go far towards achieving gender parity in schooling attainment.
Reduced fetal IDD among the birth cohorts of 1990-2000 will be important to bear in mind when
interpreting changes in schooling in much of the developing world over the coming decade.
        However, our findings also provide evidence that universal salt iodization will not eliminate the
adverse cognitive effects of fetal IDD among populations in the most afflicted settings where diets high in
goitrogens require higher supplement levels or other dietary changes to overcome maternal IDD. In these
areas, more intensive interventions such as IOC or introducing new methods of cassava processing are
necessary to achieve current Millennium Development Goals regarding micronutrient deficiencies.
Although such approaches are significantly more costly than salt iodization, the resulting gains in
schooling attainment suggested by our findings indicate that expected returns well outweigh the costs.



                                               -32-
References

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., and Robinson, J. (2002). Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Development
   in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4):
   1231-1294.
Allen L and Gillespie S (2001). What Works? A review of efficacy and effectiveness of nutrition
    interventions. UN (ACC/SN).
Bautista, A, Barker, PA, Dunn, JT, Sanchez, M, Kaiser, DL (1982). The effects of oral iodized oil on
   intelligence, thyroid status, and somatic growth in school-age children from an area of endemic
   goiter. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 35:127-134.
Barker DJP (1995): Fetal origins of coronary heart disease. British Medical Journal 311:171-174.
Barker, DJP (1992). Fetal and infant origins of adult disease. British Medical Journal 301: 1111.
Basta SS, Soekirman Karyadi D, Scrimsha NS. (1979). Iron deficiency anemia and the productivity of
   adult males in Indonesia. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 32: 916-25.
Beaton GH, Martorell R, L’Abbe KA, Edmonston B, McCabe G, Ross AC and Harvey B. (1992).
   Effectiveness of Vitamin A Supplementation in the Control of Young Child Morbidity and Mortality
   in Developing Countries. SCN State-of-the-Art Nutrition Policy Discussion Paper No. 13.
Behrman JR, Hoddinott J, Maluccio J, Martorell R, Quisumbing A, Stein A. (2003). The Impact of
   Experimental Nutritional Intervention in Childhood on Education Among Guatemalan Adults.
   International Food Policy Research Institute: Brief Discussion Paper 207.
Biassoni P, Ravera G, Schenone F, Green J, Bertocchi J. (1990). Ouham-Pende: A new endemic goiter
    area in the Centroafrican Republic (CAR): Epidemiological survey on 7261 subjects. Thyriodology 2:
    35-40.
Benoist B, Andersson M, Egli I, Takkouche B, Allen H. (2004). Iodine Status Worldwide: WHO Global
   Database on Iodine Deficiency. World Health Organization. ISBN 92 4 159200 1.
Bleichrodt N, Born MA (1994). A meta-analysis of research on iodine and its relationship to cognitive
    development. Report of the Franklin Symposium: Iodine deficiency and brain damage. Cognizant
    Communications Corporation.
Bloom, David, Jeffrey Sachs, Paul Collier, Christopher Udry (1998). Geography, Demography and
   Economic Growth in Africa. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998(2):207-295.
Boyages SC, Halpern JP, Maberly GF, Eastman CJ, Morris J, Collins J, Jupp JJ, Jin CE, Wang ZH, You
   CY. (1988). A comparitive study of neurological and myxedematous endemic cretinism in Western
   China. Journal of Clinical. Endocrinology & Metabolism. v67: 1262-66.
Bourdoux P, Delange F, Gerard M, Mafuta M, Hanson A, Ermans AM. (1978). Evidence that Cassava
   Ingestion Increases Thiocyanate Formation: A Possible Etiological Factor in Endemic Goitre. Journal
   of Clinical. Endocrinology & Metabolism 46: 613-621.
Cao XY, Jiang XM, Dou ZH (1994). Timing of vulnerability of the brain to iodine deficiency in endemic
   cretinism. New England Journal of Medicine 331: 1739–44.
Chan SY, MH Andrews, R Lingas, CJ McCabe, JA Franklyn, MD Kilby, and SG Matthews (2005).
   Maternal nutrient deprivation induces sex-specific changes in thyroid hormone receptor and
   deiodinase expression in the fetal guinea pig brain. Journal of Physiology 566(Pt 2): 467–480.
Connolly KJ, Pharoah PO, and Hetzel BS (1979). Fetal iodine deficiency and motor performance during
   childhood. Lancet 2:1149 –51.



                                              -33-
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (2001). Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health
   for Economic Development. Geneva: WHO
Delange F, Lecomte P (2000). Iodine supplementation: benefits outweigh risks. Drug Safety 22(2):89-95.
Delange F (2000). The role of iodine in brain development, Proceedings of Nutrition Society 59(1): 75-
   80.
Delange F, Ekpechi L, Rosling H. (1994). Cassava cyanogenesis and iodine deficiency disorders. Paper
   presented to the International workshop on cassava safety, Ibadan, Nigeria, Acta Horticulturae,
   International Society for Horticultural Sciences.
Delange F (1998). Risks and benefits of iodine supplementation. Lancet 351(9107): 923-924, March 28.
Dugbartey, A (1998). Neurocognitive            aspects   of   hypothyroidism,     Archives    of   Internal
   Medicine.158(13):1413-1418, July 13.
Eltom M, Karlsson FA, Kamal AM, Bostrom H, and Dahlberg PA (1985). The effectiveness of oral
    iodized oil in the treatment and prophylaxis of endemic goiter. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
    Metabolism 61(6):1112-7.
Friedhoff AJ, Miller JC, Armour M, Schweitzer JW, and Mohan S. (2000). Role of maternal biochemistry
    in fetal brain development: effect of maternal thyroidectomy on behaviour and biogenic amine
    metabolism in rat progeny. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacoogy 3: 89–97.
Furnee CA (1997). Prevention and control of iodine deficiency: a review of a study on the effectiveness
   of oral iodized oil in Malawi. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 51(Suppl 4):S9-10.
Gaitan E and Dunn J (1990). Goitrogens in food and water. Annual Review of Nutrition 10: 21-39.
Galler JR, Ramsey F, Solimano G, Kucharski LT, Harrison R. (1983). The influence of early malnutrition
    on subsequent behavioral development, II, Classroom behavior. Journal of the American Academy of
    Child Psychiatry 22 : 16-22.
Galler JR (1984). Behavioral consequences of malnutrition in early life. In : JR Galler (ed.) Nutrition and
    Behavior. New York : Plenum Press.
Glasizou PP, Mackerras DEM (1993). Vitamin A supplementation in              infectious diseases: a meta-
   analysis. British Medical. Journal 306: 366-70.
Haddow, J, Palomaki G, Allan W, Williams J, Knight G, Gagnon J, O’Heir C, Mitchell M, Hermos
   Rosalie, Waisbren S, Faix J, Klein R. (1999). Maternal thyroid deficiency during pregnancy and
   subsequent neuropsychological development of the child, New England Journal of Medicine.August;
   341(8):549-555.
Halpern J-P, Boyages SC, Maberly GF, Collins JK, Eastman CJ, Morris JG. (1991). The neurology of
   endemic cretinism: A study of two endemias. Brain 114: 825-41.
Henderson, Jalizi and A. Venables (2001). Geography and Development, Journal of Economic
   Geography: 81-105.
Hetzel, B.S. (1983). IDD and Their Eradication. Lancet ii: 1126-1129.
Hetzel, Basil S. (1988). The Prevention and Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders. Nutrition Policy
   Discussion Paper No. 3, ACC/SCN State-of-the-Art Series, United Nations Administrative Commitee
   on Coordination/Subcommittee on Nutrition.
Hetzel BS (1989). The story of iodine deficiency. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Hetzel BS, Mano M (1989). A review of experimental studies of iodine deficiency during fetal
   development, Journal of Nutrition 119: 145-151.


                                               -34-
Hetzel BS (2000). Iodine and neuropsychological development. Journal of Nutrition 130(2S Suppl):
   493S-495S.
Hussain KHD et al. (1981). Evaluation of nutritional anemia intervention among anemic female workers
   on a tea-plantation. Iron Deficiency and Work Performance 73. Washington DC: Nutrition Found.
Lamberg BA. (1991). Endemic Goiter-Iodine Deficiency Disorders. Annalsof Medecine 23: 367-372.
Lavado-Autric R, Auso E, Garcia-Velasco JV, Arufe Mdel C, Escobar del Rey F, Berbel P, Morreale de
   Escobar G. (2003). Early maternal hypothyroxinemia alters histogenesis and cerebral cortex
   cytoarchitecture of the progeny. Journal of Clinical Investigation 111:1073–82.
Maberly G, Trowbridge F, Yip R, Sullivan K, West C. (1994). Programs against micronutrient
   malnutrition: Ending hidden hunger. Annual Review of Public Health 15:277-301.
Magombo F et al (1990). An investigation into factors leading to some resistance to a new innovation:
   The case of iodinated oil capsule distribution: Rukwa Region, Tanzania. Tanzania Food and
   Nutrition Centre, TFNC report No 1242.
Mannar M (1996). The iodization of salt for the elimination of iodine deficiency disorders. SOS for a
   Billion. Hetzel & C. Pandav. Dehli: Oxford University Press.
Marett, J.R.H. (1936). Race, Sex and Environment: A Study of Mineral Deficiency in Human Evolution.
   London: Hutchinson’s Scientific and Technical Publications, 342 pgs.
Merke F. (1984). The History and Ichnography of Endemic Goitre and Cretenism. Lancaster: MTP Press.
Miguel E, Kremer M (2004). Worms: Identifying Impacts On Education And Health In The Presence Of
   Treatment Externalities. Econometrica 72: 159-217.
Painter RC, TJ Roseboom, OP Bleker (2005). Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch Famine and disease in later
    life: an overview. Reproductive Toxicology 0(3): 345-352
Pandav CS, Kochupillai N. (1982). Endemic goitre in India: Prevalence, etiology, attendant disabilities
   and control measures. Indian Journal of Pediatrics 50: 259
Peterson S (2000). Controlling Iodine Deficiency Disorders: Studies for Program Management in Sub-
    Saharan Africa. Uppsula Dissertations from the Faculty of Medecine 943.
Peterson S, Assey V, Forsberg B, Greiner T, Kavishe FP, Mduma B, Rosling H, Sanga B, Gebre-Medhin
    M (1998). Coverage and cost of iodized oil capsule distribution in Tanzania. Health Policy and
    Planning 14(4):390-399.
Pharoah PO, Connolly KJ (1987). A controlled trial of iodinated oil for the prevention of endemic
   cretinism: a long-term follow-up. International Journal of Epidemiology 16:68 –73.
Pop V, Kuijpens J, van Baar A, Verkerk G, van Son M, Vijlder J, Vulsma T, Wiersinga W, Drexhage H,
   Vader H. (1999). Low maternal free thyroxine concentrations during early pregnancy are associated
   with impaired psychomotor development in infancy. Clinical Endocrinology 50(2):149-155.
Rao PS, and R Lakshmy (1995). Role of goitrogens in iodine deficiency disorders & brain development.
   Indian Journal of Medical Research 102: 223-6.
Research and Analysis Working Group (R&AWG) (2005). Tanzania poverty and human development
   report 2005. Ministry of Planning, Economy and Empowerment, Poverty Eradication Division. Dar es
   Salaam, Tanzania. Available at: www.povertymonitoring.go.tz
Richardson et al (1995). The behavior of children at home who were severely malnourished in the first 2
   years of life. Journal of Biosocial Science 7: 255-67.




                                              -35-
Rodrik, Subramanian, Trebbi (2004) Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and
   Integration in Economic Development, Journal of Economic Growth.
Shrestha, R. M. and C. E. West (1994). Role of Iodine in Mental and Psychomotor Development: An
    Overview. Wageningen, Netherlands: Grafisch Service Centrum.
Simon, P.A., D.T. Jamison and M.A. Manning. (1990). Gender differences in Goiter prevalence: A
   review. Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Sommer A. Tarwotjo I, Hussaini G, Susanto D, Soegiharto T. (1981). Incidence, prevalence, and scale of
   blinding malnutrition. Lancet 1: 1407-8
Sommer A Tarwotjo I, Djunaedi E, West K, Loeden A, Tilden R, Mele L (1986). Impact of vitamin A
   supplementation on childhood mortality: A randomized controlled community trial. Lancet 1:1169-73
Sundqvist J, Wijetunga M, Assey V, Gebre-Medhin M, Peterson S. (1988). Salt iodation and risk of
   neonatal brain damage. Lancet 352(9121):34-35.
Tanzanian Census (1988). Dar Es Salaam: Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs
   and Planning.
Thomas D and Frankenberg E. (2002). Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 80.2: 106-113.
Thomas D, Frankenberg E, Friedman J, Habicht J-P, Hakimi M, Jaswadi, Jones N, McKelvey C, Pelto G,
   Sikoki B, Seeman T, Smith H, Sumantri C, Suriastini W, Wilopo S. (2003). Iron Deficiency and the
   Well Being of Older Adults: Early Results from a Randomized Nutrition Intervention. Mimeo, UCLA
UNICEF (2004). A pinch of salt can go further In West Africa. Press center:
   http://www.unicef.org/media/media_23686.html
United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Education and Culture (MoEC) (2003), Poverty and Human
   Development Report, Mkuki na Nyota Publishers.
United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Education and Culture (MoEC) (2003b). Basic Statistics in
   Education 1999-2003. Dar es Salaam,.
Untoro, J, Schultink W, Gross R, West CE, Hautvast JG. (1998). Efficacy of different types of iodised oil.
   Lancet 351(9104): 752-753, March 7.
Utiger, Robert D (1999). Maternal hypothyroidism and fetal development. New England Journal of
    Medicine 341(8):601-602.
Van der Haar F, Kavishe P, Medhin MG (1988). The public health importance of IDD in Tanzania.
   Central African Journal of Medicine 34(3): 60-5.
Vermeersch, C (2003). School Meals, Educational Achievement and School Competition: Evidence from
   a Randomized Evaluation. Mimeo, University of Oxford.
West KP, Howard JR, Sommer A. (1989). Vitamin A and Infection: Public health implications. Annual
   Review of Nutrition 9: 63-86.
Wei Jun and Li Jianqun (1985). Metabolism of Iodized Oil After Oral Administration in Guinea Pigs.
   Nutrition Reports International 31, 1085-1087.
Wolff, J (2001). Physiology and Pharmacology of Iodized Oil in Goiter Prophylaxis. Medicine 80: 20-36.
WHO (1991). National strategies for overcoming micronutrient malnutrition, EB 89/27.
WHO (1992). National strategies for overcoming micronutrient malnutrition, A45/17.
Zaleha MD. Isa PhD, Iskandar Zulkarnain Alias MSc, Khalid Abdul Kadir PhD, Osman Ali PhD (2000).
    Effect of iodized oil supplementation on thyroid hormone levels and mental performance among


                                              -36-
   Orang Asli schoolchildren and pregnant mothers in an endemic goitre area in Peninsular Malaysia.
   Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition 9 (4): 274–281.
Zimmermann MB, Aeberli I, Torresani T, Burgi H. Increasing the iodine concentration in the Swiss
   iodized salt program markedly improved iodine status in pregnant women and children: a 5-y
   prospective national study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. Aug 2005; 82(2): 388-92.
Zoeller, RT and J. Rovet (2004). Timing of Thyroid Hormone Action in the Developing Brain: Clinical
   Observations and Experimental Findings [REVIEW ARTICLE]. Journal of Neuroendocrinology 16:
   809–818.




                                             -37-
Figure 1: Intervention districts


                        Bukoba Urban
                          Bukoba  Rural                 Tarime
                  Karagwe                        Musoma Urban
                                                       Musoma
                              Muleba       Ukerewe
                                                     Bunda       Serengeti
                                   Sengerema
                                          Mwanza Magu
                 Ngara                                                  Ngorongoro
                      Biharamulo                            Bariadi
                                   Geita
                                          Misungwi
                                              Kwimba                                  Monduli
                                                      Maswa                                        HaiRombo
                                                                                          Arumeru Moshi Rural
                                                              Meatu                       Arusha   Moshi Urban
                           Bukombe         Shinyanga
                                               Shinyanga
                                                      Urban                Karatu
                                                                                                       Mwanga
                                    Kahama
                  Kibondo                                               Mbulu Babati
                                                                                                           Same
                                                    Igunga   Iramba                            Simanjiro
           Kasulu                           Nzega
                                                                        Hanang                                  Lushoto
                                                             Singida Urban
Kigoma Urban                                                                                                   Korogwe
                                                                                                                     Muheza Micheweni
                             Urambo Tabora Urban
                                              Tabora            Singida
                                                                                Kondoa
                                                                                                                        Tanga   Wete
                                                                                           Kiteto                            Chake Chake
                                                                                                                               Mkoani
    Kigoma Rural                                                                                          Handeni   Pangani
                                                                                                                                      Kaskazini 'A'
                                                                                                    Kongwa                            Kaskazini 'B'
                                              Sikonge                            Dodoma Urban                                          Magharibi
                                                                                                                                         Mjini
                                                                                                                                            Kati
                                                                                    Dodoma                                   Bagamoyo        Kusini
                      Mpanda                                       Manyoni
                                                                                              Mpwapwa                                 Kinondoni
                                                                                                                                 Kibaha    Ilala
                                                                                                                 Morogoro
                                                                                                                  MorogoroUrban
                                                                                                             Kilosa        Rural          Temeke
                                                                                                                                 Kisarawe
                                                                                                                                       Mkulanga
                  Nkansi                                                               Iringa
                                              Chunya                                Iringa Urban
                                                                                                                                   Rufiji           Mafia
                     Sumbawanga Urban
                                                                 Mbarali
                     Sumbawanga Rural
                                                                               Mufindi             Kilombero

                                          Mbozi Mbeya
                                                    Mbeya
                                                      Urban
                                                                                                      Ulanga                                Kilwa
                                                      RungweMakete         Njombe                                        Liwale
                                                   Ileje
                                                         Kyela

                                                                      Ludewa                                                            Lindi
                                                                                                                                    RuangwaLindi
                                                                                                                                              Rural
                                                                                                                                                 Urban
                                                                                                                                               Matwara Urban
                                                                                                                           Nachingwea         Mtwara Rural
                                                                                    Songea Rural
                                                                                Songea Town                                              Tandahimba
                                                                                                                                        Newala
                                                                                                               Tunduru           Masasi
                                                                           Mbinga




                                                                       -38-
                   Figure 2: Iodine remaining in body after administration of 380mg iodized oil


      60




      50




      40
mgs




      30




      20




      10




      0
           1   4   7   10    13      16     19     22      25     28      31   34   37
                                  Months after administration



                                   Mgs of iodine remaining in adipose tissue




                                                   -39-
                                                 Figure 3: Child's likelihood of protection from IDD during first tri-mester

                           1.2




                            1




                           0.8
Likelihood of protection




                           0.6




                           0.4




                           0.2




                            0
                                 1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59
                                                                             Months after IOC child is born




                                                                             -40-
  Figure 4: Grade Progression by Gender and IOC


                            4



                           3.5
 Highest grade completed




                            3



                           2.5



                            2



                           1.5



                            1
                                 10          11                 12              13                  14
                                                                Age
                                      Female, no IOC in utero          Female, IOC in utero
                                      Male, no IOC in utero            Male, IOC in utero

Notes: Data from the 2004 Tanzania Demographic Health Survey. 3675 observations, including all children in project
districts between the ages of 10 and 14 that are children of respondents to the birth history module and who reside
in the household. X-axis is child age and y-axis is completed years of schooling. IOC in utero refers to whether
iodized oil capsules distributed in district of residence 1 to 3 years prior to child's year of birth.




                                                       -41-
Figure 5: Schooling Effect of IOC by District Level of Cassava Production

                              0.7                                                               0.6

                              0.6




                                                                                                      IOC effect on grade attainment
                                                                                                0.5
   District rate of cassava




                              0.5
                                                                                                0.4
          production




                              0.4
                                                                                                0.3
                              0.3
                                                                                                0.2
                              0.2

                              0.1                                                               0.1


                               0                                                                0
                                    1            2               3          4            5
                                                Quintile of cassava production

                                        District-level Cassava Production   Program Impact

Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzania Household Budget Survey. Includes 2277 observations are all
children in project districts between the ages of 10 and 13 that are children or grandchildren of the
household head or spouse. Left-hand side Y-axis is district fraction of households that grow cassava,
a highly goitrogenous food; right-hand side x-axis is point estimate of coefficient on IOC in regression
of grade attainment on age, gender, birth order and IOC, run separately for districts in five levels of
cassava production. IOC in utero refers to whether iodized oil capsules distributed in district of
residence 1 to 3 years prior to child's year of birth. Since IOC prevents maternal iodine deficiency for
an estimated 24 months, IOC distributed 1-3 years before birth corresponds to higher likelihood of
sufficient maternal iodine level in utero during first two trimesters of pregnancy, what is considered to
be the critical intervention period.




                                                          -42-
Figure 6: Sibling differences in schooling by age difference and IOC


         Difference in grade   2.7
              attainment
                               2.3

                               1.9                                  IOC in utero:
                               1.5                                     Oldest only
                                                                       Both/Neither
                               1.1
                                                                       Youngest only
                                     1 year   2 years     3 years
                                       Sibling age difference




Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzania Household Budget Survey. 576 observations
comprise all sibling pairs in 25 pre-1994 project districts in which both children are between
the ages of 10 and 13 and are children or grandchildren of the household head or spouse.
Mother-child linkages are not perfectly recorded, so children may not be true siblings.
Because month of birth is unobservable, there is no variation in likelihood of IOC in utero
for siblings of the same age. Hence, siblings of same age are excluded from the analysis.
Y-axis is sibling difference in completed years of schooling. IOC categories refer to
whether iodized oil capsules distributed in district 1 or 2 years prior to the birth year of each
child. Since IOC prevent iodine deficiency for 24 months, this corresponds to higher
likelihood that sufficient maternal iodine levels in utero during first two trimesters of
pregnancy, what is considered to be the critical intervention period for fetal brain
development.




                                                        -43-
 Figure 7: PSLE Score Distribution by Gender and IOC participation


        0.5                                                               0.5

      0.45                                                                0.45

        0.4                                                               0.4

      0.35                                                                0.35

        0.3                                                               0.3

      0.25                                                                0.25

        0.2                                                               0.2

      0.15                                                                0.15

        0.1                                                               0.1

      0.05                                                                0.05

          0                                                               0
                  E           D           C           B           A

              Male IOC               Grades Female IOC
                           Male Non IOC                          Female Non IOC



Note: 2004 PSLE test scores were not available for the following districts-regions: Iringa Rural-Iringa,
Iringa Urban-Iringa, Njombe-Iringa, Biharamulo-Kagera, Nyamagana-Nzega, Kiteto-Arusha, Namtumbo-
Newala, Mvomero-Mwanga, Mufindi-Muheza, Mbulu-Arusha, Ngara-Kagera, Nkansi-Rukwa,
Sumbuwanga-Rukwa, Ludewa-Lusoto, Makete-Manyoni, Mwete-Pemba, Cheke-Pemba, Micheweni-
Pemba, Mjini-Pemba, Mkoani-Pemba. The grades awarded on the PSLE range from the top grade "A" to
the lowest grade "E." At least one male received the highest score "A" on the PSLE in 81 of the districts;
at least one female received the highest score "A" on the PSLE in 59 districts.




                                              -44-
Figure 8: IDD Prevalence across African countries, 2000-2005




                                            -45-
Figure 9: Fraction of households consuming iodized salt, 2000-2005




                                             -46-
Figure 10: TGR pre-1995 and % of Households Consuming Iodized Salt, 2000-2005, by African Country

        80
                                   CAF
                                                                      UGA

                COG

                                            GIN          TCD
        60
                                                                              ZMB
TGR                                                        MWI
                RWA
                                                                        TZA
                                     CIV
       40                                                               LSO
                       SEN
                                                                MOZ
                ETH
                 TGO
                MRT                                                            BDI
                CPV                                                              CMR
                  SLE
                SWZ
                SDN
                LBR
       20       GHA NER                    BEN
                GMB                                            BWA                          KEN
                COM
                                                                                    NGA




   0
            0                20         40          60          80                        100
                             % of households with adequately iodized salt




                                                  -47-
Table 1: Summary of Timing and Coverage of Intervention Across Districts
                                                        Year of Intervention                 Average
                                                         (Coverage - %)*                    Frequency
     Region       District                   1         2         3         4        5          (yr)
1    Dodoma       Mpwapwa                  1990      1992                                         2.00
                                            (65)      (58)
2    Arusha       Monduli                  1992                                                     n/a
                                            (71)
3    Arusha       Arumeru                  1991                                                     n/a
                                            (89)
4    Kilimanjaro Rombo                     1990                                                     n/a
                                            (68)
5    Morogoro     Ulanga                   1988      1991      1992                                1.33
                                            (73)      (61)       (34)
6    Ruvuma       Songea Rural             1987      1991      1995                                2.67
                                            (91)      (74)       (85)
7*   Ruvuma       Mbinga                   1995                                                     n/a
                                            (92)
8    Iringa       Mufindi                  1986      1991      1995                                3.00
                                            (41)      (63)       (54)
9    Iringa       Makete                   1986      1991      1993       1996                     2.50
                                            (20)      (62)       (62)      (49)
10 Iringa         Njombe                   1989      1992      1995                                2.00
                                            (76)      (68)       (64)
11 Iringa         Ludewa                   1989      1992      1995                                2.00
                                            (59)      (62)       (47)
12 Mbeya          Chunya                   1990                                                     n/a
                                            (49)
13 Mbeya          Mbeya Rural              1986      1989      1990       1993     1997            1.75
                                            (44)      (84)       (90)      (53)     (53)
14 Mbeya          Kyela                    1989      1993                                          4.00
                                            (91)      (57)
15 Mbeya          Rungwe                   1986      1990      1993                                2.33
                                            (35)      (73)       (49)
16 Mbeya          Ileje                    1989      1992                                          3.00
                                            (94)      (71)
17 Mbeya          Mbozi                    1989      1991                                          2.00
                                            (67)      (63)
18 Rukwa          Mpanda                   1987      1991      1993                                2.00
                                            (79)      (60)       (72)
19 Rukwa          Sumbawanga               1987      1990      1993       1996                     2.25
                                            (76)      (89)       (72)      (51)
20 Rukwa          Nkansi                   1987      1991                                          4.00
                                            (89)      (49)
21 Kigoma         Kibondo                  1989      1992      1996                                2.33
                                            (73)      (75)        n/a
22 Kigoma         Kasulu                   1987      1990      1996                                3.00
                                            (50)      (66)       (49)
23 Kigoma         Kigoma Rural             1991                                                     n/a
                                            (91)
24 Kagera         Karagwe                  1990      1994                                          4.00
                                            (96)      (85)
25* Kagera        Bukoba Rural             1994                                                     n/a
                                            (78)
26 Kagera         Biharamulo               1990      1994                                          4.00
                                            (96)      (38)
27 Kagera         Ngara                    1989      1994                                          5.00
                                            (29)      (51)

                   Total                       27       20          12       3          1          2.76


Notes: Dates and coverage rates collected from various Tanzanian Food and Nutrition Centre (TFNC)
Zafari Reports stored in the archives of TFNC library. Coverage was calculated using 1988 Tanzanian
Census data and adjusted for proportion of population in target age group. * indicates district that was
added to the intervention area post-1990; these two districts were excluded from the analysis since
children who benefited form IOC in these areas were too young in 2000 and 2004 to exhibit improvements
in schooling.



                                                             -48-
Table 2: Summary Statistics by Timing of Intervention Across Districts
                                                       (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                                     IOC Program Timing                     tΔ

                                                No Program     1986-1987      1988-1989      1990-1995     2-4
Total members per household                             4.86          5.02           4.58           5.08    -0.52
                                                      (3.13)        (2.90)         (2.50)         (3.11)
Head of household education                          10.95          10.84          10.72          10.44     1.87
                                                      (6.48)        (6.53)         (6.65)         (6.71)
Enrollment (ages 5-15)
    Boys                                              65.4%          68.7%         63.2%          61.6%      4.00
    Girls                                             67.0%          66.8%         67.4%          61.2%      3.09
    Total                                             66.2%          67.7%         65.4%          61.4%      5.01
Urban                                                 69.9%          52.2%         49.6%          56.8%     -2.83
Purchases of durables, services (Tsh - 12 mo)     32,362.47      21,341.32     25,126.56      25,626.35     -4.19
Head of household farmer                              40.6%          56.8%         62.3%          55.8%      0.62
Main source of cash income
    Harvest crops                                     31.9%          53.1%         56.3%         43.8%      5.71
    Business income                                   23.8%          17.8%         16.6%         15.8%      1.60
    Wage income                                       21.5%          14.8%         12.1%         14.4%      0.35
Safe Water                                           73.15%         79.58%        73.63%        67.62%      8.52
Drinking water source
    Private Indoor                                    12.7%           7.4%           4.9%          4.5%      3.78
    Private Outdoor                                   13.4%          11.3%           6.1%          9.4%      2.01
    Community/Neighbor                                31.7%          38.1%          33.6%         41.5%     -2.07
    Private/Public Well                               27.4%          30.3%          34.8%         25.5%      3.32
Hunger (self-reported)
    Never                                             33.3%          44.5%          43.9%         34.6%      6.26
    Seldom                                            42.8%          39.1%          36.1%         42.9%     -2.37
    Sometimes                                          7.2%           5.5%           7.8%          4.8%      0.99
    Often                                             15.7%          10.3%          11.5%         16.7%     -5.87
Meals per day                                          2.74           2.51           2.49          2.48      1.45
                                                      (0.48)         (0.53)         (0.52)        (0.55)
Fish per week                                          2.27           1.87           1.59          1.79     1.48
                                                      (1.80)         (1.59)         (1.45)        (1.84)
Toilette facilities
     Flush toilette                                    9.1%           4.4%           2.8%          2.0%     3.97
     Pit Latrine                                      84.2%          92.1%          90.8%         74.4%     2.03
Illness in previous month
     Fever/Malaria                                    66.2%          60.4%          63.4%         67.6%     -5.42
     Diarrhea                                         10.0%          11.0%          12.0%         12.2%     -1.39
     Ear/Nose/Throat                                   7.1%           9.0%           8.7%          8.2%      1.08
Dirt floor                                            53.3%          65.5%          67.6%         68.0%     -1.81
Mud or grass roof                                     36.7%          53.4%          46.2%         40.8%      8.87
Metal roof                                            60.3%          45.9%          53.6%         58.6%     -8.94
Distance to nearest Health Center (km)                 2.29           2.78           2.33          2.59      1.39
Distance to nearest Hospital (km)                     10.19          20.18          12.94         22.88     -2.73
Distance to nearest Primary School (km)                1.07           1.06           1.30          1.48     -5.76
Distance to nearest Secondary School (km)              1.63           2.59           3.41          3.88     -2.79
Observations                                          17067           2152            819          1711

Source: 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey (THBS). IOC Program refers to government-sponsored iodized oil
capsule distribution that was initiated between 1985 and 1995 in 27 districts of the country.




                                                   -49-
Table 3: Grade Attainment and IOC Supplementation in Utero, 2000

                                        (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)        (9)            (10)           (11)
                                                                         Binary treatment                                                       Universe: Households with >
                                                                             indicator         All kids in household                                1 member in sample
                                        All       Girls      Boys         Girls      Boys         Girls      Boys         Girls      Boys           Girls           Boys
Pr(IOC in utero)                      0.358      0.902       0.428       0.709       0.168       0.733       0.331       0.357       0.006          0.692          0.346

                                     [0.161]* [0.360]*      [0.292]     [0.318]*    [0.259]     [0.327]*    [0.278]     [0.142]*    [0.194]        [0.431]         [0.389]
Pr(IOC in utero)3≤t<5                 0.015      0.838      -0.142       0.038      -0.422       0.355      -0.088       0.478       0.032          0.754          -0.179
                                      [0.252]    [0.680]    [0.371]      [0.379]    [0.274]      [0.486]    [0.345]      [0.323]    [0.261]        [0.659]         [0.504]
Pr(IOC in utero)3≤t<5 * Young         0.168      -0.708      0.266       0.069       0.191       -0.307      0.020       -0.673      0.047         -0.756          0.443
                                      [0.315]    [0.740]    [0.488]      [0.407]    [0.286]      [0.603]    [0.482]     [0.335]*    [0.276]        [0.626]         [0.521]
Age 11                                0.624      0.982       0.599       0.940       0.487       0.772       0.538       0.310       0.395          0.353          0.862
                                     [0.163]** [0.331]** [0.317]+       [0.352]** [0.305]       [0.275]** [0.283]+      [0.157]* [0.148]**         [0.323]        [0.372]*
Age 12                                1.468      1.730       1.066       1.631       0.894       1.599       1.237       1.240       1.182          1.335          1.162
                                     [0.134]** [0.329]** [0.283]**      [0.347]** [0.290]**     [0.278]** [0.236]**     [0.160]** [0.151]**       [0.357]**       [0.347]**
Age 13                                2.139      2.801       1.768       2.730       1.505       2.695       1.981       2.092       1.648          2.041          1.823
                                     [0.155]** [0.398]** [0.348]**      [0.448]** [0.382]**     [0.325]** [0.287]**     [0.177]** [0.165]**       [0.394]**       [0.399]**
Female                                0.216
                                     [0.104]**
Number boys 10-15 in HH                                                                                                              0.303                         0.845
                                                                                                                                    [0.122]*                      [0.285]**
Number girls 10-15 in HH                                                                                                 0.398                      0.210
                                                                                                                        [0.138]**                  [0.532]
                                      House-     House-     House-       House-     House-       House-     House-
Fixed effects                          hold       hold       hold         hold       hold         hold       hold        District   District       District        District


Observations                           846        231        251          231         251         300         335         865         920            231            251


Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to children ages 10-13 in 25 districts targeted for iodized oil capsule (IOC) distribution
between 1986 and 1992. All estimates except those in columns 6 and 7 exclude children that cannot be matched to mothers in the household. Outcome is highest grade
completed. Pr(IOC in utero) is the probability that IOC was distributed in the district before or during the first trimester of pregnancy times the likelihood that sufficient
iodine stores remain in the mother's body to protect the fetus during month 1 of pregnancy. Precise values are given in Appendix A. Pr(IOC in utero)3≤t<4 is the same
probability for children born 3-4 years after IOC was distributed in the district, during which time iodine is being depleted from the body at an unobservable rate, and equal
to 0 otherwise. Young mom is an indicator of whether mother was under 23 years of age at the time of IOC distribution, in which case she might have received 200mg
rather than 380mg of iodine and therefore experienced faster depletion 3-4 years after the program. All regressions also control for binary indicators of sex-specific birth
order. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                            -50-
Table 4: Grade Attainment and IOC Supplementation in Utero, 2004

                                             (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)
                                             All       Girls      Boys           All       Girls       Boys          All       Girls       Boys          All       Girls       Boys
Pr(IOC in utero)                           0.519     0.809        0.293        0.288     0.416        0.197         0.738     1.042        0.451        0.635     0.896    0.323
                                         [0.191]** [0.477]+      [0.351]      [0.165]+ [0.245]+      [0.229]      [0.238]** [0.570]+      [0.410]     [0.208]** [0.304]** [0.291]
Pr(IOC in utero)3≤t<5 * Birth month
                                           0.027      0.032       0.006        0.005       0.018      -0.01
                                          [0.018]     [0.040]    [0.030]      [0.014]     [0.021]    [0.019]
Pr(IOC in utero)3≤t<5 * Young mom          -0.043      -0.05     -0.032        0.016       0.018      0.013
                                          [0.027]     [0.059]    [0.046]      [0.013]     [0.020]    [0.019]
Pr(IOC in utero) * Age of child                                                                                    -0.122      -0.13      -0.079       -0.137     -0.211      -0.035
                                                                                                                  [0.059]*    [0.130]     [0.096]     [0.054]* [0.079]** [0.074]
Age 11                                     0.407      0.384       0.402        0.523       0.537      0.558        0.423       0.409      0.405        0.534       0.561       0.56
                                         [0.101]** [0.239]      [0.189]*     [0.069]** [0.102]** [0.095]**        [0.101]** [0.238]+ [0.188]*         [0.069]** [0.102]** [0.095]**
Age 12                                     1.141      0.991       1.103        1.105       1.224      0.985        1.151       0.998      1.111        1.137       1.274      0.997
                                         [0.089]** [0.278]** [0.208]**       [0.069]** [0.103]** [0.094]**        [0.089]** [0.277]** [0.207]**       [0.070]** [0.105]** [0.096]**
Age 13                                     1.637      1.867       1.209        1.721       1.901      1.526        1.672       1.905      1.217        1.766       1.967      1.543
                                         [0.094]** [0.385]** [0.285]**       [0.070]** [0.106]** [0.096]**        [0.096]** [0.384]** [0.284]**       [0.073]** [0.110]** [0.100]**
Age 14                                      2.42      2.436       2.109        2.301       2.473       2.11        2.457       2.485      2.126        2.356       2.555      2.129
                                         [0.096]** [0.439]** [0.336]**       [0.072]** [0.112]** [0.098]**        [0.099]** [0.438]** [0.334]**       [0.076]** [0.118]** [0.102]**
Birth month                                -0.031     -0.051     -0.022        -0.038      -0.05      -0.029       -0.031     -0.052      -0.022       -0.035     -0.046      -0.029
                                         [0.010]** [0.024]*      [0.017]     [0.007]** [0.010]** [0.009]**        [0.010]** [0.022]*      [0.017]     [0.007]** [0.010]** [0.009]**
Female                                     0.351                               0.321                               0.353                               0.322
                                         [0.062]**                           [0.068]**                            [0.062]**                           [0.068]**
Number boys 10-15 in HH                                                       -0.033                  0.073                                            -0.031                  0.075
                                                                              [0.044]                [0.063]                                           [0.044]                [0.063]
Number girls 10-15 in HH                                                      -0.041       0.076                                                       -0.041      0.079
                                                                              [0.046]     [0.075]                                                      [0.046]    [0.075]


                                          House-     House-      House-                                           House-      House-     House-
Fixed effects                              hold       hold        hold         District   District    District     hold        hold       hold         District   District    District
Observations                               2160        534        643          3672        1797       1875         2160         534        643          3672       1797        1875


Notes: Data from the 2004 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to children ages 10-14 that reside in the household and have non-missing month of birth
and education data. Outcome is highest grade completed. Pr(IOC in utero) is the probability that IOC was distributed in the district before or during the first trimester of
pregnancy times the likelihood that sufficient iodine stores remain in the mother's body to protect the fetus during month 1 of pregnancy. Precise values are given in Appendix
A. Pr(IOC in utero) 3≤t<4 is the same probability for children born 3-4 years after IOC was distributed in the district, during which time iodine is being depleted from the body at an
unobservable rate, and equal to 0 otherwise. Young mom is an indicator of whether mother was under 23 years of age at the time of IOC distribution, in which case she might
have received 200mg rather than 380mg of iodine and therefore experienced faster depletion 3-4 years after the program. All regressions also control for binary indicators of
sex-specific birth order. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                -51-
Table 5: Variation in Effect on Schooling of IOC Supplementation in Utero
                                              Rate of Cassava Consumption in District


                                                 High            Medium               Low
                                             (0.41-0.62)       (0.10-0.40)         (< 0.10)
Pr(IOC in utero)                                -0.037            0.750             -0.149
                                                [0.492]         [0.230]**           [0.305]
Age 11                                           0.783            0.387              0.576
                                               [0.323]*          [0.248]           [0.257]*
Age 12                                           1.951            1.353              1.066
                                              [0.240]**         [0.185]**         [0.206]**
Age 13                                           2.137            2.294              1.725
                                              [0.247]**         [0.226]**         [0.281]**
Female                                            0.47            0.243              0.105
                                               [0.195]*          [0.165]            [0.152]
Fixed effects                                Household         Household        Household
Observations                                     529               650              606



Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to
children ages 10-13 in 25 districts targeted for iodized oil capsule (IOC) distribution between
1986 and 1992. Rate of cassava consumption defined as fraction of THBS households in
district that report growing cassava in the 2000 survey data. In all regressions, Pr(IOC in
utero ) is the probability that IOC was distributed in the district before or during the first
trimester of pregnancy times the likelihood that sufficient iodine stores remain in the
mother's body to protect the fetus during month 1 of pregnancy. Precise values are given in
Appendix A. Regressions also control for sex-specific birth order and household fixed
effects.




                                                    -52-
Table 6: Robustness Checks of Grade Attainment and IOC Supplementation in Utero, 2000

                        (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
                                      Full sample                               Restricted control group                        Restricted treatment group
                       Binary treatment      Continuous treatment        Binary treatment     Continuous treatment       Binary treatment      Continuous treatment
                           indicator               indicator                 indicator              indicator                indicator               indicator
                        All         Girls         All        Girls         All       Girls       All     Girls       All              Girls         All     Girls
Pr(IOC in utero)      0.276        0.671        0.355       0.838        0.412       0.733     0.608     1.013     0.416              1.15        0.505     1.302
                     [0.125]*     [0.276]*     [0.159]*    [0.354]*     [0.163]*   [0.384]+ [0.217]** [0.521]+ [0.179]*             [0.484]*     [0.217]* [0.583]*
Age 11                0.639        0.897         0.62        0.87        0.603       1.031     0.498     0.881      0.65              1.18        0.624     1.134
                    [0.155]**    [0.309]**    [0.155]**   [0.308]**    [0.220]**   [0.578]+ [0.228]* [0.584] [0.171]**             [0.359]**    [0.172]** [0.358]**
Age 12                1.435         1.58        1.434       1.566        1.229       1.438     1.182     1.335     1.571             1.851        1.577     1.827
                    [0.118]**    [0.278]**    [0.117]**   [0.278]**    [0.171]**   [0.430]** [0.174]** [0.441]** [0.153]**         [0.362]**    [0.153]** [0.363]**
Age 13                2.111        2.654        2.116       2.654         2.11       2.326     2.124     2.308     2.137             3.251        2.128     3.166
                    [0.139]**    [0.352]**    [0.140]**   [0.353]**    [0.201]**   [0.504]** [0.200]** [0.500]** [0.166]**         [0.461]**    [0.165]** [0.452]**
Female                0.244                     0.242                    0.274                 0.276               0.321                          0.318
                     [0.098]*                  [0.098]*                 [0.138]*              [0.138]*           [0.113]**                      [0.113]**
                     House-       House-      House-       House-      House-       House-     House-      House-       House-      House-       House-      House-
Fixed effects         hold         hold        hold         hold        hold         hold       hold        hold         hold        hold         hold        hold

Observations           846          231         846          231         568         143         568         143         694          187         694         187


Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to children ages 10-13 in 25 districts targeted for iodized oil capsule (IOC)
distribution between 1986 and 1992. Full sample (columns 1-4) includes all children in the analysis sample; restricted control group sample (columns 5-8)
excludes children born more than one year before a treatment year who are not also born 1-3 years after a treatment year; restricted treatment group sample
(columns 9-12) excludes children born the year after an intervention year. All estimates exclude children that cannot be matched to mothers in the household.
Outcome is highest grade completed. Pr(IOC in utero) is the probability that IOC was distributed in the district before or during the first trimester of pregnancy
times the likelihood that sufficient iodine stores remain in the mother's body to protect the fetus during month 1 of pregnancy. Precise values are given in
Appendix A. All regressions also control for binary indicators of sex-specific birth order. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                         -53-
Table 7: Difference in Grade Attainment and IOC Supplementation by Birth Order

IOC in utero, eldest only                               0.383                    0.383
                                                              +                        +
                                                       [0.201]                 [0.212]
IOC in utero, youngest only                             -0.225                  -0.225
                                                              +                        +
                                                       [0.129]                 [0.134]
IOC in utero, both                                                              -0.001
                                                                                [0.127]
Age difference = 1 year                                  0.616                   0.616
                                                      [0.176]**               [0.176]**
Age difference = 2 years                                 0.990                   0.990
                                                      [0.160]**               [0.159]**
Age difference = 3 years                                 1.333                   1.333
                                                      [0.197]**               [0.197]**
Age oldest                                               0.157                   0.157
                                                                                       +
                                                       [0.057]*                [0.088]
Both female                                             -0.041                  -0.041
                                                        [0.123]                 [0.124]
Both male                                               -0.115                  -0.115
                                                        [0.117]                 [0.117]
Birth order                                             -0.008                  -0.008
                                                        [0.030]                 [0.030]
Observations                                             667                     667



Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to
children ages 10-13 in 25 districts targeted for iodized oil capsule (IOC) distribution
between 1986 and 1992. Observations are sibling pairs from 667 different households in
sample in which more than one child between 10 and 13. To balance across treatment
orders, in households with more than one sibling pair, pair in which older sibling treated
and younger not was selected first, pair in which younger sibling treated and older not was
treated second, otherwise two siblings chosen at random. IOC in utero is the binary
indicator of treatment based on probability that IOC was distributed in the district before or
during the first trimester of pregnancy, defined in Notes to Table 3.




                                                     -54-
Table 8: Mortality and IOC Supplementation in Utero
                                                        Fertility                  Neonatal mortality                      Infant Mortality                      Child Mortality
                                                  (Birth in month m)          (Died within 30 days of birth)         (Died within 1 year of birth)       (Died between ages 1 and 15)
                                            (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)        (11)         (12)
                                            All         Girls      Boys           All       Girls       Boys           All        Girls      Boys            All        Girls       Boys
Pr(IOC in utero)                          0.004         0.001     0.003        -0.026       0.027      -0.060        -0.008      -0.036      0.042        -0.101       -0.077      -0.084
                                         [0.003]       [0.002]    [0.002]      [0.025]     [0.064]     [0.051]       [0.037]    [0.083]     [0.076]      [0.032]**     [0.066]     [0.068]
Pr(IOC in utero)3≤t<5 * Birth month
                                          0.000         0.000     0.000         0.004       0.008       0.002        0.000       -0.002      0.009        -0.004       -0.007      -0.004
                                         [0.000]       [0.000]    [0.000]      [0.002]*    [0.003]*    [0.003]       [0.002]    [0.004]     [0.005]+      [0.002]*    [0.004]*     [0.004]
Pr(IOC in utero)3≤t<5 * Young mom         0.000         0.000     0.000         -0.004     -0.011       0.003        0.000       0.001       -0.005        0.002       0.010        0.001
                                         [0.000]       [0.000]    [0.000]      [0.002]*    [0.005]*    [0.004]       [0.003]    [0.006]     [0.006]       [0.003]     [0.005]*     [0.005]
                                                                               House-      House-      House-        House-     House-      House-        House-      House-       House-
Fixed effects                             Mother       Mother     Mother        hold        hold        hold          hold       hold        hold          hold        hold         hold


Observations                             217,740      217,740    217,740        4352        1219        1344         4352        1219        1344          4352        1219         1344



Notes: Data from the 2004 Tanzanian Demographic Health Survey. Analysis sample for column 1-9 regressions restricted to all births reported by TDHS sample members between
1990 and 1995, and outcomes pertain to survival of each child born. Unit of observation in analysis sample for column 10-12 regressions is a month between 1990 and 1995, and
outcome is whether respondent gave birth during that month. Pr(IOC in utero) is the probability that IOC was distributed in the district before or during the first trimester of pregnancy
times the likelihood that sufficient iodine stores remain ni the mother's body to protect the fetus during month 1 of pregnancy. Precise values are given in Appendix A. Pr(IOC in
utero) 3≤t<4 is the same probability for children born 3-4 years after IOC was distributed in the district, during which time iodine is being depleted from the body at an unobservable rate,
and equal to 0 otherwise. Young mom is an indicator of whether mother was under 23 years of age at the time of IOC distributioh, in which case she might have received 200mg
rather than 380mg of iodine and therefore experienced faster depletion 3-4 years after the program. All regressions control for binary indicators of birth order, sex-specific birth order,
mother's birth year, and birth month. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                   -55-
Table 9: Effect of IOC on Reported Health Status at Ages 10-13
                                         (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)
                                                                               Whether                                            Whether      Whether        Days
                                    Whether any                                ear/nose/    Whether      Whether      Whether     accident-     other      school/work
                                    sickness last   Whether      Whether        throat        eye          skin        dental      related      health     missed due
                                       4 weeks       fever       diarrhea      condition    condition    condition    condition   condition    problem      to illness

Pr(IOC in utero)                        0.046         0.071        -0.019        0.001        -0.001       0.011       -0.003       0.008        0.000        -0.030
                                       [0.052]       [0.044]      [0.016]       [0.018]      [0.010]      [0.015]      [0.011]     [0.008]      [0.027]       [0.064]
Age 11                                 -0.047         0.010        -0.009       -0.001        -0.011       0.007       -0.020       -0.001      -0.010        0.026
                                       [0.050]       [0.042]      [0.015]       [0.018]      [0.010]      [0.014]     [0.011]+     [0.007]      [0.026]       [0.062]
Age 12                                 -0.004        -0.024        -0.012       -0.012        0.006        0.021       0.009        0.011        0.000        0.056
                                       [0.038]       [0.032]      [0.012]       [0.013]      [0.008]     [0.011]+      [0.008]     [0.006]*     [0.020]       [0.047]
Age 13                                 -0.028        -0.008        -0.022        0.006        -0.006       0.013       0.005        0.000        0.024        0.004
                                       [0.045]       [0.038]      [0.014]       [0.016]      [0.009]      [0.013]      [0.010]     [0.007]      [0.024]       [0.056]
Female                                  0.008         0.016        0.006        -0.006        -0.007      -0.006       0.011        0.000        0.010        0.037
                                       [0.032]       [0.027]      [0.010]       [0.011]      [0.006]      [0.009]     [0.007]      [0.005]     [0.017]       [0.040]
                                       House-        House-       House-        House-       House-       House-      House-       House-      House-        House-
Fixed effects                           hold          hold         hold          hold         hold         hold        hold         hold        hold          hold
Observations                            1807          1807         1807          1807         1807         1807        1807         1807         1807         1807


Notes: Outcome is whether child reported by respondent to have experienced any of above health conditions during last four weeks; last column is amount of
absence from school or work due to illness during past four weeks, a four category variable indicating: none, 0-1 week, 1-2 weeks, and 2-4 weeks. All data from
the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to children ages 10-13 in 1988 in 25 districts targeted for iodized oil capsule (IOC) distribution
between 1986 and 1992. In all regressions, Pr(IOC in utero) is the probability that IOC was distributed in the district before or during the first trimester of pregnancy
times the likelihood that sufficient iodine stores remain in the mother's body to protect the fetus during month 1 of pregnancy. Precise values are given in Appendix
A. Regressions also control for sex-specific birth order and household fixed effects.




                                                                           -56-
Table 10: Male and Female PSLE Performance by IOC Intervention

                                                                       (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                                      ln (number             1         ln(number            1         ln (number of          2        ln (number of         2

Dependent Variable:                                                individuals taking               individuals with             individuals with grade              individuals with
                                                                         PSLE)                     passing grade on                   "F" on PSLE)                 grade "A" on PSLE)
                                                                  Female         Male             Female        Male              Female         Male              Female        Male

IOC Intervention between 1986-1992                                  0.12            0.11            0.24 **         0.15 **        -0.92     ***   -0.83     ***   -0.15           -0.01
                                                                   (0.08)          (0.09)          (0.10)          (0.07)          (0.25)          (0.26)          (0.34)          (0.37)
Male secondary school attainment rate, 1988                                        -1.87 **                         1.08                           -5.44      **                   -3.88
                                                                                   (0.83)                          (0.69)                          (2.46)                          (3.55)
Female secondary school attainment rate, 1988                       -2.22    **                     4.14 ***                      -12.22 ***                        -0.62
                                                                   (1.08)                          (1.24)                         (3.01)                           (4.22)
ln(2002 population males 10-14)                                                     0.53 ***
                                                                                   (0.03)
ln(2002 population females 10-14)                                   0.56 ***
                                                                   (0.03)
ln(2004 population male test-takers)                                                                                0.92 ***                        1.74     ***                    1.56 ***
                                                                                                                   (0.05)                          (0.17)                          (0.25)
ln(2004 population female test-takers)                                                              0.87 ***                        1.68     ***                    1.18 ***
                                                                                                   (0.07)                          (0.16)                          (0.23)

     3   Observations                                                  93           93              93              93              93               93              93             93

Notes:
  1
    Dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the number of girls/boys that take the 2004 PSLE; dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is the number of students who receive a passing
    grade of A, B, C on the PSLE. Secondry school enrollment rate in 1988 is fraction of girls/boys enrolled in form 1 or above from the 1988 Census (National Bureau of Statistics).
  2
    The grades awarded on the PSLE range from the top grade "A" to the lowest grade "E." We have altered the lowest grade from "E" to "F" to match the U.S. grading system for ease of
    comprehension. The top grade of "A" and lowest grade of "E" were not received in several districts: no females received a top grade "A" in 28 region-districts, no males received a top
    grade of "A" in 11 region-districts and no males received the lowest grade of "E" in one region-district. The dependent variable was adjusted to zero [ln(0) = 0] in cases where the natural
    log would otherwise be undefined in the above-mentioned region-districts.
  3 The 2002 Census from the National Bureau of Statistics in Tanzania reports a total of 127 districts. A total of 18 districts were newly constructed from existing districts in the 1988
    Census. These districts were merged in the 2004 PSLE data and the 2002 Census data to match the 1988 Census data. A total of 16 districts were excluded from the above analysis
    due to lack of information on PSLE scores: All 6 districts in the Iringa Region, all 4 districts in Pemba (North and South) and all 6 districts in Zanzibar.
   * Significant at 10% ** Significant at 5%   *** Significant at 1%
Sources:
      Data on female/male populations age 10-14 come from the 2002 Census (National Bureau of Statistics); 2004 PSLE Examination Statistics from the National Examinations Council of
     Tanzania. Male/female secondary school attainment rates in 1988 were calculated from the 1988 Census (National Bureau of Statistics). The percent of population below poverty line
     and gini coefficient data was obtained from the "Tanzania Poverty and Human Development Report 2005."




                                                                                       -57-
Table 11: 2000 School Participation by Gender

                                                                              2000 Primary School Participation                                           2000 Secondary School Participation
Dependent Variable:
                                                                Female                Male              Female               Male               Female             Male           Female               Male
                                                                  (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)               (6)             (7)                 (8)

 1   TGR                                                          -0.01               0.11                -0.06               0.08               -0.26      **    -0.16             -0.29     **     -0.18
                                                                 (0.13)              (0.12)              (0.13)              (0.12)              (0.12)           (0.13)           (0.12)            (0.13)
 2   % Household use of adequately iodized salt                                                            0.14      **       0.09                                                  0.10              0.04
                                                                                                         (0.07)              (0.07)                                                (0.07)            (0.08)
     1980 Female Primary School Participation                     0.22       ***                           0.21      ***                          0.24      **                      0.24      **
                                                                 (0.08)                                  (0.08)                                  (0.10)                            (0.10)
     1980 Male Primary School Participation                                            0.26      ***                           0.25     ***                         0.18     *                        0.18      *
                                                                                     (0.07)                                  (0.07)                                (0.10)                            (0.10)
     Prevelance of Malaria (2000/01)                                3.82              -8.62               6.48               -7.49               -7.47             -4.95             -5.59           -4.17
                                                                 (15.08)            (14.30)             (14.77)             (14.26)             (14.02)           (15.24)          (13.98)          (15.40)
     Prevalence of HIV (2003)                                       0.59               0.50                0.46               0.42                0.67              0.44             0.57             0.40
                                                                  (0.35)             (0.32)              (0.35)              (0.32)              (0.31)            (0.34)           (0.32)           (0.35)
     Urban Population (1990 - % of Total)                           0.17               0.05                0.19                0.06               0.75              0.67             0.76             0.67
                                                                  (0.14)             (0.14)              (0.14)              (0.13)              (0.14)            (0.15)           (0.14)           (0.15)
     Population Density (1990 - per sq. km)                         0.02               0.02                0.02                0.02               0.00              0.00             0.01             0.01
                                                                  (0.14)             (0.02)              (0.02)              (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)
     Log GDP per capita (1990 - Constant LCU)                     15.50              13.23               11.10               10.59               15.63             16.19            12.72            15.05
                                                                  (7.00)             (6.60)              (7.17)              (6.89)              (6.63)            (7.32)           (6.90)           (7.67)
                             2
     Log GDP per capita (1990)                                     -1.84              -1.40               -1.44               -1.16               -1.78            -1.79             -1.52           -1.69
                                                                  (0.81)             (0.76)              (0.82)              (0.78)              (0.77)            (0.84)           (0.78)           (0.87)
 3   Terms of Trade (1980)                                          5.52               3.84                6.78                4.52               5.28              4.70             6.15             5.07
                                                                  (3.07)             (2.89)              (3.06)              (2.92)              (0.35)            (3.11)           (2.90)           (3.21)

     Region Effect                                                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes

 4   TGR Controls                                                  Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes

     5   Observations                                              81                  81                  81                 81                  81                81               81                81

Notes:
    1 TGR is a reported measure of TGR prior to 1995.
    2 Reported % of households using adequately iodized salt in mid-1990s.
    3 Terms of Trade is the ratio of the Export Value Index and Import Value Index for year 2000.
    4 TGR Controls include information from the sample used to calculate TGR: minimum age, maximum age, gender (both, male, female), sample level (national, province, local, etc.), year of sample.
    5 A number of countries were excluded from the above analysis do to partial or missing data: 18% of countries were missing primary school enrollment data; 14% of countries were missing secondary school
      participation data; and 15% were missing other variables included in the above analysis.
Sources:
     Enrollment data is from the World Bank's WDI database and supplemented by data from UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) and NBER (National Bureau of Economic
     Research). Other national statistic data is from the World Bank's WDI database and supplemented by data from the WHO (World Health Organization) and UN (United Nations). Information on goiter rates and
     salt legislation years were culled from the Current Iodine Deficiency Status (CIDDS) database maintained by the International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders and supplemented by the
     WHO's Micronutrient Deficiency Information System.




                                                                                               -58-
Table 12: Projected impact on school participation worldwide
                                                                                                                                                                             4   Percentage
                                      % of households             Year Salt            Total       1                    Population     2   Expected       3   Average            increase in     5

                                      using adequately            Iodization           Goiter          Year TGR           5-9 yr            Treated           Years of              grade
    Country                              iodized salt             Measured             Rate            Measured           2002             Population         Schooling          attainment
      Algeria                                       92.0                1995                 48             1995            3,628              3,204               5.37                11.9%
      Argentina                                     92.0                1996               19.0             1995            3,373              1,179               8.83                 2.9%
      Bangladesh                                    44.0                1995               10.5             1982          13,782               1,273               2.58                 2.6%
      Bhutan                                        82.0                1996               21.0             1988              276                 95                   9                2.8%
      Croatia                                       70.0                1997               20.0             1995              267                 75               6.28                 3.2%
      Indonesia                                     62.1                1997               25.0             1988          23,114               7,177               4.99                 4.5%
      Jordan                                        95.0                1997               37.7             1993              677                485               6.91                 7.5%
      Kazakhstan                                    52.9                1995               52.1             1993            1,379                760               8.87                 4.5%
      Kyrgyz Republic                               27.0                1997               49.1             1993              530                141                   8                2.4%
      Malaysia                                      85.0                1998               36.9             1993            2,618              1,642                 6.8                6.7%
      Maldives                                      55.0                1999               23.6             1995               49                 13                   7                2.7%
      Mongolia                                      46.0                1999               22.0             1993              256                 52                   8                1.8%
      Myanmar                                       64.8                1997               33.1             1994            4,019              1,724               2.77                11.3%
      Nicaragua                                     86.1                1998               35.8             1994              653                403               4.58                 9.8%
      Niger                                           7.4               1996               20.0             1993            1,661                 49               1.02                 2.1%
      Oman                                          35.0                1996               10.0             1994              376                 26                   9                0.6%
      Pakistan                                      19.0                1995               13.2             1990          19,761                 991               3.88                 0.9%
      Panama                                        91.6                1996               13.2             1990              302                 73               8.55                 2.1%
      Paraguay                                      64.0                1995               48.7             1988              762                475               6.18                 7.3%
      Philippines                                   14.6                1996               29.5             1991          10,180                 877               8.21                 0.8%
      Russian Federation                            30.0                2000                 50             1990            7,069              2,121              10.03                 2.2%
      Syrian Arab Republic                          40.0                2000                 42             1994            2,152                723               5.77                 4.2%
      Thailand                                      60.2                1999                 32             1992            5,264              2,028                 6.5                4.3%
      Tunisia                                       63.0                1996               30.5             1988              926                356               5.02                 5.6%
      Turkey                                        18.2                1995               23.0             1994            6,274                525               5.29                 1.1%
      Uzbekistan                                    16.7                1996               17.2             1981            2,906                167                   8                0.5%
      Venezuela, RB                                 90.0                1998               39.7             1986            2,601              1,859               6.64                 7.8%
      Vietnam                                       49.4                1996               22.0             1993            8,312              1,807               3.84                 4.1%
    Central/Southern Africa:
      Angola                                          35.0                2001              35.3             1965            1,493                369                    4               4.5%
      Botswana                                        60.2                1994              16.5             1994              214                 43                 6.28               2.3%
      Burundi                                         80.0                1993                30             1990              932                447                 1.38              25.3%
      Cameroon                                        82.5                1998              26.5             1993            2,142                937                 3.54               9.0%
      Central African Republ                          86.0                2002                80             1991              520                716                 2.53              39.5%
      Congo                                           75.0                2000                69             1987              379                392                 5.14              14.6%
      Congo, Dem. Rep.                                12.3                1995              20.0             1995            8,806                433                    6               0.6%
      Cote d'Ivoire                                   31.0                2000                43             1992            2,490                664                    4               4.8%
      Gabon                                           15.0                2000              34.4             1989              179                 18                    6               1.2%
      Guinea                                          36.8                1996              26.4             1992            1,277                248                 0.84              16.8%
      Kenya                                          100.0                1995              16.3             1984            4,420              1,441                  4.2               5.6%
      Lesotho                                          73.0               1996              42.9             1993              234                147                 4.23              10.8%
      Madagascar                                       7.0                1995              45.2             1992            2,426                154                    6               0.8%
      Malawi                                           58.1               1995              51.2             1993            1,734              1,032                  3.2              13.5%
      Mozambique                                      62.0                1995              34.5             1991            2,409              1,031                 1.11              28.0%
      Namibia                                         59.0                1996              34.5             1990              270                110                   10               3.0%
      Nigeria                                         83.2                1995              10.0             1993           18,766              3,123                    5               2.4%
      Rwanda                                          90.0                2000              50.0             1993              982                884                 2.56              25.5%
      Tanzania                                        73.8                1995              15.3             1991            5,196              1,173                 2.71               6.1%
      Uganda                                          69.0                1995              75.0             1991            4,241              4,389                 3.51              21.4%
      Zambia                                          78.1                1996              65.0             1990            1,570              1,594                 5.46              13.5%
      Zimbabwe                                        93.0                1999              42.7             1989            1,617              1,284                 5.35              10.8%


    Total Projected Increase Among Beneficiary Countries Worldwide:                                                        4.83%
    Total Projected Increase Among Beneficiary Countries in Central/Southern Africa:                                       7.50%


Notes:
    1 Only countries with goiter rates similar in magnitude to Tanzania are included in the analysis. Countries with significantly lower goiter rates than Tanzania are not likely to benefit
       similarly from adequately iodized salt since the severity of IDD is likely to be considerably lower. Countries with significantly larger goiter rates are likely to have larger benefits if
       salt is adequately iodized since the severity of IDD is likely to be considerably higher. However, these countries may have lower or no benefits if salt is not properly iodized to
       combat the severity of IDD.
    2 Population (in 1000s) is limited to children 5-9 yrs old in 2002 on the premise that this age group will be eligible for secondary school participation in 2010 at ages 13-17.
    3 This is the expected number of children (000's) that received adequately iodized salt in treatment of IDD. The rate of en utero IDD is assumed to be twice the TGR (Total Goitre
       Rate). The reasoning behind this assumption is that the rate of IDD is larger for women and the rate of IDD en utero occurs more quickly than adult IDD. The number of children
       suffering from IDD is calculated as the rate of en utero IDD times the population of children. The number of protected children is calculated by taking the number of children
       suffering from IDD and multiplying it times the fraction of households using adequately iodized salt.
    4 The observed increase in grade attainment (.34 yrs) in Tanzanian IOC districts is used as a baseline measure of grade attainment (yrs) for countries. This baseline is adjusted for
       the estimated participation of 78% in the target population of Tanzania as well as the estimated TGR level in Tanzania (30%). The total increase in grade attainment (yrs) is the
       product of the number of protected children times the expected average increase in years of schooling (.73 yrs).
    5 This is the projected percentage increase in grade attainment among 5-9 year-olds in each country.
Sources:
   Information on goiter rates and salt legislation years were culled from the Current Iodine Deficiency Status (CIDDS) database maintained by the International Council for the Control
   of Iodine Deficiency Disorders and supplemented by the WHO's Micronutrient Deficiency Information System. Population data is from the Global Population Profile: 2002 report by
   the International Programs Center (IPC), Population Division, U.S. Census Bureau. Baseline education information was obtained from the Barro-Lee Educational Attainment Data
   (1960 - 2000) available at the National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                                                              -59-
Appendix A:

Probability of protection from in utero IDD relative to program year t by month of birth, 380mg IOC 1,2,3


                                                                                                                            Seasonality
                                                                                                                   Birth     adjusted
                                                                                                                    year     birth year
              Jan     Feb     March   April   May     June    July     Aug     Sept     Oct     Nov         Dec   average     average

    Program
     year t   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.028    0.083   0.167   0.250    0.333      0.072       0.070
      t+1     0.417   0.500   0.583   0.667   0.750   0.833   0.917   1.000    1.000   1.000   1.000    1.000      0.806       0.802
      t+2     1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000    1.000   0.998   0.991    0.977      0.997       0.997
      t+3     0.955   0.927   0.891   0.849   0.802   0.749   0.690   0.627    0.559   0.488   0.419    0.353      0.668       0.696
      t+ 4    0.292   0.237   0.189   0.148   0.112   0.082   0.057   0.037    0.022   0.011   0.004    0.001      0.099       0.101




Notes:
1
  Calculations make the following assumptions about IOC distribution over the year: Three months are
required for the program to reach all individuals in a district, and the distribution of program start dates
over the year is uniform. This implies that children born t months after the start of the program year were
                                           1              1
treated in time with probability equal to:    if t = 8 ;    if t = 9 ; and min(1, 1 + 1 + t − 9 ) if t > 9 .
                                           36            18                      36 18 12
2
  Iodine contained in IOC is assumed to be stored in the body after an immediate extraction of 90% during
month 0, and depleted during months 1-38 following a simple hyperbolic discounting function ( V = A )
                                                                                                                                       1 + kt
with a half-life at month 1 of 3 months ( → k = 0.33 3 ) .
3
  Minimum iodine requirement for one full month of protection from IOC was calculated to be 6.5mg
based on recommended daily requirement for pregnant women of 1.4mg – 2.1mg (multiplied by 30 days),
assuming daily depletion of dietary iodine of 90%. Based on this range of required iodine across the
population, iodine stores below 4.2mg were assumed to offer inadequate protection from fetal IDD.
4
  Seasonality adjustment based on district-level number of births per month between 1996 and 2004 in the
2004 TDHS.




                                                              -60-
Appendix B: 2000 Grade Attainment and IOC Supplementation in Utero, Ages 6-13

                        (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)       (9)      (10)
                                                                                                  Started primary
                                           Highest Grade Attained                                                    Started pre-school
                                                                                                        school
                        All        Girls         Boys           All       Girls      Boys           All         All      All       All
Pr(IOC in utero)       0.172       0.135         0.130        0.119       0.200      0.059        0.026       0.030    0.006     0.020
                     [0.063]**    [0.110]       [0.101]     [0.059]*    [0.086]*    [0.081]      [0.020]    [0.017]+  [0.019]   [0.018]
Age 7                 -0.001      -0.093         0.128        0.022       0.158     -0.128        0.199       0.225    0.166     0.192
                      [0.105]     [0.190]       [0.176]      [0.086]     [0.124]    [0.119]     [0.033]** [0.025]** [0.032]** [0.026]**
Age 8                  0.196       0.011         0.272        0.207       0.339      0.053        0.387       0.424    0.263     0.307
                     [0.102]+     [0.174]       [0.182]     [0.090]*   [0.126]**    [0.129]     [0.032]** [0.026]** [0.031]** [0.027]**
Age 9                  0.515       0.253         0.377         0.57       0.686      0.402        0.609       0.603    0.472      0.48
                     [0.099]**    [0.188]      [0.178]*    [0.088]**   [0.129]**   [0.122]**    [0.031]** [0.026]** [0.031]** [0.026]**
Age 10                 1.137       0.741         0.991        1.183       1.312      1.012        0.663       0.713    0.512     0.549
                     [0.098]**   [0.200]**    [0.180]**    [0.083]**   [0.123]**   [0.116]**    [0.031]** [0.025]** [0.030]** [0.025]**
Age 11                 1.595        1.19         1.352        1.531       1.617      1.322        0.769       0.741     0.56     0.563
                     [0.112]**   [0.229]**    [0.222]**    [0.095]**   [0.142]**   [0.134]**    [0.035]** [0.028]** [0.035]** [0.029]**
Age 12                 2.526       2.181         2.162         2.42       2.512      2.206        0.743       0.775    0.552     0.586
                     [0.109]**   [0.234]**    [0.231]**    [0.089]**   [0.131]**   [0.130]**    [0.034]** [0.026]** [0.034]** [0.027]**
Age 13                 3.064       2.805         2.635         3.08       3.363      2.678        0.809       0.789    0.599     0.589
                     [0.119]**   [0.254]**    [0.255]**    [0.097]**   [0.145]**   [0.140]**    [0.037]** [0.029]** [0.037]** [0.029]**
Boys                                                                                 0.062
                                                                                    [0.051]
Girls                                                                     0.11
                                                                        [0.054]*
Female                                                       0.124                                             0.008                   0.003
                                                           [0.043]**                                          [0.013]                 [0.013]
                      House-      House-       House-                                            House-                   House-
Fixed effects          hold        hold         hold        District    District    District      hold        District     hold       District

Observations           2805         888          926         3590        1765        1825         2805         3590        2805        3590


Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to children ages 6-13 in 25 districts targeted for iodized
oil capsule (IOC) distribution between 1986 and 1992. All estimates exclude children that cannot be matched to mothers in the household.
Outcome in columns 1-6 is highest grade completed; outcome in columns 7-8 is whether child ever enrolled in primary school; outcome in
columns 9-10 is whether child ever enrolled in either primary or pre-school. Pr(IOC in utero) is the probability that IOC was distributed in
the district before or during the first trimester of pregnancy times the likelihood that sufficient iodine stores remain in the mother's body to
protect the fetus during month 1 of pregnancy. Precise values are given in Appendix A. All regressions also control for binary indicators of
sex-specific birth order. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                               -61-
Appendix C: 2000 Grade Attainment and IOC Supplementation in Utero, Ages 6-13

                      (1)          (2)               (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)
                 At least one year early            Completed early          At least one year late
                          primary                        primary                     primary
                       (≥ Standard I)                (≥ Standard IV)             (≥ Standard V)
Pr(IOC in utero)    0.044        0.053              0.007       0.011           0.018       0.032
                   [0.018]*    [0.021]**           [0.015]     [0.019]        [0.009]+    [0.012]**
Age 7               0.052        0.048              0.002      -0.010          -0.008       0.000
                   [0.026]*     [0.034]            [0.022]     [0.031]         [0.014]     [0.020]
Age 8               0.232        0.202              0.003       0.011          -0.006      -0.004
                  [0.027]**    [0.033]**           [0.023]     [0.030]         [0.014]     [0.020]
Age 9               0.417        0.411              0.043       0.035          -0.002      -0.004
                  [0.026]**    [0.033]**          [0.022]+     [0.029]         [0.014]     [0.019]
Age 10              0.623         0.62              0.168       0.152           0.005      -0.003
                  [0.025]**    [0.032]**          [0.021]**   [0.029]**        [0.013]     [0.019]
Age 11              0.685          0.7              0.288       0.303           0.023       0.023
                  [0.028]**    [0.037]**          [0.024]**   [0.033]**        [0.015]     [0.022]
Age 12              0.809        0.852              0.528       0.546           0.111       0.115
                  [0.027]**    [0.036]**          [0.023]**   [0.032]**      [0.014]**    [0.021]**
Age 13              0.857        0.874              0.675       0.691           0.255       0.236
                  [0.029]**    [0.039]**          [0.025]**   [0.035]**      [0.016]**    [0.023]**
Female              0.015         0.01              0.039       0.046           0.012       0.013
                      [0.013]       [0.017]       [0.011]**     [0.015]**     [0.007]+       [0.010]

Fixed effects      House- hold      District    House-hold       District    House-hold      District

Observations           2805          3590           2805          3590          2805          3590




Notes: Data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey, sample restricted to children ages 6-
13 in 25 districts targeted for iodized oil capsule (IOC) distribution between 1986 and 1992. All
estimates exclude children that cannot be matched to mothers in the household. Outcomes are binary
indicators of whether child has passed a certain grade in school. Pr(IOC in utero) is the probability
that IOC was distributed in the district before or during the first trimester of pregnancy times the
likelihood that sufficient iodine stores remain in the mother's body to protect the fetus during month 1
of pregnancy. Precise values are given in Appendix A. All regressions also control for binary indicators
of sex-specific birth order. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                   -62-
Appendix D: Control Experiment, IOC Distribution and Grade Attainment of Older Cohort

                                        (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)        (5)          (6)
                                    Boys and                                  Boys and
                                      girls        Boys          Girls          girls       Boys         Girls

Pr(IOC in utero)                      -0.023       0.069        -0.028          -0.042     -0.035       -0.050
                                      [0.025]     [0.047]      [0.045]         [0.019]* [0.027]        [0.026]+
Age 11                                 0.699       0.692        0.596           0.716     0.784          0.646
                                     [0.022]**   [0.043]**    [0.041]**       [0.014]** [0.020]**      [0.020]**
Age 12                                 1.622       1.558        1.423           1.394     1.445          1.341
                                     [0.019]**   [0.047]**    [0.047]**       [0.013]** [0.019]**      [0.019]**
Age 13                                 2.547       2.446        2.319           2.239     2.301          2.176
                                     [0.023]**   [0.062]**    [0.061]**       [0.015]** [0.022]**      [0.021]**
Female                                 0.268                                    0.324
                                     [0.015]**                                [0.010]**
                                      House-      House-       House-
Fixed effects                          hold        hold         hold           District    District     District
Observations                         113932       57613         56319          113932      57613        56319



Notes: All data except for cassava consumption from the 1988 Census of Population and Housing, sample
restricted to children ages 10-13 in 1988 in 25 districts targeted for iodized oil capsule (IOC) distribution
between 1986 and 1995. Cassava data from the 2000 Tanzanian Household Budget Survey. Rate of cassava
consumption defined as fraction of THBS households in district that report growing cassava. In all regressions,
Pr(IOC in utero) is equal to the value of the variable for children born 12 years later in the same district, such
that kids born 11 years before a distribution round receive the value pertaining to kids in the same district born
1 year after the distribution round, etc.. Regressions also control for sex-specific birth order and household or
district fixed effects.




                                                    -63-
