NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THERE AN "EMBOLDENMENT" EFFECT? EVIDENCE FROM THE INSURGENCY
IN IRAQ
Radha Iyengar
Jonathan Monten
Working Paper 13839
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13839

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2008

The opinions and conclusions are solely those of the authors. We are grateful to Orley Ashenfelter,
David Autor, Eli Berman, Ryan Bubb, Erica Chenoweth, Martin Feldstein, Lawrence Katz, Mathew
Kroenig, John Nagl, Megan O’Sullivan, and James Wilson for helpful comments and insightful suggestions.
We thank Jason Campbell and Michael Greenstone for their generous provision of data sources and
Wesley Hopkins and Kyle Chauvin for excellent research assistance. Funding from the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation and Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs is gratefully acknowledged.
Any remaining errors are entirely ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Radha Iyengar and Jonathan Monten. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Is There an "Emboldenment" Effect? Evidence from the Insurgency in Iraq
Radha Iyengar and Jonathan Monten
NBER Working Paper No. 13839
February 2008, Revised May 2008
JEL No. F51,J18
ABSTRACT
Are insurgents affected by new information about the United States' sensitivity to costs? Using data
on attacks and variation in access to international news across Iraqi provinces, we identify an "emboldenment"
effect by comparing the rate of insurgent attacks in areas with higher and lower access to information
about U.S news after public statements critical of the war. We find that in periods after a spike in war-critical
statements, insurgent attacks increases by 7-10 percent, but that this effect dissipates within a month.
Additionally, we find that insurgents shift attacks from Iraqi civilian to U.S. military targets following
new information about the United States' sensitivity to costs, resulting in more U.S. fatalities but fewer
deaths overall. These results suggest that there is a small but measurable cost to open public debate
in the form of higher attacks in the short-term, and that Iraqi insurgent organizations - even those motivated
by religious or ideological goals - are strategic actors that respond rationally to the expected probability
of US withdrawal. However, the implied costs of open, public debate must be weighed against the
potential gains. We conclude that to the extent insurgent groups respond rationally to the incentives
set by the policies of pro-government forces, effective counterinsurgency should prioritize manipulating
costs and inducements, rather than focus simply on search and destroy missions.

Radha Iyengar
Harvard University
Center for Government and International Studies
1730 Cambridge Street, Room 408
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
riyengar@rwj.harvard.edu
Jonathan Monten
International Security Program Research Fellow
Belfer Center for Science and International Affair
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street, Mailbox 134
Cambridge, MA, 02138
Jonathan_Monten@ksg.harvard.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
The claim that information about the United States’ sensitivity to costs, as revealed though open debate or
shifts in public opinion, can embolden adversaries and reduce the likelihood of achieving military victory
has been a common feature in previous U.S. wars, and particularly in U.S. counterinsurgency campaigns.
In the Philippines, where the United States successfully suppressed an insurrection from 1899 to 1902,
Theodore Roosevelt referred to critics of harsh U.S. tactics - including the use of torture and indiscriminate
violence against civilians - as encouraging Filipinos to challenge U.S. authority (Welch 1974). In the
Vietnam war, others argue that the United States’ “failure to demonstrate resolve” created the belief among
North Vietnamese insurgents that they could outlast a militarily superior force, extending the war and
contributing to the U.S. defeat (Walton 2002: 40). More recently, the Bush administration and its
supporters have generated controversy by suggesting that public criticism of its war policies in the current
conflict in Iraq undercuts the United States’ reputation for resolve and encourages attacks on the United
States and U.S. forces deployed overseas. In Iraq, as in these previous conflicts, opponents claim that this
line of argument represents an attempt to brand critics as unpatriotic and shield government decision
makers from legitimate public criticism.
Both sides, however, overlook that what we will call the “emboldenment view” represents a set of
empirically testable propositions about the relationship between open debate, credibility, and the behavior
of insurgent groups. Researchers have identified the general importance of resolve and credible
commitments in the initiation and termination of conventional and civil wars, but there has been little
empirical research examining this issue in the context of insurgencies.1 In these types of conflicts, resolve
refers to the perceived commitment of the counterinsurgent to bearing the costs of defeating insurgency.
The emboldenment perspective might be separated into two distinct sets of arguments about why the
perception of low resolve in one period increases insurgent violence in a subsequent period. A “cost
sensitivity” argument posits that signals undercutting the perception of U.S. resolve in Iraq are likely to
produce greater levels of violence if insurgents perceive that increasing the costs of the U.S. presence will
induce withdrawal - that is, if the United States appears to be responsive to the costs imposed by the
insurgents in the form of higher attacks. A “fence-sitting” hypothesis suggests that lower resolve may
indirectly strengthen the insurgency by reducing support for pro-government forces in the wider
population. Individuals, and particularly those uncommitted to either side in a civil conflict, are less likely
to collaborate with the government by providing information or withholding support for insurgents if pro1

The classic work on commitment issues in international politics is Schelling 1966; see also Fearon 1995. Recent
work has also addressed how states acquire a reputation for resolve and what influence, if any, previous actions exert
on the behavior of adversaries. See Press 2005 and Mercer 1996; in the context of the United States and Islamic
extremists, see Fettweis 2008 and Shannon and Dennis 2007. Malkasian 2006 and Race 1973 present some
qualitative evidence on the impact of resolve on insurgent violence and recruitment in Iraq and Vietnam, respectively.

3

government forces cannot credibly protect them from future retribution by insurgent groups. Both
mechanisms imply that insurgent groups are strategic actors that respond to incentives created by the
policies of the incumbent government and its external supporters.
Is there evidence for an emboldenment effect in Iraq? Using data on insurgent attacks, variation in
access to international news across Iraqi provinces, a measure of anti-resolve statements in the U.S. media,
and the release of U.S. public opinion polls, we provide one possible picture of whether open public debate
exerts a positive effect on the rate of insurgent violence. We identify a possible emboldenment effect by
comparing whether the availability of information about U.S. cost-sensitivity via anti-resolve statements or
negative poll releases have differential impacts on the rate of insurgent attacks in areas with higher and
lower access to information about U.S news. This difference-in-difference approach isolates the effect of
information about the level of U.S. resolve from the many other possible sources contributing to variation
in insurgent attacks. We find that in periods immediately after a spike in anti-resolve statements, the level
of insurgent attacks increases in provinces with greater access to U.S. news, but this effect dissipates in the
following weeks. Among provinces matched on a broad set of social and economic indicators, insurgent
attacks increase between 7-10%. However, new information about the level of resolve also results in
insurgents shifting attacks from Iraqi civilians to U.S. military targets, resulting in more military fatalities
but fewer fatalities overall. These results suggest, first, that there is a small but measurable cost to open
public debate in the form of higher attacks in the short-term, and, second, that insurgent organizations even those motivated by religious or ideological goals - are strategic actors that respond to the incentives
set by the policies and actions of the counterinsurgent.
An important qualification to this empirical finding is that it does not represent a full account of
the costs and benefits of open public debate about military strategy, or address the overall effect of public
debate on the likelihood of defeating an insurgency. In the context of counterinsurgency campaigns, an
unconditional commitment by an external force may have an unintended effect of reducing the incentive
for the host nation to take greater responsibility for its own security (Byman 2006; Posen 2006). Extensive
empirical research also suggests that open debate, independent scrutiny of official policy, and transparency
improves the quality of decisions in democracies relative to closed political systems, and may at times be
necessary to force changes in a flawed war strategy (e.g., Snyder 1991). Public criticism and policy
reviews may therefore be net beneficial if the resulting improvements in strategy produce an overall
reduction in attacks and fatalities. Without knowing how to weigh the gains from open debate against the
cost of revealing information about the US sensitivity to costs, it is not possible to determine if public
criticism is on balance bad.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 defines insurgency and discusses the development of
the insurgency in Iraq. Section 3 presents the theoretical basis for an insurgent response to new

4

information about cost-sensitivity. Section 4 describes the data and the identification strategy used in this
paper. Section 5 presents the results, and section 6 addresses possible concerns with the identification and
estimation strategy. Section 7 concludes.
2. INSURGENCY AND COUNTERINSURGENCY IN IRAQ
Following Fearon and Laitin (2003), an insurgency might be defined as a type of armed conflict in
which one group uses guerilla tactics to achieve the political goal of overthrowing an incumbent
government or seizing and governing a breakaway territory.2 “Counterinsurgency” refers to the political
and military actions taken by either the challenged government or an outside actor to defeat a rebellion.
Insurgent groups are generally weaker in conventional military terms; insurgent tactics are therefore
designed to avoid directly engaging the counterinsurgent’s main strengths by using concealment, small and
highly mobile units, and subversion to defeat a militarily stronger power.3 Insurgent political objectives
seek to challenge and delegitimize the existing government through the use of violence, while forming or
presenting an alternative that will be accepted by the contested population. Insurgent conflicts tend to be
protracted, with both insurgent groups and the existing government competing for the loyalty and support
of the wider population and with neither force able to achieve a decisive military victory. The average
duration of insurgencies in the twentieth century is approximately nine years, with about half resulting in
success (Eisenstadt and White 2005).
An important conceptual distinction is often drawn between insurgent violence and terrorism.4
Terrorism - or the deliberate targeting of civilians for the purposes of inducing fear - can be motivated by a
variety of reasons. Insurgents, by contrast, are motivated by the specific political objective of overthrowing
the state, and may adopt terrorist tactics as one possible means to that end. The study of terrorism is
focused on how these illegal networks are built and how this relates to the organization’s ability to
perpetrate attacks; in insurgencies these networks are directed toward the specific goal of delegitimizing
and displacing the state.5 Terrorist tactics are consistent with the need for insurgent forces to remain

2

According to Fearon and Laitin (2003: 75), insurgency is a “technology of military conflict characterized by small,
lightly armed bands practicing guerilla warfare from rural base areas.” The Central Intelligence Agency’s Guide to
the Analysis of Insurgency defines insurgency as a “protracted political-military activity directed toward completely
or partially controlling the resources of the country through the use of irregular military forces and illegal political
mobilization. Insurgent activity…is designed to weaken government control and legitimacy while increasing
insurgent control and legitimacy.”
3
On insurgent military tactics, see Nagl 2002 and Krepenevich 1986.
4
For a discussion on the distinctions between insurgency and other types of armed action, and particularly terrorism,
see Byman 2007. There is considerable debate about the definition of terrorism. For a detailed discussion, see
Krueger and Maleckova 2006.
5
While quantitative research on insurgent actions is limited, there is an extensive line of research in the economics
literature on terrorist organizations. Two strands have emerged: one focusing on the social determinants of terrorism
(Krueger and Maleckova, 2006; Berrebi, 2003) and one focusing on modeling and testing the rational behavior of

5

concealed and avoid direct engagement with the frequently superior counterinsurgent military forces.
Insurgent groups frequently abandon terrorist tactics as they gain in strength relative to government forces
and can fight on conventional military terms (Krepenevich 1986). Thus, the study of insurgent behavior
must also consider the broader political landscape in which these groups operate and the way in which that
setting interacts with the specific objectives of insurgent groups to generate different incentives for
behavior.
By these criteria, the United States has faced a devastating insurgency Iraq since overthrowing the
previous regime in mid-2003. In March 2003, United States invaded Iraq with the goal of both disarming
the regime of weapons of mass destruction and replacing Saddam Hussein’s Ba’athist party dictatorship
with a stable, liberal-democratic government that might serve as a broader model in the Middle East. The
major conflict phase of military operations lasted until May 1, when President Bush declared “mission
accomplished” on the deck of the aircraft carrier Abraham Lincoln. After a brief transition phase, the
United States created an occupation government, the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), which
exercised legal sovereignty until the transfer of power to an interim national government in June 2004.
Legislative elections for the national government were held January 30, 2005. Although the United States
formally turned over authority to a political leadership in Iraq, the Iraqi government remained completely
dependent on the United States for its internal and external security, and the United States continues to
play a significant role in political decisions.
The Iraqi insurgency has steadily grown in size and capability since 2003, and has generated a
consistent level of violence through shootings, indirect fire (such as mortar attacks), kidnappings, and
bombings (ranging from improvised explosive devices to large-scale suicide attacks). Insurgent violence
has been directed to varying degrees at U.S. forces, Iraqi civilians, and Iraqi police and security personnel.
Violence levels have generally been high nationwide, with the highest rates of attacks in Baghdad and the
surrounding areas. Large fatalities and a majority of the attacks occurred in the center of the country
including the urban areas of Baghdad, Fallujah, Ramadi, Baqua, and Najaf, with the notable exceptions of
Mosul (in the North) and Basrah (in the South). The continued low-level violence concentrated in central
Iraq has been punctuated by several major bombings that have resulted in hundreds of civilian casualties or
targeted high-profile religious or political sites, for example the January 2006 bombing of the Golden
Shrine in Samarra and the 2004 bombing of the U.N. mission in Baghdad, which resulted in the death of
the UN’s senior envoy in Iraq.
terrorists (Berman and Laitlin 2005; Kalyvas 2005, 1999; Hoffman and McCormick 2004; Pape 2003; Iannaccone,
2003; Hoffman and McCormick 2004; Iannaccone 2003; Pape 2003; Wintrobe 2003; Berman 2003; and Sprinzak
2000). A large strand of this explicitly focuses on the use of religion as a group commitment device and incentivizing
tool (based on Iannaccone, 1992). A controversial exception to this is the extensive literature on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict (Berribi and Klor, 2006). For example, recent work by Klor, Miaari and Paserman (2008) finds
behavior effects of poll releases on Palestinian but not Israeli armed attacks.

6

The insurgency in Iraq stems from several sources, all with a variety of motives, capabilities, and
degrees of organization.6 On the Sunni side, the insurgency is driven by former Baath party elements,
particularly from the former military and para-military security services, who seek to return to power and
fear oppression under a Shia-dominated state, nationalists who object to the U.S. occupation, and religious
extremists. The Sunni insurgency is also driven by foreign volunteers, most notably those linked to al
Qaeda. Intelligence analysts disagree on the extent to which “al-Qaeda in Iraq” (AQI) is “home-grown” or
has organizational links to the international network led by Osama bin Laden, but the group nonetheless
shares al-Qaeda’s broader ideological and religious goals of establishing an extreme version of Islamic law
and a pan-Arab Caliphate. Although AQI is frequently blamed for a disproportionate number of insurgent
attacks, best military estimates place its membership at most at 15% of total insurgent manpower
(Tilghman 2007).
On the Shia side, anti-government violence is driven primarily by large militia groups. These
groups include both nationalists seeking to eject the United States from Iraq, rival factions that oppose the
particular Shia coalition represented in the national government, and organized militias responding to
heightened violence by the Sunni insurgency. As the violence between the Sunni and Shia groups has
escalated, the communities have become more hardened and less trustful, further contributing to violence
(Kaufman 2007). A Kurdish minority in the north is relatively stable and has remained largely outside of
the insurgency.
3. THEORETICAL BASIS FOR AN “EMBOLDENMENT” EFFECT
Insurgent conflicts are characterized by a competition between government and anti-government
forces over the control of the population and the legitimacy of the existing state. We use the term resolve
to refer to the perceived willingness of a counterinsurgent to bear the costs of defeating an insurgency.
The Bush administration has placed a high premium on issues of resolve, and frequently portrays the
conflict in Iraq as a contest of wills between the United States and the Iraqi insurgency: “By attacking
coalition forces -- by targeting innocent Iraqis and foreign civilians for murder -- the terrorists are trying to
weaken our will. Instead of weakness, they're finding resolve” (Bush 2004).
Variation in the counterinsurgent’s - and in this case, the outside actor’s - perceived level of
resolve might influence insurgents via two mechanisms. First, declining resolve might directly raise the
level of anti-government violence initiated by the insurgents. Insurgents may look for information that
increasing the costs of engagement for the outside actor affects its level of support. The appearance of

6

On the composition of the insurgency, see Tilghman 2007; Hashim 2006; and Eisenstadt and White 2005. On the
origins of the insurgency in the initial aftermath of the invasion, see Gordon and Trainor 2006; Ricks 2006; and
Diamond 2005.

7

reduced commitment in response to a higher level of violence produced by insurgents may support the
belief that commitment is related to the costs incurred from insurgent actions.7 This view further implies
that if the external actor can credibly commit to unconditional support regardless of the level of violence,
then the insurgent group’s best option is give up. Malkasian, for example, argues that “signaling resolve taking actions that indicate that the government or occupying power will bear the costs of suppressing the
insurgency - plays a critical role in convincing potential insurgents of the futility of violence” (2006: 423).
An additional implication is that any cost-sensitivity effect should be larger in periods when the
counterinsurgent’s policy in flux. In periods when the level of commitment is settled, heightened violence
is less likely to produce a course change; in periods where the counterinsurgent’s policy is up for debate,
greater violence has the potential to decisively alter the course of action.
Second, perceptions of declining resolve might reduce support among the wider population for the
incumbent government. Classic counterinsurgency theory identifies the population as the “center of
gravity” in counterinsurgency warfare, and suggests that counterinsurgency campaigns should therefore be
thought of as a competition between the government and the insurgents over the loyalty of the population
(e.g., Galula 1964; Huntington 1965; Nagl 2002). The key point of contention is security - creating the
belief among the population that pro-government forces can offer better protection than anti-government
forces. Hence the most recent U.S. Army/Marine Corps Field Manual (FM 3-24) stresses “population
security” over “search and destroy” missions, and argues that the military's "primary function in COIN
[counterinsurgency] is protecting that populace." A credible commitment to population protection both
demonstrates that areas will be safer remaining loyal to the government and signals to potential
collaborators that they will not face reprisals if they support or share information about insurgent activity
with pro-government forces. The perception of declining resolve can reduce support for the government
among the population if it places this protection in doubt - individuals are less likely to collaborate with the
government if the counterinsurgent force cannot credibly protect them from future reprisals, or those
already loyal to the government might flip their support. According to the U.S. Field Manual (2007, 43):
“The populace may prefer the HN [Host-Nation] government to the insurgents; however, people
do not actively support a government unless they are convinced that the counterinsurgents have the
means, ability, stamina, and will to win. The insurgent’s primary battle is against the HN
government, not the United States; however, U.S. support can be crucial to building public faith in
that government’s viability. The populace must have confidence in the staying power of both the
counterinsurgents and the HN government.”

7

For example, the National Strategy for Victory (2005) states that “The enemy seeks to weaken the coalition’s
resolve and our resolve at home through barbaric mass casualty attacks, public slaughter of Iraqi civilians and
hostages, infliction of casualties on coalition forces and use of the media to spread propaganda and intimidate
adversaries.”

8

Declining support from the wider population may take several forms. As many counterinsurgency
theorists have noted, the ability to gather intelligence is often the critical factor in determining the success
of counterinsurgency campaigns, and the population itself is a key source of information for the
counterinsurgency force in separating combatants and non-combatants.8 According to Kahl (2007),
“Protecting and developing relationships with the population…allows counterinsurgents to derive
‘actionable’ intelligence that is vital to efficiently targeting the rebellion.” This is particularly true for
foreign forces, who suffer from an initial deficiency in their level of, or ability to gather, knowledge about
the local environment. Fence-sitters may be less likely to provide critical information if they believe the
counterinsurgency force will not be present or capable of assuring the security in the future. The
perception of declining resolve may also improve insurgent recruitment, as individuals seek to bandwagon
with what appears to be the winning side. Insurgents also rely on the population for passive support in the
form of safe houses, transportation, weapons storage, etc. More generally, successful counterinsurgency
requires carefully building trust and social capital in local communities. It may be more difficult to build
these relationships and networks if communities are uncertain that they will be protected from insurgent
violence in the future for collaborating.
One issue raised by this argument is whether low resolve signals can be easily reversed. The costs
to emboldening statements may not be high if they can be easily mitigated by subsequent statements and
actions. In the context of counterinsurgency, uncertainty in the form of conflicting signals may have the
same effect as low resolve in inducing fence-sitters to side with the insurgency over the United States. If
the likelihood of U.S. withdrawal or a future reduction support for the national government is perceived to
have increased, unallied groups may opt for the local forces (such as the insurgency), who are certain to
remain even after foreign forces have left. Thus, the insurgents offer more predictability even if their
objectives are not the populace’s first preference.9
A second issue is whether insurgent groups are more likely to pursue an alternative strategy of
“playing dead,” in which they reduce violence levels to induce the outside actor to commit to withdrawal
at some specified future date. The reduced violence would be intended to ensure withdrawal occurs, after
which the insurgents could immediately increase violence.10 This theory again treats insurgent groups as
8

See also FM 3-24 2007 and Fearon and Laitin 2003 on the “identification” problem counterinsurgents face in
separating combatants from non-combatants. According to Fearon and Laitin (2003: 80), insurgents’ natural
advantage in information about the local population “allows the active rebels to threaten retribution for denunciation
credibly.”
9
In market settings, it has been noted (most recently by Bloom 2007) that there may be a “trade-off between policy
‘correctness’ and ‘decisiveness.’ To the extent that there are ‘uncertainty effects,’ it may be better to act decisively
(but occasionally incorrectly) then to deliberate on policy, generating policy-induced uncertainty.”
10
The essential difference between the “emboldenment” and “playing dead” hypotheses was captured in exchange
between comedian Jon Stewart and former Press Secretary Tony Snow on the Daily Show:

9

strategic actors seeking to get the largest “bang per buck” of the violence they produce. If the support of
an external actor is withdrawn, the destabilizing effect of violence may be substantially greater postwithdrawal and the potential cost of inducing the actor to remain due to maintaining violence will induce
insurgents to postpone violence to the post-withdrawal period.11 However, this strategy is made more
difficult by the critical importance of fence-sitters, for whom a continued visible presence by the
insurgents is necessary to maintain and increase support for their cause. Ultimately, the strategy adopted
by the insurgents is an empirical question based on their own objectives and their perceptions of which
strategy is likely to be most effective.
4. DATA AND EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
4.1 Identification
To identify the effect of political debate on insurgent behavior, we combine variation in potentially
emboldening statements reported in the U.S. media with variation in access to U.S. media in Iraq.
Specifically, we use differences in the penetration of satellite TV across the 18 Iraqi provinces and the fact
that satellite television provides more direct information about the U.S. policy. Under the intuition that
areas with greater exposure to U.S. and international media will more be more responsive to
“emboldening” statements by U.S. political figures than areas with lesser exposure, we use measures of
access to satellite television as an instrument for the rapidity of information diffusion. This estimation
method relies on the importance of these media mentions in providing salient information about U.S.
political resolve. Using a difference-in-differences strategy, we look at the effect of media content on
insurgent behavior before and after statements related to U.S. cost-sensitivity, in regions with higher
versus lower levels of satellite penetration.
Next, we divide the sample into three periods surrounding the 2006 U.S. congressional election.
As discussed above, in time periods where declining public support and criticism of the U.S. military
Stewart: How do [Bush administration officials] know what emboldens the terrorists so well? They seem to always
know what emboldens the terrorists. For instance, when we have an argument about his policies, that's very
emboldening, apparently, to the terrorists.
Snow: Well, let me put it this way: if you're Al Qaeda, and you think you're going to be able to chase the United
States out, when we have clear military superiority, we've got the ability to win on the battlefield, and you end up
leaving because of political pressure that in some ways have been fomented by their ability to stick it out, you look at
yourself as a winner!
Stewart: But the President says we'll leave when there's an acceptable level of violence. So, if I'm Al Qaeda, and I
want the U.S. to leave, don't I just lay low until they leave?
Snow: Yeah, but apparently they're not smart enough to figure that out…
11

This reverse is also plausible - a surge in military commitment may also lead to a playing dead strategy, as
insurgents wait out the expanded military presence.

10

policy are unlikely to prompt U.S. withdrawal - and thus U.S. policy is less sensitive to insurgent costs the responsiveness of a strategic insurgent group to opposition statements should be nearly zero. The first
period spans the re-election of George W. Bush in 2004 until after the off-season election in 2005. During
this period, opposition statements and the release of polls showing declining support should be relatively
uncorrelated with the levels of attacks because the level of U.S. commitment was more settled following
the perceived “mandate” afforded to George W. Bush after his re-election. The second period spans the
November 2005 until the mid-term election in 2006 in which the Democrats regained control of the U.S.
Congress. In this period, media mentions and public opinion are especially important in generating a
potential U.S. withdrawal. The third period spans the post-election, lame-duck session, the new Congress,
and the Surge. In this period, because of large changes in the U.S. political landscape and
counterinsurgency strategy, the insurgent response to media information may be more responsive than in
the first period but less responsive than in the second period.
We use satellite television because it is an important source of information in post-Saddam Iraq,
and therefore a useful proxy for access to information about the U.S. political debate. Prior to the U.S.
invasion in 2003, Iraqis were banned from owning satellite television and had access only to state-run
news stations. After the collapse of Baathist-run television stations, Iraqis were “starve[d] for
information,” and the sale of satellite dishes “skyrocketed in the months following the invasion, leading to
one of the highest penetration rates in the world in just two years.”12 Despite high overall penetration
levels, there is also great deal of geographic variation in access. According to a media poll by United
Kingdom’s Department of State, Office of Intelligence and Research, while nearly all (93%) Iraqis report
owning a television, only about a third (33%) have access to a satellite dish (either at home, a friend's
residence, or at work). The two-thirds (62%) of Iraqis report that they have no access satellite television
tend to be less educated and poorer.13
In addition, the content of satellite television is dominated by foreign, and in particular U.S.,
content. This developed for two reasons. First, emerging television networks are heavily regulated by the
Iraqi government. For a brief but critical period of time, the CPA banned stations that might incite antiU.S. violence, resulting in predominantly U.S.-based content.14 In 2004, the Iraqi Interim Government set
up a Higher Media Commission to regulate and license television stations. This Commission increased
foreign (and largely U.S.) based content and banned Arab stations deemed to be anti-U.S., such as Al

12

As of 2006, Iraqis with satellite television had access to over 300 satellite channels. For details on the emergence of
Iraqi satellite television, see Cochrane 2006 and Bahadur 2005.
13
Significantly, post-college graduates are three times more likely to have access to satellite television than those
with a primary education or lower. A summary of results is available at
http://www.stanhopecentre.org/iraqmediapoll.shtml.
14
Aljazeera.Net, September 23, 2003.

11

Jazeera and Al Arabiya.15 Second, one of the most widely available TV stations is the U.S.-sponsored Al
Iraqiyah, which began satellite broadcasting in October 2003. In January 2004, the U.S. Defense
Department awarded Florida-based Harris Corporation a 12-month contract to manage the Iraqi Media
Network, including Al Iraqiyah, which provides access to American programming.16 Al Iraqiya’s detailed
content on U.S. issues relative to other sources is also due to the privileged status it was afforded by
Coalition forces (Cochrane 2006). One indicator of the dominance of U.S. media content is the opposition
of Iraqi religious groups and leaders to greater satellite TV access in Iraq, which they hold has increased
the availability of Western and un-Islamic material (Bahadur 2005). The dominance of Western news and
entertainment is evident of the availability of shows like ABC’s Extreme Makeover Home Edition or the
British show Pop Idol (Cochrane 2006, 13).
An obvious concern with using satellite television variation is the underlying reason why satellite
access may vary by province. While some variation is related to the underlying wealth of the population,
much of the variation is due to the existing technology and infrastructure. Blue Iraq, the company
responsible for the satellite network in Iraq, provides several reasons why different regions may lack
satellite access.17 Performance problems on satellite networks have to do with several factors unrelated to
either violence or socioeconomic characteristics. The first reason relates to the efficiency of the
technology under use. Due to the high capital costs of deploying a satellite network, and relatively limited
size of the satellite market, vendors often do not update their systems as new technology becomes
available. Comparing a satellite network using early 1990s-era technology (Hughes DirecWay) to modern,
efficient systems (such as iDirect), the modern system will provide much better performance for the same
cost. This is due to more efficient encoding and traffic management technologies which are constantly
being developed. The second issue relates to subscription management by carrier. The structure of satellite
broadcast is such that all consumer/business satellite links are shared. As such, the satellite capacity must
be sized for a given capacity with most sites transmitting at less than full speed most of the times. To avoid
service interruptions, many network carriers limit the number of customers they add to their networks.

15

Cochrane (2006). For a discussion of popular Arab media, see Los Angeles Times (2003). For a sample of media
content, see http://www.publicagenda.com/press/clips/cfpi4_clips_ais.pdf, http://alsumaria.com/en/iraq-files/usiraq.php
16
Although Al Iraqiyah has seen a steady improvement in the quality of its programming since early 2004, the
network still offers few hours of original content. Among the original programs are daily news hour shows with
detailed information on U.S. media watched by many, despite skepticism about its objectivity due to it close ties with
the United States.
17
Blue Iraq is a company focused on satellite, wireless, and network technologies. They currently operate a satellite
network with reach throughout Iraq, and provide customer support and installation assistance from Iraq and Dubai
(UAE). Their primary market is supporting Western military and commercial reconstruction efforts throughout the
country. They also provide infrastructure to support rebuilt Iraqi domestic communications, as well as IT and
communications to support NGOs, Iraqi organizations, and businesses to conduct their own operations. Information
obtained from: http://www.blueiraq.com/

12

Third, satellite networks are designed around specific parameters, including coverage area and customer
traffic profiles. Because there were many mismatched systems, that is systems were sold for purposes for
which they were not designed, many areas have difficulty accessing satellite television, which deters takeup.18 A fourth, problem relates to the interaction between the technology used and environmental factors.
Satellite links are designed around a specific "link budget" to provide reliable communications in a variety
of environmental conditions. These links require the correct interactive technology which is often not
available in Iraq. Because of these “tight margins” on satellite links and the use of inferior equipment,
undersized antennas, or insufficient error correction on such links, access in some regions will be
problematic in suboptimal conditions (e.g. environmental or other extreme conditions). Finally, there is the
inherent problem of satellite television: latency due to inherent limitations of the speed of light. Due to the
extreme distance from the surface of the earth to geostationary earth orbit and back down to the satellite
hub, there is an approximately 240 millisecond delay in each direction on a satellite link. While this is a
fundamental limitation, there are several ways to minimize the practical effect of this delay. However, if
not addressed, this latency can hinder reception, reliability, and other link characteristics as well. In
regions without the preexisting infrastructure or subject to environmental hazards, access will be severely
limited. The implication of these technology constraints is that individuals with similar tastes and
characteristics, who may have same desire to adopt satellite television, will do so differentially in different
regions due to the implied costs due to technological limitations. Thus, even if it could be demonstrated
that the access of any given individual may be affected by income or desire for information, the variation
in the province level measure nonetheless reflects the relative ease of access.
A second possible criticism of these measures is that insurgent groups pay little attention to media
sources. However, reports indicate that insurgents in Iraq are particularly watchful of the media, and that
the tactics used by al Qaeda in particular heavily rely on the propaganda potential of large media sources.
According to Bruce Hoffman, “What I think has made the insurgency in Iraq so different from previous
ones is the insurgents' enormous media savvy” (Ross 2006). Others have documented, based on insurgentgenerated media such as websites, the extent to which Iraqi insurgent groups are detailed consumers of
news on U.S. politics and policy (Kimmage and Ridolfo 2007, 88).
An additional assumption for this identification is that insurgent groups are decentralized and get
information based largely on where they live, and not through a national network structure. This
assumption also seems to be in line with the general intelligence information available.19 While the
18

Blue Iraq describes this problem in more detail: “[T]he transponder chosen on a satellite will provide optimum
coverage within a specific footprint, and the bandwidth, sharing ratio, and technology used for the system will best
support certain types of customers.”
19
In January 2005 Iraqi intelligence service director General Mohamed Abdullah Shahwani estimated that Iraq's
insurgency consisted of at least 40,000 hardcore fighters, out of a total of more than 200,000 part-time fighters and

13

assumption that insurgent access to information is decentralized appears reasonable given the information
known about the insurgency, if a central coordinating body with better access to information determines
violence levels, then this identification will fail to capture exogenous differences in attack behavior
because the insurgency may be determining the allocation of violence simultaneous to the television
programming. To the extent that insurgents are small in scale and news takers, as opposed to only news
makers, any differential changes in attack behavior across high- and low-access areas might reasonably be
interpreted as a response to information about the United States’ policies and actions. Moreover, this
criticism does not apply to the response of fence-sitters in the Iraqi civilian population - even if
information is shared or distributed between insurgent groups, this is less likely to be true for the civilian
fence-sitters who are also receiving information about the United States’ level of commitment.

4.2 Data Sources
The data used in the estimation represents the most complete compilation of data available on the
topic. It was compiled from a variety of sources in part by ourselves and in part by Greenstone (2007).
Insurgency-initiated attacks and fatalities are among the best measured data related to the U.S. war in Iraq.
To measure U.S. military casualties, we use counts obtained directly from the Department of Defense,
which releases information on the date, location, and type of attack of each fatal casualty.20 Data on Iraqi
Security Force casualties are obtained from the Brookings Iraq Index, which is available monthly from
2003 to 2005. After 2005, weekly data is available from the Iraq Coalition Casualty Count.21 To measure
Iraqi civilian casualties, we aggregate attacks reported on the Iraq Body Count (IBC) website, which
maintains an ongoing database of attacks with estimated numbers of fatalities from a variety of media
sources (with the source of each attack documented), and provides a minimum and maximum estimated
number of deaths when sources conflict.22 For the purposes of this paper we use the estimated minimum
number of deaths for any given attack.

volunteers who provide intelligence, logistics and shelter. The former Ba’ath party-based insurgency has split into
three factions and there are a wide range of Islamist factions from Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's al-Qaeda affiliate to
Ansar al-Sunna and Ansar al-Islam. “THE INSURGENCY,” at
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/iraq_insurgency.htm. On the decentralized character of the Iraqi
insurgency, see also Hashim (2006).
20
This data excludes non-fatal casualties, which the DOD does not make public on privacy grounds. It also excludes
“non-hostile” fatalities, which comprise about 19 % of all U.S. military deaths in Iraq. See
http://icasualties.org/oif/HNH.aspx.
21
Available at www.icasualties.org/oif/IraqiDeaths.aspx.
22
There has been substantial controversy over attempts to measure excess violent civilian deaths in Iraq since the
2003 invasion. Most disagreement, for example over a 2006 study reported in the medical journal The Lancet which
placed this figure around 601,000, concerns attempts to estimate this number through samples of household surveys
administered directly in Iraq. We avoid these problems by using a direct count of military and civilian deaths
compiled by the IBC and the Department of Defense.

14

We use two counts of the number of attacks and cross-check for consistency. First, we aggregate the
number of incidents in any given week from the combined Iraqi civilian data. Second, we use monthly
data on insurgent-initiated attacks on U.S. and Iraq security forces from the Brookings Iraq Index.
Quantifying media content that might bear on the perceived resolve of U.S. policy is obtained through
two distinct measures. First, we construct an automated mentions count of potentially “emboldening”
statements reported in major U.S. news outlets, which we define as the number of times top Bush
administration officials—the President, Vice-President, Secretary of Defense, Secretary of State, Press
Secretary, and the U.S. commander Iraq—refer to statements or actions by other U.S. political figures that
might encourage violent extremist groups in Iraq.23 This strategy provides an objective mechanism to
classify what constitutes an emboldening or resolve-undermining statement or action. 24 We define “high
mention” weeks as those weeks with at least 10 mentions.25 We also compare these high mention weeks to
high local media mention weeks as measured by statements in Al Jazeera.
Relying on a count of media mentions alone raises several problems, most importantly that U.S.
political discourse may be driven by attacks, creating a possible bias related to reverse-causation. We thus
use a second measure of resolve: the release of major polls regarding American attitudes towards the war
in Iraq. Like the media mentions count, the content of public opinion polls contains information about the
level of U.S. resolve. However, unlike statements by political officials, the timing of the release of polls is
plausibly unrelated to the conditions on the ground in Iraq, even if broad changes in public support for the
war are to some degree affected by the level of violence.26 This is because media organizations want to
produce regular series of polls to track public opinion, regardless of the status of the war, and as a result
conduct such polls in regular intervals. Financial pressures and the desire to retain credibility in a
competitive media market drive media organizations to report polls as soon as they have been vetted by inhouse checkers.27 In fact, most polls are released within 1 week of being conducted but the set-up prior to

23

We acknowledge that the U.S. commander in Iraq is not a member of the political leadership. We also
acknowledge that the Press Secretary is not a top policy-maker, but include them because this person is often
responsible for stating the administration’s policy line in public. See data appendix for the individuals included in
these categories for the time period under analysis.
24
A full description of search terms and included newspapers is available in the data appendix. We distinguish
between references to statements that are said by Bush officials to embolden attacks against U.S. forces in Iraq, and
statements that are said by Bush officials to embolden attacks against the U.S. homeland. While this second claim is
also an empirically testable proposition, for the purposes of this paper we focus only on the first.
25
Specifications using a continuous measure of media mentions are presented in the supplementary results appendix.
26
For a debate over whether U.S. public support is driven by solely by casualties or the perception of the likelihood
of victory, see Feaver, Gelpi, and Reifler 2005/06; and Mueller 2005.
27
In fact, recent work suggests that the financial pressures were previously generating premature releases (Mann,
Orren, Shorenstein 1992). After the 2004 US Presidential Election, increased methodological concerns have forced
many large media organizations to establish in-house standards (Daves and Newport, 2005). See for example, ABC
News’ Polling and Methodology Standards, available at
http://abcnews.go.com/sections/us/DailyNews/poll_methodology.html.

15

the launch takes several weeks.28 This timeline makes releasing polls immediately prior to high attack
period highly unlikely. We track the release of major media-sponsored polls and treat the week of releases
as “high information” weeks. We also verify that information about these polls was discussed on networks
broadcast via satellite television using online transcripts from Al-Iraqiya.
Finally, in order to compare regions with different levels of satellite access in other characteristics
that might plausibly affect violence levels, we use a broad set of social and economic variables collected in
the Iraq Living Conditions Survey 2004 by the UN Development Programme and the Central Organization
for Statistics and Information Technology, Ministry of Planning and Development Cooperation in Iraq. 29
Control variables used are population density, household size, average number of displaced persons,
median household income, access to safe and stable drinking water, malnutrition rate, literacy rate, net
primary school attendance, unemployment rate, and median hourly wage. We use estimates collected and
constructed by the CIA on the dominant ethno-religious groups by province. These estimates label each
region as predominantly Sunni, predominantly Shia, predominantly Kurd, or mixed.

4.3 Framework for Estimation
The effect of political debate on insurgent behavior is based on the premise that politicians in the
United States will be less willing to maintain military support if it is sufficiently costly. Insurgents thus
wish to know at what point in time their attacks will produce the greatest returns. Using this theory, we
use statements of resolve by Bush officials and the release of polls regarding public opinion about the
ongoing war in Iraq as an information shock to insurgents regarding the sensitivity of U.S. policy to
casualties.
To begin, consider the following structural model of violence production by an insurgent
organization:

Vt = f ( At , Lt , K t )

(1)

In equation (1), V represents the number of violent attacks produced in period t. A represents the
technology/productivity of the insurgents in creating attacks and fatalities. L represents the number of
insurgent participants at a given time available to participate in attacks, and K represents the set of
resources and materials needed to produce the attack (e.g. the raw materials for bombs, weapons, etc.).

28

For example, CBS Polls often are released within days of data collection. For CBS/NY Times polling
methodology see: http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2001/07/02/opinion/main299401.shtml
29
This survey took place in April and May 2004, except for data collected in Erbil and Dahouk, which was collected
in August 2004. To the extent possible, the indicators in the tables are constructed using the standard definitions in
the international community. Details on data collection, definitions and the full set of variables measured are
available in the Summary Report, http://www.iq.undp.org/ILCS/PDF/Tabulation%20Report%20-%20Englilsh.pdf.

16

At the same time, the U.S. probability of remaining in period t+1 is governed by the following
relationship:

US t = 1 − π 1 (demst ) − π 2 ( PO(Vt , X t )) + ε t

(2)

In equation (2), dems is an indicator for the Democratic party’s control of Congress.30 PO( . ) is a function
that represents the public opinion on the war in Iraq, which is a function of the previous period’s violence
and other time specific characteristics. USt represents the probability that the U.S. will remain in Iraq at
t+1 and illustrates that the decision to remain at t+1 is actually made after the choice of violence level.
The error term is distributed normally and is independent between periods. It is meant to represent a
random, exogenous shock to the U.S. probability of remaining.
In a standard model of organized crime,31 the criminal entity would maximize a profit function that
balances the expected revenues, the expected penalties, and the costs of input. 32 Since insurgent groups
are in many ways organizationally similar to criminal enterprises but with politically motives (e.g., Fearon
2007 and Iyengar and Monten 2008), define the probability distribution function H( . ) which maps the
profit of the insurgency into their objective of Iraqi National Government (ING) failure. H is increasing in

Π with H = 1 if Π ≥ Π . Define the probability that the ING fails as follows:

Pr( ING fails t ) = aH (Π t ) + bUS t −1

(3)

Equation (3) illustrates that in a given period t, the insurgency can increase the probability of ING failure
in t through Vt and the probability of ING failure in t+1 through the effect of Vt on USt (i.e. the probability
of withdrawal in t+1). Now let us consider the intertemporal decision. In any given period t, the
insurgents choose maximize Pr(ING fails) in t and all period after t. In practice that means maximizing
Pr(ING fails) in t and in t+1,

max

At , Lt , K t

aH (ϕ t ⋅ f ( At , Lt , K t )(1 − p(USAFt , IPS t )) − c( f ( At , Lt , K t )) ⋅
p(USAFt , IPS t ) − wLt − rK ) + b(1 − π 1 (demst ) − π 2 ( PO( f ( At , Lt , K t ), X t )) + ε )

(4)

30

We treat the control of Congress by the Democrats as increasing opposition to remaining Iraq.
We adopt a model of organized crime because while rational models of terrorists and insurgents are not widely
considered in most settings, there has been a large literature modeling criminal decisions as rational and subject to
economic analyses of marginal costs and benefits. This literature, beginning with Becker (1968), Stigler (1970) and
Ehrlich (1973), stressed the relevance of the cost for offenses relative to outside options and between crimes
themselves. Indeed, there has been consistent evidence that criminals respond to incentives about whether to
participate in crime (e.g. Levitt, 1997; or for a literature review, Cameron, 1998) and if they participate, how to
substitution between types of crime (Levitt and Kessler, 1999; Iyengar, 2008).
32
A standard definition for such a profit function is:
Π = ϕVt (1 − p (USAFt , IPS )) − c (Vt ) p (USAFt , IPS ) − wLt − rK t . In this equation, p( .)—the probability of
31

detection—is a function of the total security forces—US Armed Forces (USAF) and Iraqi Security forces. The gain
from successful completed violence is φ for each attack. The cost of an unsuccessful attack is c( . ) and is an
increasing function of violence. The cost of labor is w and the cost of capital is r; both assumed to be fixed over time.

17

Thus, the optimal choice of violence level V will be a function of input costs, probability of detection, and
US public opinion (as well as the democratic control of Congress). Given this, we assume a linear
specification for the optimal level of violence in any given period and thus the structural equation
governing violence levels is:

Vt = δ 0 + δ 1 (USAFt ) + δ 2 ( POt ) + δ 3 (demst ) + δ 4 (input pricest ) + δ 5 X t + ξ t

(5)

Identifying the causal relationship between any of these effects and the level of violence will be biased in
practice by two issues. First, because of underlying changes in the return to violence (i.e. the φ in equation
(4)) may be changing over time with contemporaneous changes in the public opinion, input prices, and US
Armed Forces levels. Second, the above relationship is in some sense a partial equilibrium. To the extent
that some third factors (such changes in US military strategy) change both the left hand side (violence) and
the right hand side (USAF, PO, etc.), the straightforward linear estimate of equation (5) will be biased.
Using this analysis, we implement our difference-in-differences approach to determining if
imperfect information about U.S. sensitivity to costs affects insurgent behavior. Based on the structural
equation (5) governing violence, suppose that violence is produced at the level:

⎧d 0 + d1 (USAFt ) + d 2 (resolve) t + d 3 (demst ) + d 4 (input pricest ) + d 5 X pt + ε pt if access = 1
(6)
V pt = ⎨
d 0 + d1 (USAFt ) + dˆ3 (demst ) + d 4 (input pricest ) + d 5 X pt + ε pt if access = 0
⎩
In equation (6), access is an indicator for whether an area has access to satellite television.
Assuming that resolve levels (or measures of resolve) are independent of the time effect, a simple
difference between areas with access to and access to areas without satellite will yield an estimate of the
effect of resolve on violence.

V pt = dˆ 0 + dˆ 2 (resolve * access to satellite) pt + dˆ3 N pt + λ p + τ t + ε pt

(7)

In equation (7), resolve*access to satellite is a variable that is equal to the fraction of the population with
access to satellite television in weeks with high resolve statements but zero in other weeks. Note two
issues with an estimate of d2 from equation (7). First, identification is related to the decision of when to
commit attacks relative to perception of resolve. To the extent that resolve statements themselves are
driven by levels of violence in the previous period, either reverse causation or mean reversion would bias
the estimate of d2. Second, the level of attacks may be conditional on a certain total number of feasible
attacks. Because we are relying on a relatively short window, which may be related to inter-temporal
substitution of violence than the overall level of violence, the level effect from any previous period and the
substitution effect of perceived U.S. commitment changes in this period will both be captured by the same
coefficient.
To address the timing issue, we estimate all specifications with both a lag and lead interactions.
The cross-province differences in satellite access identify the effect of U.S. political speech on violence

18

levels, and the week-before-resolve statement variable captures some of the reverse causation/mean
reversion effect. Thus, we estimate the following specification:

V pt = dˆ 0 + dˆ1 (resolve) t * (access to satellite p ) + dˆ 2 (one week before resolve) t * (access to satellite p )
dˆ3 (one week after resolve) t * (access to satellite p ) + λ p + τ t + ε pt
In equation (8), the effect of media mentions on violence is likely to show up in coefficients d3 and
d1. We focus on the results from the point estimate on d3 (coefficient on the week after resolve-satellite
interaction) because it seems unlikely that changes in violence levels in the next week could cause higher
number resolve statements in the previous week except for the causal effect of resolve perceptions on
violence production. We control and test for potential reverse causation in d2 (coefficient on the one week
before-satellite interaction). We do not discuss the d1, which is the week of statement-resolve interaction,
because it may conflate both the reverse causation and the direct causation effects.
5. RESULTS
We begin our analysis with a set of descriptive statistics about trends in violence levels. Figure 1A
shows the number of attacks over time and figure 1B shows the number of U.S. military, Iraqi Security
Force (ISF), and Iraqi civilian casualties over time. In figure 1, the increase in attacks and fatalities is
largely driven by an increase in the use of explosive weapons (e.g., bombs) and an increased number of
individuals being tortured and executed.33 A full exploration of the structure of the insurgency in Iraq is
beyond the scope of this paper, but these figures provide some contextual information on trends in
violence in Iraq. There was a large increase in the number of attacks and fatalities beginning in the middle
of 2005. This increased dramatically until the winter of 2006-2007, when it began declining. While we do
not discuss the strategic reasons for this increase, we can describe the associated changes in technology
related to this increase. The bimodal distribution (as shown in the noticeably higher disjointed set of
scatter points in figure 1B) in fatalities is likely due to the increase in use of bombs and indirect fire. This
also results in greater variance in attacks, which is correlated with the increase in the level of attacks
(rather than simply a time-related dynamic). Higher variance periods and periods which generate a
bimodality in fatalities are both associated with a higher fraction of attacks using bombs, and so may in
part be technology-driven. However, higher variance may also be a strategic choice by the insurgents,
under the belief that clusters of attacks are more destabilizing than spread out attacks.

33

These graphs exclude a large numbers of unidentified bodies at morgues in Bagdad, Kirkuk, Mosul, and Tikrit.
These bodies could not be linked to any specific number of attacks or causes but media accounts suggest these may
be the result of Shia militia responses to Sunni groups. On the improved ability of insurgent groups to conceal
killings from Iraqi authorities, see Dehghanpisheh 2007.

19

(8)

Figures 2 and 3 plot counts over time of our two measures of U.S. resolve: media mentions about
U.S. “resolve” to remain in Iraq and the release of U.S. public opinion polls. The series in figure 2 is the
number of media mentions about “resolve” in a week, with 10 or more mentions being labeled as a “high
mention” week. We chose 10 because it is one standard deviation greater than the mean.34 Looking at the
plot in figure 2 and comparing it to figure 1 provides a simple time-series comparison, which suggests that
there is a concurrent increase in anti-resolve statements and attack levels. The series in figure 3 tracks the
release of public opinion polls containing questions about attitudes towards the war in Iraq. As discussed,
public opinion polls are arguably released at times independent of the amount of violence in the preceding
weeks. While the content of the polls may be affected by violence, we measure the actual release date and
observe how the change in information about the existing public support for maintaining troops in Iraq
affects future levels of violence. Comparing figure 3 to figure 1, there appears a much less clear correlation
between poll release timing and the level of attacks overall.
The diffusion of information occurs across regions based on satellite TV access. Table 1 presents
descriptive statistics about regions with “high” satellite access (those regions where more than 50 percent
of the population has access to satellite television at home, at a friend’s home or at work) and low satellite
access. There do appear to be differences between high and low satellite regions. In particular, high
satellite regions tend to have more attacks and fatalities, denser population centers, and are slightly richer.
They also have larger number of displaced persons due to the war. While the regions are similar in other
characteristics, such as nutrition and literacy rates, these differences are somewhat concerning. As a result,
we construct a second test using only a subset of provinces which are better matched on a set of
observables such as population density, literacy, unemployment rates, and malnutrition rates. In this
matched province sample, provinces in the high satellite category are Anbar, Babil, Ninawa, and Tamim.
Provinces in the low satellite category are Diyala, Karbala, Najaf, and Salah ad Din. The provinces with
high satellite access have on average 10.88 attacks per week and the low satellite access provinces have on
average 11.49 attacks, with no significant difference between the two groups. The provinces are also not
significantly different in terms of the observables listed in Table 1.
From column (3) in table 1, it is apparent that Baghdad is an extreme outlier on a host of
characteristics, including population density, frequency of attacks, and various socioeconomic indicators.
As such, we exclude Baghdad from subsequent analysis. While necessary on methodological grounds,
excluding Baghdad might raise other concerns about the applicability of the subsequent analysis. Baghdad
does represent a substantial fraction - approximately 35 percent - of overall violence in Iraq. However,
there remains a large amount of violence (65%, or about 5 people killed per day) in the rest of the country.
34

We conduct a sensitivity analysis varying the high mention variable between 10 and 15. The magnitude of the
effect changes, but qualitatively the results are similar.

20

In terms of casualties confirmed by the Department of Defense, the non-Baghdad areas of Iraq account for
2,778 U.S. military deaths, still a substantial number.35 In addition, although Baghdad represents a major
population center and a strategic target, our analysis does include other major population centers such as
Mosul, Basrah, Kirkuk, and Najaf, and areas that were or continue to be at the center of the Sunni
insurgency such as Tikrit, Ramadi, Samarra, and Fallujah. Our analysis also includes other strategically
valuable areas such as the oil-producing regions in the South.
Table 2 presents differences in attack rates in high and low mention weeks and poll release and no
poll-release weeks. High mention weeks are relatively infrequent. In the election and post-election period,
high mention weeks represent between 15 and 20 percent of the total weeks in the period. Poll releases are
more consistent, with 12 poll high mention weeks in the pre-election period, 11 in the election period, and
8 in the post-election period. On average, high mention weeks have more attacks and fatalities than low
mention weeks in all periods. The weeks surrounding high mention weeks also have more attacks in all
periods. However, comparing high satellite to low satellite regions in the week after high mentions, there
appears to be a sizeable increase in the number of attacks in high satellite regions relative to low satellite
regions.
The summary statistics in Tables 1 and 2 contain several important facts that bear consideration in
interpreting the results. First, there is a higher level of variance in insurgent activity in higher satellite
areas. This makes the issue of mean reversion of particular concern. The rate of insurgent violence may
spike in one week and revert to the mean level in the next. If a short-term increase in insurgent activity
results in more “resolve”-related mentions in the U.S., then in the period immediately after the “high”
resolve weeks it may appear to as if attacks are declining due to some change in U.S. political discourse
when in fact there is simply negative serial correlation between high resolve mention weeks and
subsequent mentions. However, if it appears that we observe an increase in violence, the mean reversion
problem would only downward bias the results - that is, bias against finding an emboldenment effect. We
discuss this issue in more detail below.
A related concern is the response of the U.S. military to insurgent attacks. If there is a short-term
clamp down in response to high resolve statements (perhaps precipitated by high levels of attacks), this
might also produce a decline in attacks immediately after a week with high resolve statements. If there is a
relaxation of military responses after high resolve mentions, then we might observe an increase in
insurgent actions. The former scenario seems more likely, but again would likely only bias against finding
any effect. With these issues in mind, we turn to our causal estimates of U.S. political speech and
insurgent activity.

35

Confirmed by the DOD as of January 2008.

21

Table 3 panel A provides estimates of the main specification in equation (8). Because there is
variation in the relevance of information for insurgent strategy, we divide our analysis into time periods
where declining public support and criticism of the U.S. military policy are unlikely to prompt U.S.
withdrawal - and thus U.S. policy is less sensitive to insurgent costs - and the responsiveness of a strategic
insurgent group to opposition statements should be closer to zero. The first period spans the re-election of
George W. Bush in 2004 until after the off-season election in 2005. During this period, opposition
statements and the release of polls showing declining support should be relatively uncorrelated with the
levels of attacks because the level of U.S. commitment was more settled following the perceived
“mandate” afforded to George W. Bush after his re-election. The second period spans the November 2005
until the mid-term election in 2006 in which the Democrats regained control of the U.S. Congress. In this
period, media mentions and public opinion are especially important in generating a potential U.S.
withdrawal. The third period spans the post-election, lame-duck session, the new Congress, and the Surge.
Columns (1)-(3) present estimates of attacks on a continuous variable for satellite television, an
indicator for “high mention” weeks, and indicators for the week before and the week after “high mention”
week. These indicators are all interacted with the satellite variable. The province-level control variables
are included in the specification without province fixed effects. Including these variables explains very
little of the total variation, as indicated by the relatively low R-squared statistics presented in the last row
of each column. The main effect of greater access to satellite TV is positive, consistent with the
expectation that higher satellite regions will experience more attacks. There is no significant difference
following high and low mention weeks across regions in the pre-election season, but there is a significant
difference in the election and post-election season, with the coefficients implying once again a relatively
large increase of 30-40 percent. Columns (4)-(6) include province fixed effects which shrink these
estimates substantially. The coefficients change only slightly with the inclusion of week fixed effects in
columns (7)-(9). The comparable set of estimates using the poll release variable is presented in panel B.
The effect sizes in columns (7), (8), and (9) are consistent with the estimates from the resolve statement
analysis. These last coefficients are our preferred specification, and imply an 18-25 percent increase.
Note, however, these coefficients are not precisely estimated and the effect size could be as small as 5-10
percent. 36
The results in Tables 3 are consistent with strategic action by insurgents to increase attacks after
the U.S. produces greater information about the likelihood of withdrawal and when polls are released
regarding U.S. public opinion on the war in Iraq. The results in Table 3 and most of the results in Table 4
are only weakly significant in many cases. This is not surprising given the many other issues related to the
36

Specifications using different scalings of attacks (logs and per capita) are qualitatively similar but vary in the
degree of significance. Results of these tests are reported in Appendix Table 1.

22

production of violence, none of which are directly addressed here. However, there does appear relatively
convincing evidence against a simple mean reversion story. Table 3, especially columns (5) and (6), show
that high violence today results in high resolve statements today. This effect is not present in the poll
release regressions, which confirms that poll release dates are likely independent of the violence during
that time period (although the content of the polls surely are not). This effect is also consistent with a
reverse-causation story rather than a mean reversion story: unless insurgent groups are able to
instantaneously adjust, violence is inducing resolve statements rather than reverting to the mean after
relatively low violence weeks.37
Table 4 presents the effect of media mentions and poll releases on fatalities. There appears to be
an increase in the number of fatalities of U.S. military forces and a decrease in the number of non-U.S.
fatalities following high mention and poll release weeks. The effect sizes seem implausibly large, but the
reasonably large standard errors make the magnitude of the effects more difficult to interpret. Notably, the
post-poll results for fatalities are smaller than the resolve mentions, which was not the case with the attack
levels. The change in fatalities also provides some insight into the increased attacks. After the release of a
poll or an increase in “resolve” mentions, there is an increase in attacks but a decrease in the total number
of fatalities and an increase in U.S. military fatalities. Because U.S. targets are “hardened” and thus more
difficult to kill, insurgents may not invest in doing so unless the returns are sufficiently high. The
perceived increase in returns after poll releases or media mentions may increase the willingness of
insurgents to try to target U.S. military personnel. One possible interpretation of the decrease in fatalities is
that insurgent groups are shifting to increased attacks on U.S. military targets - which are harder and may
necessitate more attacks - and thus the additional attacks produce less total fatalities. The trade-off in
fatalities is not one-to-one, which is also consistent with the idea that U.S. targets are harder to
successfully attack. 38
Finally, to address concerns that regions with high and low satellite access are different in other
characteristics that might plausibly be related to insurgent activity, we compare a sub-set of the provinces
that are more closely matched on a set of observables. We restrict our sample to provinces with similar
characteristics, including household size, average number of displaced persons, median household income,
37

More flexible specifications of the media mentions count are consistent with the results reported. The marginal
effect of an addition mention is about 3-7 percent, but the result appears discontinuous with most the effect driven by
very high mention weeks. Results are reported in Appendix Table 2.
38
One alternative explanation for why areas with greater access to U.S. media and politics respond differentially to
new information is that the new information revealed by the U.S. debate relates to specific U.S. military weaknesses
that insurgents translate into greater tactical success, and not the level of U.S. resolve. For example, debate about the
vulnerability of unarmored vehicles to IED attacks, and criticism of the inability of the DOD to produce more, gives
information about a specific U.S. military vulnerability and thus may increase attacks relative to areas not exposed to
the new information as quickly. This is consistent with the expectation that high satellite areas should experience an
increase in attacks on U.S. targets relative to other targets in comparison to low satellite areas. We thank Matthew
Kroenig for making this point.

23

malnutrition, literacy, labor force participation, and average hourly wages. Table 5 compares the previous
results with results in which we match provinces and districts on observables. Columns (3) and (4)
provide estimates using matched provinces. The effect sizes in these estimates are substantially smaller
and more precisely estimated. These estimates imply an effect size of about 7-10 percent. The results are
consistent in both the poll and media mention results, but results in the election year are only marginally
significant in the poll specifications. The coefficients in the fatality results also shrink dramatically but
remain large in percent terms.
Overall the evidence from Tables 3 and 4 are consistent with those in Table 5 and present evidence
that there is a spike in attacks after new information regarding US sensitivity to insurgent-imposed costs
becomes available. This spike is consistent with strategic behavior by insurgent groups: when the returns
to insurgent attacks are higher, and in particular when the returns to inflicting U.S. military fatalities are
higher, Iraqi insurgent groups increase efforts to attack US targets. This increase lasts for about 2 weeks,
after which there is no significant difference between high and low satellite regions.39 The number of
fatalities appears to significantly increase in the week after information on casualty sensitivity is released
and is higher but insignificant in future weeks.
6. CONCERNS ABOUT ESTIMATION AND IDENTIFICATION
The strategy used to identify the relationship between antiwar criticism and insurgent violence
relies on several assumptions which may appear problematic. In this section we address several possible
concerns.
Reverse Causation: Because we assume that “high mention weeks” are independent of the underlying
factors that also drive violence, our identification strategy is susceptible to concerns about reverse
causation. Our analysis addresses this issue in four ways. First, in all specifications we use a lagged term
week indicator interacted with satellite access. If the results are driven by issues in the pre-resolve or prepoll release week, then the lagged week variable should be significant. Second, although U.S. opinion
towards the war probably reflects violence levels in Iraq, the actual release of opinion polls and their
promotion in the media are more likely to be independent of week-to-week changes in violence. Tables 3
and 4 show that the results are largely consistent for both the media mentions and poll variables,
suggesting that the 7-10% estimated increase following “high mention” weeks is not driven by the prior
week’s level of violence. Third, there may be an omitted variable that influences when resolve statements
are made or polls are released in relation to attacks. This is addressed by dividing the sample into three
time periods. The importance of media mentions in explaining insurgent violence (by providing
39

The results from an analysis on the dynamics of insurgent response are available in Appendix Table 1.

24

information about the level of U.S. political resolve) should vary depending on how likely it is that
violence will affect the probability of a U.S. withdrawal. The estimate of this effect should be 0 in time
periods when the U.S. is unlikely to change policy even with dramatic changes in public criticism or public
opinion (i.e., in the period after Bush was re-elected and Republicans maintained control over the
Congress). Consistent with this expectation, we in fact find that violence differences between the high and
low satellite provinces are greater in periods where U.S. policy is more contested. However, this test will
be insufficient if the process generating the media variable is changing in the same periods of analysis.
Fourth, to further support the conclusion that the results are not biased by reverse causation, we conduct a
Granger causality test of attack levels on total “emboldening” statements. This tests to see how well the
level of attacks in previous periods predict the number of emboldening statements above and beyond the
forecasted number based on previous weeks statements. The results of this test provide evidence against
reverse causation as attacks do not Granger-cause media mentions.40
Third Factor Causation—Military Strategic Value: We assume that provinces that vary on the satellite
access measure are comparable in terms of violence except for satellite access—that is, we make a parallel
trend assumption. To the extent that provinces with high satellite television are associated with other
factors, then this strategy will fail to identify the causal relationship. To address concerns about third
factor causation, we interact our media mentions and poll release variables with other province level
variables that could potentially explain our effect, such as ethnic composition and the strategic importance
of different areas (presented in Table 7). These exercises test whether the estimates of the effect of political
speech rely on the variation of satellite access and not some other province-level variable. To do this, we
require a variable which may be plausibly associated with higher levels of attacks but not collinear with
the satellite access variable. Intuitively, areas with some strategic value may have different responses to
information about U.S. withdrawal than non-strategic areas. In Iraq, a major indicator of strategic value is
the presence of oil. We therefore interact a continuous variable for the fraction of total Iraqi oil produced
in the province with the media mentions variable. Oil production varies substantially across Iraq, and the
correlation of production level and satellite access is 0.4. There are substantially more attacks in low oil
producing regions relative to high oil regions (13.1 versus 5.6), which is consistent with a higher U.S.
emphasis on protecting “high oil” regions. To the extent that satellite access is really picking up the effect
of strategic value, the oil variable should produce similar results to the satellite variable. The results for
the “resolve” high mention count are presented in Panel A of Table 7, Columns (1)-(3). There does not

40

Test specifications, using anywhere from 1-4 week lags, result in F-statistic p-values of 0.51 (1 lag), 0.39 (2 lags),
0.36 (3 lags) and 0.42 for 4-lags. The asymptotic Chi-squared statistics (p-value) for these four tests are chi2(1)=0.43
(0.51), chi2(2)=0.79 (0.67), chi2(3)= 3.23 (0.36), and chi2(4)=3.92 (0.42), respectively.

25

appear to be a significant effect across oil producing regions in part because the standard errors on the
estimates are sizeable. Regressions using the “matched” sample, produces point estimates that are
substantially smaller (1.14 in pre-election season, 1.62 in the election season, and 0.91 in the post-election
season) and insignificant (results not reported).
Third Factor Causation—Ethnic Divisions: A similar concern could be raised about the relationship
between satellite access in the ethnic composition of regions. We therefore conduct a similar exercise
using ethnic identity, as measured by whether a province is “predominantly Sunni.” If there are differences
in responses to U.S. political discourse by ethnicity (or satellite variation is in some way driven by ethnic
differences), then our causal interpretation is false. If the variation in satellite access is identifying supplyside factors for the insurgency then ethnic composition should perform at least as well if not better in
generating higher attack rates in the subsequent periods. Most Sunni Arabs reside in central Iraq,
including the “Sunni Triangle”, an area that stretches northwest of Baghdad and encompasses Tikrit,
Ramadi, Samarra, and Fallujah. At least half of Iraq’s Sunni community lives in cities, such as Baghdad or
Mosul. The Sunni population forms the major base of the insurgency. There are more attacks in “high
Sunni” areas, consistent with the Sunni population participating in and aiding insurgent-led attacks.
Results from this specification are presented in Panel B of Table 7. There is no significant effect of poll
releases or media mentions on attack rates. There does appear to be some relationship in attack rates in the
week prior to resolve mentions and poll release dates.41
Plausibility of a Week-to-Week Response: We assume a relatively short time-frame for the response to
information about U.S. cost-sensitivity, and specifically that a week with 10 or more low resolve
statements will produce an insurgent response in the following week. We attempt to minimize concerns
about this assumption in several ways. First, we conduct a sensitivity analysis, varying the response time
to 2-weeks and 3-weeks. These results are reported in Table 6. We find that after a two week window the
effect diminishes over time. By the third week, there appears to be no significant effect. However, these
results should be interpreted with caution because of the clustering of high-resolve statement weeks. Thus,
few weeks had no association with either mentions or poll releases and these regressions may be overcontrolled. Second, as discussed below, the interpretation of the results could be limited to a timing
substitution response; insurgent groups may have a greater ability to shift the timing of attacks rather than
increase the overall amount of attacks they can produce. This response is more plausible on a week-toweek basis. Another explanation could be that there are a large number of groups in any given region that
have the potential to participate in violence. In periods with little motivation, these groups do not mobilize
41

Results including oil production, fraction Sunni, and satellite access is available in Appendix Table 2.

26

frequently and as a result only a fraction of these groups are actually participating. In this scenario,
information about U.S. cost-sensitivity serves as a mobilization incentive, motivating a larger fraction of
groups to participate. Thus while each group is producing the same amount of violence, the total number
of groups has increased, raising the total amount of violence. Third, substitution is limited by input factors
and thus may not be the only margin along which insurgents adjusts. There is little doubt that insurgent
groups are media savvy, and, to that end, are likely to seek not only the lowest cost means of producing
attacks but also the highest return for any given attack or set of attacks. This suggests the media salience
of increases in American fatalities makes short-term effects plausible and likely. Finally, the use of a oneweek window is a plausible but arbitrary assumption needed to limit the scope of the study. Future
research can examine different versions of the emboldenment view over longer or even shorter time
frames, or how insurgent groups determine the timing of their response.
Greater Variance in High Satellite Regions: Another possible concern is that high satellite regions on
average exhibit both higher levels of attacks and greater variance in attacks (See Table 1). Thus, the
observed effect may not be the result of greater access to information about U.S. policy, but might instead
be produced by the variability in the overall level of violence, which is larger in regions with satellite
access. Our response to this criticism is that very little is known about the underlying mechanism driving
increases in the variance of attacks (as opposed to just the levels of attacks). If it is due to the strategic
choice of technology or targets then the higher variance may indeed be an outcome of the strategic
substitution by insurgents (to cluster attacks to provide maximum impact). We do find an association
between violence levels and variance that varies differentially by satellite access. To the extent this is
simply due to some inherent aspect of violence rather than the strategic choice of insurgents, it limits the
relevance of these results.
Increased sensitivity to other factors in High Satellite Regions: A separate but related concern is that high
satellite regions may simply be more sensitive to a variety of issues that might occur at the same time as
resolve statements. Immediately before the Iraq elections, the level of violence does not appear to be
correlated with violence on a week-to-week basis. A comparable analysis of Al-Jazeera media accounts of
the Iraqi election (available on a variety of media sources including broadcast television, radio, and
satellite) has no significant effects on violence levels by satellite regions.42

42

Elections in Iraq refer to the legislative elections which took place Jan 30, 2005.

27

7. CONCLUSION
Overall, the results presented in this paper suggest several important facts. First, the findings
suggest that there is an explicit and quantifiable cost to public debate during wartime in the form of
increased attacks. Based on these results, it appears that Iraqi insurgent groups believe that when the U.S.
political landscape is more uncertain, initiating a higher level of attacks increases the likelihood that the
U.S. will reduce the scope of its engagement in the conflict. However, the magnitude of the response by
Iraqi insurgent groups is relatively small. To the extent that U.S. political speech does affect insurgent
incentives, it changes things only by about 7-10 percent. The estimated effects, while consistent in
direction across different specifications, also vary considerably in magnitude. Given the relatively large
standard errors and the potential lack of robustness to specification, these coefficients should be interpreted
with caution—more dispositive of the cost-sensitivity of insurgents than a precise estimate of their
elasticity to increased costs.
Second, the insurgent response to low resolve periods may not represent an overall increase in the
total number of attacks, but rather a change in the timing of attacks.43 Because it may be difficult and
costly to increase the frequency of attacks in a particular time period, insurgent groups may only seek to do
this when the returns are sufficiently high. New information about U.S. cost-sensitivity increases the
perceived return to violence and thus insurgent groups condense the violence they would have committed
over several weeks into a shorter time horizon. To the extent that these additional attacks represent timing
decisions designed to manipulate U.S. public opinion, simply recognizing this fact reduces some of the
strategic value of that substitution.
Third, regardless of whether the observed effect represents an overall increase or inter-temporal
substitution, the evidence in this study indicates that insurgent groups are strategic actors that respond to
the incentives created by the policies and actions of the counterinsurgent force, rather than groups driven
by purely ideological concerns with little sensitivity to costs. There appears to be a systematic response of
Iraqi insurgent groups to information about the U.S. willingness to remain in Iraq and/or public support for
the war. U.S. counterinsurgency strategy should recognize that incentives, whether in the form of
deterrence or inducements, can be effective in reducing both insurgent recruitment and the willingness of
individuals to participate in attacks, and in encouraging individuals to collaborate with the government or
withhold passive support to the insurgents. Support for the view that insurgent groups respond in part to
incentives set by U.S. politics also provides insight into understanding the strategy and relative importance
of different insurgent objectives. Insurgent groups may, for example, be willing to trade off destabilizing

43

This substitution effect across both time and type of action has been observed in research on crime. See, for
example, Levitt 1995 and Iyengar 2006. For a detailed overview on the relationship between punishment, crime and
cost-sensitivity, see Ehrlich 1996.

28

the Iraqi National Government for imposing increased costs on the United States (in the form of attacks) in
order to reduce U.S. participation.
The argument that insurgent groups respond in predictable ways to costs and incentives - in this
case, to new information about U.S. cost-sensitivity - has several implications for improving US COIN
strategy. To the extent insurgent groups appear to respond rationally, counterinsurgency should place
greater weight on deterrence and incapacitation rather than search and destroy missions. Future
consideration regarding the production function that dictates the level of violence insurgent groups are able
to produce, and the potential costs which may reduce violence, are of important areas for future research.
Finally, it is not possible to determine from these results the overall benefits or costs of public
debate, or its net effect on counterinsurgency effectiveness. One issue is how to weigh the difficult tradeoff between U.S. and Iraqi casualties. If the goal of U.S. policy is to minimize harm to Iraqi civilians and
to shift the costs and risks of the conflict from non-combatants to U.S. forces, more public debate may be
better. In addition to the potential social preference for protecting civilians, there are pragmatic reasons
why such a shift may be desirable. Because military targets tend to be more difficult to successfully
attack, the total number of fatalities (civilian plus military) tends to decline as targeting increases. The
targeting also forces insurgents to reveal themselves to the military (more so in certain types of attacks),
making detection easier. Third, protecting and reducing civilian fatalities may increase support for the
counterinsurgent among the general populace—consistent with the “hearts and minds” approach to
counterinsurgency. As mentioned above, there may be additional benefits to a vigorous public debate,
from improving the quality of political and military policy choices to reducing the moral hazard effect of
unconditional support for the incumbent government. Without analyzing and measuring the additional
consequences, it is not possible to determine if antiwar criticism of U.S. policy is on balance bad. The
direct consideration of how to adjust political speech to address this issue is therefore beyond the scope of
this paper.

29

REFERENCES
ABC News' Polling Methodology and Standards “The Nuts and Bolts of Our Public Opinion Surveys”
(prepared by: Gary Langer and Daniel Merkle) available at
http://abcnews.go.com/sections/us/DailyNews/poll_methodology.html
Aylwin-Foster, Nigel (2005) “Changing the Army for Counterinsurgency Operations,” Military Review
(November-December): 2-15.
Berman, Eli, and David Laitin (2005) "Hard Targets: Evidence on the Tactical Use of Suicide Attacks,"
NBER Working Paper No. 11740.
Berman, Eli (2003) "Hamas, Taliban, and the Jewish Underground: An Economist's View of Radical
Religious Militias," NBER Working Paper No. 10004.
Berrebi, Claude. 2003. "Evidence About the Link Between Education, Poverty and Terrorism Among
Palestinians," Princeton University Industrial Relations Sections Working Paper #477.
Berrebi, Claude and Esteban F. Klor (2006) “On Terrorism and Electoral Outcomes: Theory and Evidence
from the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50(6): 899-925.
Bloom, Nick (2007) “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks” NBER Working Paper No. 13385
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan (2005) “The Quality of Terror,” American Journal of Political Science, 49(3):
515-530.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan and Eric S. Dickson (2007) “The Propaganda of the Deed: Terrorism,
Counterterrorism, and Mobilization.” American Journal of Political Science, 51(2): 364381.
Bush, George W. (1999) “A Period of Consequences,” Address at the Citadel, South Carolina, September
23.
Bush, George W. (2004) “President Bush Reaffirms Resolve to War on Terror, Iraq and Afghanistan,”
White House Press Release, March 19.
Bush, George W. (2005) National Strategy for Victory in Iraq (Washington, DC: White House/National
Security Council), available at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/infocus/iraq/iraq_strategy_nov2005.html
Bush, George W. (2007a), “President’s Address to the Nation,” Office of the Press Secretary,
January 10, 2007, accessed at http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2007/01/200701107.html
Bush, George W. (2007b) “Press Conference by the President,” Office of the Press Secretary,
February 14, accessed at http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2007/02/20070214-2.html.
Byman, Daniel (2007) Understanding Proto-Insurgencies (Santa Monica: RAND).
Byman, Daniel (2006) “Friends Like These: Counterinsurgency and the War on Terrorism,” International
Security 31 (2): 79-115.
Central Intelligence Agency (n.d.) Guide to the Analysis of Insurgency (Washington, D.C.)
Cochrane, Paul (2006) Media on the Front Lines: Arab Satellite TV in Iraq (American University in Cairo
Press).
Daves, Robert P. and Frank Newport (2005) “Pollsters Under Attack: 2004 Election Incivility and Its
Consequences” Public Opinion Quarterly 69 (5): 670-681.
Dehghanpisheh, Babak (2007) “The ‘Body Contractors,’” Newsweek, December 15.
Diamond, Larry (2005) Squandered Victory: The American Occupation and the Bungled Effort to
Bring Democracy to Iraq (New York: Times Books).
Ehrlich, Isaac (1996) “Crime Punishment and the Market for Offenses” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 10 (1).
Eisenstadt, Michael and Jeffrey White (2005) “Assessing Iraq's Sunni Arab Insurgency,” The Washington
Institute for Near East Policy (December).
Fearon, James and David Laitin (2004) “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” American Political
Science Review 97 (1): 75- 90.
Fearon, James (1995) “Rationalist Explanations for War," International Organization 49 (3): 379-414.

30

Fearon, James (2007) “Economic Development, Insurgency, and Civil War,” forthcoming in Elhanan
Helpman, ed., Institutions and Economic Performance (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Fettweis, Christopher (2007-8) "America's Dangerous Obsession: Credibility and the War on Terror,"
Political Science Quarterly 122 (4): 607-633.
Gambetta, Diego, ed. 2005. Making Sense of Suicide Missions (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Galula, David (1964) Counterinsurgency Warfare: Theory and Practice (New York: Praeger).
Gelpi, Christopher, Peter D. Feaver, and Jason Riefler (2005/06) "Success Matters: Casualty
Sensitivity and the War in Iraq." International Security (30) 3: 7-46.
Glaeser, Edward L (2005) “The Political Economy of Hatred.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1):
45-86.
Gordon, Michael and Bernard Trainor (2006), Cobra II: The Inside Story of the Invasion and Occupation
of Iraq (New York: Pantheon).
Government Accounting Office (2007a) “Rebuilding Iraqi: Integrated Strategic Plan Needed to Help
Restore Iraq’s Oil and Electricity Sectors” GAO-07-677 (May).
Government Accounting Office (2007b) “Securing, Stabilizing, and Rebuilding Iraq: Iraqi
Government Has Not Met Most Legislative, Security, and Economic Benchmarks,” GAO-01-1195
(September).
Greenstone, Michael (2007) “Is the ‘Surge’ Working: Some New Facts,” NBER Working Paper No.
13458.
Hashim, Ahmed (2006) Insurgency and Counterinsurgency in Iraq (Ithaca: Cornell University Press).
Hoffman, Bruce, and Gordon McCormick (2004) "Terrorism, Signaling, and Suicide Attacks," Studies in
Conflict and Terrorism 27: 243-81.
Holmes, Stephen. 2005. "Al Qaeda, September 11, 2001." In Gambetta, Diego, ed. Making Sense
of Suicide Missions. (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
Huntington, Samuel P. (1962) “Patterns of Violence in World Politics,” in Huntington, ed., Changing
Patterns of Military Politics (New York: Free Press).
Iannaccone, Lawrence. 2003. "The Market for Martyrs." Global Prosperity Initiative Working Paper 48.
Iyengar, Radha (2005) "I'd Rather Be Hanged for a Sheep than a Lamb: The Unintended
Consequences of California's Three Strikes Law". American Law & Economics Association
Annual Meetings. American Law & Economics Association 15th Annual Meeting. Working Paper
15.
Iyengar, Radha and Jonathan Monten (2008) “Understanding Insurgency: Lessons from the World of
Organized Crime,” manuscript, Harvard University.
Kahl, Colin (2007) “COIN of the Realm: Is There a Future for Counterinsurgency,” Foreign Affairs 86 (6):
169-175.
Kaufman, Chaim (2007) “What Can We Do In Iraq?” Harvard International Review 28:4: 44-50.
Kimmage, Daniel and Kathleen Ridolfo (2007) “Iraq’s Networked Insurgents,” Foreign Policy
(November/December).
Krepenevich, Andrew (2005) “How to Win in Iraq,” Foreign Affairs (September/October).
Krepenevich, Andrew (1986) The Army and Vietnam (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press).
Krueger, Alan B and Jitka Maleckova (2006) “Does Poverty Cause Terrorism” in Grusky and Szelenyi,
eds., The Inequality Reader (Westview Press).
Krueger, Alan, and Jitka Malečková. (2003). "Education, Poverty and Terrorism: Is There a Causal
Connection?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4): 119-44.
Los Angeles Times (2003) "War with Iraq: Arab TV Shows A Different Conflict," April 5.
Malkasian, Carter (2006) “Signaling Resolve, Democratization and the First Battle of Fallujah,”
Journal of Strategic Studies 29 (3): 423-52.
Mann, Thomas E and Garry Orren “To Poll or Not to Poll...and Other Questions” in Mann and Orren, eds.
Media Polls in American Politics (Washignton DC: Brookings Institution)
Mercer, Jonathan (1996) Reputation and International Politics (Ithaca: Cornell University Press).
Mueller, John (2005) “The Iraq Syndrome,” Foreign Affairs 84 (6): 44-54.

31

Myers, Steven Lee and Alissa Rubin, “U.S. Scales Back Political Goals for Iraqi Unity,” New York Times,
November 25, 2007, p. A1.
Nagl, John A. (2002) Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya to Vietnam: Learning to Eat Soup
with a Knife (New York: Praeger).
Department of State, Office Intelligence and Research (2006) “Iraq Television Viewership Poll,”
October 16, accessed at http://www.stanhopecentre.org/iraqmediapoll.shtml.
Pape, Robert A. (2003) “The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism,” American Political Science Review,
97 (3): 1-19.
Posen, Barry (2006) “Exit Strategy: How to Disengage From Iraq in 18 Months,” Boston Review
(January/February).
Press, Daryl (2005) Calculating Credibility: How Leaders Assess Military Threats (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press).
Ricks, Thomas (2006) Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in Iraq (New York: Penguin Press).
Ross, Brian (2006) “Many Media Savvy Groups Make for Tough Opponents,” ABC World News, March
20.
Shannon, Vaughn P. and Michael Dennis (2007) “Militant Islam and the Futile Fight for Reputation,”
Security Studies 16 (2): 287-317.
Schelling, Thomas (1996) Arms and Influence (New Haven: Yale University Press).
Snyder, Jack L. (1991) Myths of Empire: Domestic Politics and International Ambition (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press).
Sprinzak, Ehud. 2000. "Rational Fanatics." Foreign Policy 120: 66-74
Tilghman, Andrew (2007) “The Myth of AQI,” Washington Monthly (October).
United Nations Development Programme (2005) Iraq Living Conditions Survey 2004 (Baghdad:
Central Organization for Statistics and Information Technology, Ministry of Planning and
Development Cooperation).
U.S. Army/U.S. Marine Corps (2007) Counterinsurgency Field Manual (FM 3-24) (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Walton, Dale C. (2002) The Myth of Inevitable U.S. Defeat in Vietnam (New York: Taylor and Francis).
Welch, Richard E. (1974) “American Atrocities in the Philippines: The Indictment and the
Response,” The Pacific Historical Review (43) 2: 233-253.
White House (2007) “Benchmark Assessment Report,” September 14, at:
www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2007/09/20070914.html.

32

0

200

400

600

800

Figure 1. Trend in Attacks and Fatalities After U.S. Invasion of Iraq

01jul2003

01jul2004

01jul2005
date

01jul2006

01jul2007

Number of Attacks per week
4-week Moving Average Attacks per week

0

100

200

300

400

500

Figure 1A. Number of Attacks in Iraqi Provinces each week

01jan2005

01jul2005

01jan2006

01jul2006
date

01jan2007

01jul2007

Number of Deaths per week
4-week Moving Average Deaths per week

Figure 1B. Number of Fatalities in Iraqi Provinces each week
Notes: The number of attacks per region-week is defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or
more persons. The data does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks which
result in only injuries are not included. Data and methods used to construct weekly attack counts are discussed in
appendix A.

33

0

5

re so lve
10
15

20

25

Figure 2. Number of “resolve” mentions per week in major media outlets

01jan2005

01jan2006

01jan2007

01jan2008

date

Election Season
Pre-Democrats
November 2, 2004- November 9, 2005November 8, 2005 November 7, 2006
Mean (sd)
Mean (sd)
4.22 (3.41)
6.29 (4.42)

Post-Democrats
November 8, 2006November 1, 2007
Mean (sd)
6.42 (4.40)

Notes: Mentions are any article in a major media outlet which meets the search criteria. Details on the counting
procedure are available in Appendix A. High mention resolve weeks are: Nov 1, 2004; Nov 8, 2004; Nov 29, 2004;
Feb 14, 2005, Nov 14, 2005; Feb 27, 2006; Apr 17, 2006; Jul 24, 2006; Aug 7, 2006; Sep 4, 2006; Oct 16, 2006; Oct
23, 2006; Nov 6, 2006; Nov 13, 2006; Dec 4, 2006; Dec 18, 2006; Dec 25, 2006; Jan 8, 2007; Jan 22, 2007; Feb 12,
2007; Apr 2, 2007; Apr 23, 2007; May 7, 2007; May 28, 2007.

34

0

N u mb e r o f p o lls re le a sed
1
2

3

Figure 3. Number of Public Opinion Polls released per week in major media outlets

01jan2005

01jul2005

01jan2006

01jul2006
date

01jan2007

Pre-Democrats
Election Season
November 2, 2004- November 9, 2005November 8, 2005 November 7, 2006

01jul2007

Post-Democrats
November 8, 2006November 1, 2007

Notes: Polls included are polls available in major media outlets after release. Polls included are CNN/Gallup/USA
Today polls, Fox, and CBS polls. Details on the relevant questions included are available in Appendix A. High
mention poll weeks are: Jan 19, 2005; Feb 9, 2005, Mar 2, 200, Jun 8, 2005; Jun 29, 2005; Aug 10, 2005; Aug 31,
2005; Sep 14, 2005; Sep 21, 2005; Oct 12, 2005; Oct 26, 2005; Nov 2, 2005 ; Nov 16, 2005; Nov 23, 2005; Jan 11,
2006; Jan 25, 2006; Mar 15, 2006; Apr 12, 2006; Jun 14, 2006; Jun 28, 2006; Jul 26, 2006; Aug 2, 2006; Sep 20,
2006; Dec 13, 2006 ; Jan 3, 2007; Jan 10, 2007; Jan 17, 2007; Feb 7, 2007; Feb 28, 2007; Apr 28, 2007; Sep 12 2007

35

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics about Regions by Satellite Access
(1)
(2)
High Satellite Access
Low Satellite
Access
Regions Included
Anbar, Babil, Erbil,
Basrah, Diyala
Ninawa, Sulamaniya,
Karbala, Maysan,
Tamim
Najaf, Salah ad
Din, Wasit
Avg. Regional Access
0.59
0.25
(Std Dev)
(0.07)
(0.09)
Avg Number of Attacks
16.52
11.39
(per week)
(17.44)
(24.69)
Avg. Weekly Non-U.S.
17.37
12.82
Fatalities
(20.13)
(18.36)
Avg. Weekly U.S.
1.24
1.39
Fatalities
(2.13)
(0.73)
Regional Demographics
Avg. Population Density
(population per sq miles)
Pre-War Fraction Sunni

-

0.33
(-)
213.26
(134.59)
131.94
(109.53)
3.45
(2.39)

98.16

82.11

8929

0.58

0.41

0.42

0.019

0.30

101,661

100,000

62

78

0.13

0.11

0.605
0.77

0.62
0.70

0.78
0.79

0.084
931.3

0.096
913.3

0.014
833

0.24

0.32

0.26

Household Persons and Infrastructure Characteristics
Household Size
% of Population
0.077
Displaced Due to War
Median Household
116,341
Income (in Iraqi Dinars)
Safe, Stable Drinking
60.5
water
Malnutrition Rate
0.12
Education and Labor Market
Literacy Rate
Net Primary School
Attendance
Unemployment Rate
Median Hourly wage
(Iraqi Dinar)
% of Households with
Firearms

(3)
Baghdad

Notes: The number of attacks per region-week is defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more
persons. The data does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks which result
in only injuries are not included. Household characteristics are from UNDP Life Survey.

36

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics on Media Mentions and Poll Release weeks (Excluding Baghdad)
Pre-Election Season
Election Season
Post-Election
November 2, 2004November 9, 2005November 8, 2006November 8, 2005
November 7, 2006
November 1, 2007
Panel A: “Resolve” Media Mentions
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
Mention Mention
Mention Mention Mention Mention
Weeks
Weeks
Weeks
Weeks
Weeks
Weeks
# of Resolve Weeks
Avg. Number of Resolve
Mentions
Avg. Number of Attacks
Avg. Number of Attacks
in Previous Week
Avg. Number of Attacks
in Subsequent Week
Avg. Number of Fatalities
(total)
Avg. Number of attacks in
high satellite provinces in
the week after
Avg. Number of attacks in
low satellite provinces in
the week after
Panel B: Poll Release

# of Poll Weeks
Avg. Number of Attacks
Avg. Number of Attacks
in Previous Week
Avg. Number of Attacks
in Subsequent Week
Avg. Number of Fatalities
(total)
Avg. Number of attacks in
high satellite provinces in
the week after
Avg. Number of attacks in
low satellite provinces in
the week after

4
12.93

49
3.59

8
12.67

44
4.88

12
14.46

40
5.27

7.41
6.55

5.91
5.98

16.24
17.31

13.68
13.29

15.62
16.82

10.50
9.91

8.76

5.79

17.43

13.45

14.97

10.87

14.10

11.73

16.59

15.18

21.22

16.12

6.19

6.48

20.24

14.84

21.57

14.22

8.92

5.30

12.92

12.86

11.69

9.94

Poll
Release
Weeks

No Poll
Weeks

Poll
Release
Weeks

No Poll
Weeks

Poll
Release
Weeks

No Poll
Weeks

12
6.22
5.54

41
5.92
6.26

11
15.77
14.63

42
13.32
14.03

8
13.83
13.44

44
14.27
12.62

5.71

6.15

14.97

13.77

15.92

13.13

11

11.04

14.53

14.95

17.87

16.81

6.43

6.67

14.99

17.33

13.73

15.89

6.01

5.11

14.64

12.21

13.89

12.81

Notes: The number of attacks per region-week is defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more
persons. The data does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks which result in
only injuries are not included. Satellite television access estimates from UK State Department Survey.

37

Table 3. Estimate of the Relationship between Attack Levels and “Resolve” Media mentions in Various Time Periods (Excluding Baghdad)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

32.24

32.24

Election
Season

PostElection

10.04
PreElection
Season

28.99

PostElection

10.04
PreElection
Season

(5)
Attacks
28.99

10.04
PreElection
Season

28.99

32.24

Election
Season

Election
Season

PostElection

Panel A: “Resolve Mentions”
(satellite access)*(high mention
week)

0.92
(2.42)

8.76
(6.54)

4.88
(3.19)

1.24
(2.47)

7.49**
(3.07)

6.87*
(3.25)

-1.12
(2.25)

6.16
(6.44)

2.69
(5.50)

(satellite access)*(one week
before the high mention week)

-1.43
(2.55)

9.92
(4.37)

4.50
(4.93)

-0.68
(2.69)

5.18
(4.83)

4.21
(4.99)

-7.22*
(4.06)

3.74
(5.83)

-0.16
(4.00)

(satellite access)*(one week after
the high mention week)

1.65
(3.39)

9.82**
(4.79)

12.53*
(6.17)

3.48
(3.06)

5.62*
(3.63)

10.08*
(5.58)

3.58
(5.14)

5.32*
(3.32)

8.79*
(4.95)

R-squared
Panel B: Poll Release
(satellite access)*(release week)

0.0152

0.0237

0.1233

0.2048

0.3078

0.4356

0.2539

0.4263

0.4978

-4.24
(2.95)

1.60
(6.81)

19.34
(14.13)

-4.74
(2.87)

4.40
(7.10)

9.12
(13.79)

-4.21
(2.40)

3.30
(7.49)

2.73
(4.04)

(satellite access)*(one week
before release)

1.40
(2.93)

-4.94
(5.43)

2.89
(7.94)

0.22
(2.22)

-3.93
(4.78)

2.79
(7.79)

-1.62
(2.40)

-4.62
(4.08)

3.05
(8.29)

(satellite access)*(one week after
release)

-0.09
(2.15)

7.12*
(3.52)

9.95**
(4.42)

-0.90
(1.65)

4.68**
(2.15)

10.34**
(4.41)

-1.02
(1.60)

4.19*
(2.65)

9.50**
(4.08)

Dependent Variable
Mean

R-squared
0.0080
0.0131
0.0910
0.1975
0.2929
0.3986
0.2931
0.4266
0.5124
Province FE
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Week FE
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Observations
392
507
473
392
507
473
392
507
473
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province levels are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a
**(*, ***). Dependent Variable is number of attacks per region-week. Attacks are defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more persons. Data
and methods used to construct weekly attack counts are discussed in appendix A. Also included in the regression but not reported are lag and lead indicator variables for
high mention weeks which are 1 if it is one week before and one week after a high mention week respectively. Control variables in specification with out province fixed
effects include household size, avg. number of displaced persons, median household income, malnutrition rate, literacy rate labor force participation rate, and avg.
hourly wage. Pre-Election Season is November 2, 2004-November 8, 2005. Election Season is November 9, 2005-November 7, 2006. Post-Election is November 8,
2006-November 1, 2007

38

Table 4. Estimate of the Relationship between Fatalities and Media Variables in Matched Regions (Excluding Baghdad)

Dependent Variable
Mean
Panel A: "Resolve Mentions"
(satellite access)*(high mention week)

(1)
(2)
(3)
Pre-Election
Election
Season
Season
Post-Election
Number of Non-U.S. Fatalities
11.02
14.79
16.92

(4)
(5)
(6)
Pre-Election
Election
Season
Season
Post-Election
Number of U.S. Military Fatalities
0.88
0.69
0.73

-1.45
(5.78)

-0.66
(6.20)

7.79
(9.2873)

0.09
(0.89)

0.33
(0.27)

-0.16
(0.35)

(satellite access)*(one week
before the high mention week)

0.45
(3.97)

-2.01
(4.62)

-4.42
(4.2)

-0.07
(0.39)

-0.06
(0.44)

0.65
(0.71)

(satellite access)*(one week after
the high mention week)

-2.50*
(1.60)

-3.23*
(1.91)

-11.88
(7.07)

0.01
(0.63)

1.04*
(0.62)

1.27*
(0.75)

R-squared
Panel B: Poll Release Date
(satellite access)*(release week)

0.200

0.4136

0.3620

0.5320

0.7162

0.5051

-1.25**
(4.90)

3.32
(2.85)

2.89
(9.09)

-1.31**
(0.46)

-0.50
(0.37)

-0.15
(0.36)

(satellite access)*(one week
before release)

1.67
(5.94)

-5.76
(4.23)

3.16
(6.81)

-0.70**
(0.28)

0.29
(0.63)

0.07
(0.22)

(satellite access)*(one week after
release)

-1.07
(8.42)

-3.68**
(1.51)

-12.50**
(5.79)

-0.001
(0.36)

1.06***
(0.23)

0.68*
(0.41)

R-squared
0.1850
0.4157
0.3619
0.5412
0.7172
0.5036
Province FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Week FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
392
507
473
392
507
473
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a **
(*, ***). Dependent Variable is number of non-U.S. (including Iraqi Security forces and Civilians) and number of U.S. Military fatalities. Pre-Election Season is
November 2, 2004-November 8, 2005. Election Season is November 9, 2005-November 7, 2006. Post-Election is November 8, 2006-November 1, 2007

39

Table 5. Estimate of the Relationship between Attack Levels and Media Variables in Matched Regions (Excluding Baghdad)
(1)
Dependent Variable
Mean

Panel A: Resolve Mention Variable
(satellite access)*(high mention week)

28.99
Election
Season

(2)

(3)

Attacks
32.24
16.21
PostElection
Election
Season

(4)

(5)

18.07
PostElection

0.69
Election
Season

(6)
(7)
US Fatalities
0.73
0.96
PostElection
Election
Season

(8)
0.98
PostElection

6.16
(6.44)

2.69
(5.50)

0.79
(0.61)

0.55
(0.59)

0.33
(0.27)

-0.16
(0.35)

1.08
(0.80)

0.29
(0.99)

(satellite access)*(one week
before the high mention week)

3.74
(5.83)

-0.16
(9.00)

-0.20
(0.64)

0.98
(0.64)

-0.06
(0.44)

0.65
(0.71)

-0.12
(0.58)

0.18
(0.77)

(satellite access)*(one week after
the high mention week)

5.32*
(3.32)

8.79*
(4.95)

1.60**
(0.64)

1.29**
(0.64)

1.04*
(0.62)

1.27*
(0.75)

0.04
(0.63)

1.27*
(0.74)

3.30
(7.49)

2.73
(4.04)

1.44
(1.25)

4.43
(4.75)

-0.50
(0.37)

-0.15
(0.36)

0.52
(0.79)

-0.01
(0.24)

(satellite access)*(one week
before release)

-4.62
(4.08)

3.05
(8.29)

4.80
(2.32)

4.82
(7.16)

0.29
(0.63)

0.07
(0.22)

0.84
(0.57)

0.46
(0.95)

(satellite access)*(one week after
release)

4.19*
(2.65)

9.50**
(4.08)

1.75*
(1.01)

2.55**
(1.12)

1.06***
(0.23)

0.68*
(0.41)

0.49**
(0.24)

0.55**
(0.25)

Y

Y

Panel B: Poll Mention Variable
(satellite access)*(release week)

Province & Week FE

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Matched
Matched
Matched
Matched
Province
Province
Province
Province
Sample
All
All
All
All
Observations
507
473
292
262
507
473
292
262
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a **
(*, ***). Dependent Variable is number of attacks per region-week. Attacks are defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more persons. The data
does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks which result in only injuries are not included. Data and methods used to
construct weekly attack counts are discussed in appendix A. Also included in the regression but not reported are lag and lead indicator variables for high mention weeks
which are 1 if it is one week before and one week after a high mention week respectively. Matching characteristics include household size, avg. number of displaced
persons, median household income, malnutrition rate, literacy rate labor force participation rate, and avg. hourly wage. Pre-Election Season is November 2, 2004November 8, 2005. Election Season is November 9, 2005-November 7, 2006. Post-Election is November 8, 2006-November 1, 2007

40

Table 6. Dynamics of Insurgent Response to Resolve Statements and Poll Releases
(1)
Pre-Election
Season

(2)
(3)
Election
Season
Post-Election
Number of Attacks
28.99
32.24

(4)
Pre-Election
Season

Post-Election

0.88

(5)
Election
Season
US Fatalities
0.69

(6)

Dependent Variable
Mean
Panel A: "Resolve Mentions"
(satellite access)*(high mention/poll
release week)

7.81
(6.08)

0.33
(7.04)

1.48
(5.69)

0.11
(0.96)

0.51
(0.37)

0.28
(0.31)

(satellite access)*(one week after
the high mention/ poll release week)

3.90***
(0.99)

5.53***
(1.53)

3.85***
(1.26)

0.01
(0.67)

0.63***
(0.23)

0.62*
(0.34)

(satellite access)*(two weeks after
the high mention/poll release week)

1.44
(2.07)

3.66**
(1.60)

3.37**
(1.16)

0.10
(0.24)

0.40
(0.31)

0.56**
(0.22)

(satellite access)*(three weeks after
the high mention/poll release week)

1.52
(2.25)

2.98
(2.12)

1.37
(2.22)

0.16
(0.18)

0.51*
(0.29)

0.23
(0.43)

(satellite access)*(four weeks after
the high mention/poll release week)
Panel B: Poll Mention Variable
(satellite access)*(high mention/poll
release week)

0.67
(4.65)

1.06
(3.50)

0.94
(3.81)

0.29
(0.26)

0.16
(0.14)

0.45
(0.45)

1.04
(4.15)

2.66
(7.34)

18.14
(13.84)

-1.29**
(0.52)

-0.58
(0.37)

-0.22
(0.32)

(satellite access)*(one week after
the high mention/ poll release week)

4.58***
(1.19)

5.88***
(1.70)

5.60***
(1.51)

-0.03
(0.39)

0.35
(0.24)

0.68*
(0.40)

(satellite access)*(two weeks after
the high mention/poll release week)

1.72
(1.64)

3.81
(3.76)

3.17**
(1.23)

0.15
(0.23)

0.43
(0.29)

0.49
(0.53)

(satellite access)*(three weeks after
the high mention/poll release week)

0.25
(2.05)

2.56
(4.51)

2.57
(3.66)

-0.01
(0.27)

0.45
(0.29)

0.14
(0.29)

10.04

0.73

(satellite access)*(four weeks after
0.24
1.76
1.83
-0.34
0.18
0.06
the high mention/poll release week)
(2.44)
(5.21)
(4.20)
(0.34)
(0.13)
(0.40)
Province & Week FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
392
507
473
392
507
473
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with ** (*,
***). Dependent Variable is number of attacks per region-week. Attacks are defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more persons. The data
does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks which result in only injuries are not included. Data and methods used to
construct weekly attack counts are discussed in appendix A. All regressions include an interaction term that is equal to the satellite access variable one week before high
resolve mentions/poll release.

41

Table 7. Estimate of the Relationship between Attack Levels and Province Level Characteristics in Various Time Periods
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

10.04

28.99

32.24

10.04

28.99

32.24

Pre-Election
Season

Election
Season
(excludes
Election Week)

Post-Election

Pre-Election
Season

Election
Season
(excludes
Election Week)

Post-Election

-5.25
(11.28)

-8.89
(14.31)

-6.81
(7.81)

-0.72
(5.88)

4.21
(12.31)

-6.73
(9.2225)

(oil)*(one week
before the high mention/release week)

-2.32
(8.79)

-8.83
(12.39)

-6.98
(8.09)

1.44
(5.93)

-1.56
(11.84)

-5.57
(9.13)

(oil)*(one week after
the high mention/release week)

-8.93
(9.69)

-3.36
(12.76)

-2.37
(8.18)

-3.54
(5.75)

1.85
(12.08)

1.86
(9.13)

R-squared
Panel B: Ethnic Distribution
(predominantly Sunni)*(high
mention/release week)

3.72
(3.73)

0.09
(4.71)

2.43
(2.63)

2.01
(1.93)

5.45
(3.86)

-2.45
(3.12)

(predominantly Sunni)*(one week
before the high mention/release week)

2.52
(2.83)

4.45
(4.02)

7.49***
(2.70)

-0.14
(1.94)

2.76
(4.11)

9.75***
(3.26)

(predominantly Sunni)*(one week after
the high mention/release week)

-1.82
(2.79)

3.61
(4.21)

-0.72
(2.76)

1.07
(2.01)

3.51
(4.07)

2.34
(3.21)

Dependent Variable
Mean

Panel A: Oil Production
(oil)*(high mention/release week)

Attacks

R-squared
Media Variable
Resolve
Resolve
Resolve
Poll
Polls
Polls
Province & Week FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
392
507
473
392
507
473
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a **
(*, ***). Dependent Variable is number of attacks per region-week. Attacks are defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more persons. The data
does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks which result in only injuries are not included. Data and methods used to
construct weekly attack counts are discussed in appendix A. Oil variable is defined as percent of total Iraqi oil production in province (source: Revenue Watch
Institute). Pre-Election Season is November 2, 2004-November 8, 2005. Election Season is November 9, 2005-November 7, 2006. Post-Election is November 8, 2006November 1, 2007.

42

APPENDIX 1: DATA SOURCES

Data for this paper is available at people.rwj.harvard.edu/~riyengar/. Questions about data and
analysis may be directed to riyengar@rwj.harvard.edu or jonathan_monten@ksg.harvard.edu.

Attacks and Fatalities
US Fatalities
Daily data on coalition deaths comes from iCasualties.org. We downloaded the data from
http://icasualties.org/oif/Details.aspx, which lists each death individually. We then aggregated the data
by week. A fatality is included if any of the following occur:
• a news story or obituary that reports the death of a US service member is released (this must
also be confirmed by the DoD),
• Centcom or the Multi-National Force in Iraq (MNF) releases the name of a soldier who has
died (Centcom releases must be confirmed by the DoD),
• the DoD itself releases the name of a soldier who has died,
• the name of a soldier not already recorded appears in the weekly updated Department of
Records listing of Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) fatalities.
http://icasualties.org/oif/Methodology.aspx.

Iraqi Civilian Fatalities
Our primary source for data on violent civilian fatalities comes from the IraqBodyCount.org (IBC)
website. The principal researchers are Hamit Dardagan and John Sloboda. It is important to note
upfront that the website is partisan—that is, anti war—but their methodology is conservative and seeks
to provide an accurate lower bound for the number of violent civilian deaths reported. The data were
downloaded from http://www.iraqbodycount.org/database/.
Once there are two news sources reporting an incident, two measures are constructed,
reportedminimum and reportedmaximum. If multiple numbers are reported, the lowest is entered as
reportedminimum. This can be zero if “zero deaths” is reported. However, a wording like “unable to
confirm any violent civilian deaths” is not a report of zero deaths and thus is not entered in either
column. Moreover, when the report does not mention civilians specifically, this number is entered in
the reportedmaximum variable but zero is entered into the reportedminimum variable unless the
proportion of violent civilian deaths is given or a similar detail is given.) If a “family” is reported
killed, this is entered as three deaths.
Attacks by enemy combatants
The monthly data for troop strength comes from the Brookings Iraq. Information may be accessed at
http://www3.brookings.edu/fp/saban/iraq/index.pdf.
The table was assembled by Brookings from a variety of news sources (a list is available in the
footnotes of the Iraq Index).

Media Mentions Count

The script is written in Ruby using the Mechanize and Hpricot libraries. It navigates to ProQuest's
homepage, and iterates through a sequence of search terms, each of which combines a government
official's name with one or more buzz words, e.g. "bush and embolden and iraq." For each search, the
43

broadest range of articles available through ProQuest is returned, and then the script sorts the
publication dates of the articles into a weekly tally, ranging from Jan 1, 2003 to the present. For
analysis purposes, the tallies are aggregated across search terms.
Search Terms:
“<Official’s Name>” + “Resolve!”
“<Official’s Name>” + “embolden!” + “insurg!”
Officials included:
President: George W. Bush;
Vice-President: Richard Cheney;
Secretary of Defense: Donald Rumsfeld, Robert Gates;
Secretary of State: Colin Powell, Condoleezza Rice;
US Commander in Iraq: Ricardo Sanchez, George W. Casey, David Petraeus;
Press Secretary: Ari Fleischer, Scott McLellan, Tony Snow, Dana Perino.

Poll Release Counts
Identifying Polls to Count

Included Polls
• CNN/Gallup/USA Today
• Fox
• CBS
Excluded Polls
• PEW
Relevant questions in included polls
CNN/Gallup/USA Today
“Which comes closest to your view about what the U.S. should now do about the number of U.S.
troops in Iraq - the US should send more troops to Iraq, the U.S. should keep the number of troops as it
is now, the U.S. should withdraw some troops from Iraq, or the U.S. should withdraw all of its troops
from Iraq?”
“Here are four different plans the U.S. could follow in dealing with the war in Iraq. Which one do you
prefer: withdraw all troops from Iraq immediately, withdraw all troops by November, 2006 – that is, in
12 months time, withdraw troops, but take as many years to do it as are needed to turn control over to
the Iraqis, or send more troops to Iraq?”

Iraqi Security Forces Counts
Weekly data on the size and makeup of the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) comes from the Department of
State's Iraq Weekly Status Report (IWSR). This report provides updates on the progress toward eight
“pillars” of the US policy in Iraq. The weekly reports were downloaded from
http://www.state.gov/p/nea/rls/rpt/iraqstatus/.
Iraqi Security Force Readiness

44

Readiness data is obtained from “Measuring Stability and Security in Iraq: Quarterly Reports.” These
reports are available beginning in July 2005 and may be accessed at:
http://www.defenselink.mil/home/features/Iraq_Reports/
As noted in the text, judgments about the operational quality of an Iraqi unit are based on “Operational
Readiness Assessments” compiled by U.S. trainers embedded with a particular unit or other military
observers. While individual ORAs are kept classified, summarized information is provided in Petraeus
2007 and the DOD quarterly reports on Measuring Security and Stability in Iraq. On some of the limits
of the ORA data as a measure of operational effectiveness, see Jones 2007.
Iraqi National Government Budget
Government expenditures data is available from the Iraq Weekly Status Report, Weekly Expenditure
Reports, available at: http://www.state.gov/p/nea/rls/rpt/iraqstatus/
Satellite Access Survey
Face-to-face interviews were conducted among 1,444 Iraqi adults. Interviews were carried out between
August 20 and September 5, 2005. The overall response rate was 89 percent, ranging from 93% in
Baghdad to 100% in Suleymania and Erbil. Eleven percent of those selected refused to participate in
the study. The sample was drawn from a multi-stage probability-based sample was drawn, utilizing
residential listings from Iraq’s 1997 Population and Housing Census. Census sub-districts were utilized
as primary sampling units (PSUs), with each PSU being selected using probability-proportional-to-size
procedures. Interviewers were given all address details for households at four sampling points within
each PSU. Within each selected household, one respondent was randomly selected using the last
birthday method. The margin of error, assuming a 95% confidence level and the clustering effects of a
multi-stage design, is approximately ± 3.4% for the overall sample.

45

APPENDIX TABLES
Appendix Table 1. Specification Checks for Attacks Regressions using Logs and Per-Capital Measures
(1)
32.24

(2)
Attacks
10.04

28.99

1.17

(5)
log(attacks)
1.77

PostElection

PreElection
Season

Election
Season

PreElection
Season

Election
Season

PostElection

PreElection
Season

Election
Season

PostElection

Panel A: "Resolve" Mentions
(satellite access)*(high mention
week)

-1.12
(2.25)

6.16
(6.44)

2.69
(5.50)

0.39
(1.14)

0.48
(0.38)

0.26
(0.51)

-0.82**
(0.35)

0.71
(0.69)

0.88
(0.64)

(satellite access)*(one week
before the high mention week)

-7.22*
(4.06)

3.74
(5.83)

-0.16
(4.00)

0.09
(0.63)

0.51
(0.41)

0.02
(0.39)

-0.32**
(0.14)

-0.20
(0.29)

0.62
(0.64)

(satellite access)*(one week
after the high mention week)

3.58
(5.14)

5.32*
(3.32)

8.79*
(4.95)

0.56
(0.87)

0.79*
(0.48)

0.63*
(0.38)

0.04
(0.19)

0.22
(0.38)

0.20
(0.38)

R-squared
Panel B: Poll Release
(satellite access)*(release
week)

0.2539

0.4263

0.4978

0.0900

0.6006

0.6417

0.2620

0.4106

0.4762

-4.21
(2.40)

3.30
(7.49)

2.73
(4.04)

-1.45**
(0.51)

0.22
(0.48)

0.11
(0.74)

-0.7098
(0.5113)

-0.08
(0.48)

0.32
(0.47)

(satellite access)*(one week
before release)

-1.62
(2.40)

-4.62
(4.08)

3.05
(8.29)

-0.54*
(0.28)

-0.09
(0.39)

0.43
(0.61)

-0.2806
(0.2574)

0.24
(0.24)

0.29
(0.46)

(satellite access)*(one week
after release)

-1.02
(1.60)

4.19*
(2.65)

9.50**
(4.08)

0.23
(0.48)

0.06
(0.44)

0.12
(0.51)

0.0911
(0.3700)

0.66*
(0.40)

0.42*
(0.24)

Dependent Variable
Mean

(3)

(4)

(6)
1.76

(7)
(8)
(9)
Attacks per 100,000 people
0.44
1.07
0.92

R-squared
0.2931
0.4266
0.5124
0.4371
0.5970
0.6379
0.2508
0.4104
0.4754
Province Fixed Effect
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Week Fixed Effect
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
392
507
473
392
507
473
392
507
473
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a **
(*, ***). Attacks are defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more persons. The data does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and
Shia militia attacks. Attacks which result in only injuries are not included. Data and methods used to construct weekly attack counts are discussed in appendix A. PreElection Season is November 2, 2004-November 8, 2005. Election Season is November 9, 2005-November 7, 2006. Post-Election is November 8, 2006-November 1,
2007.

46

Appendix Table 2. Specification Checks of Continuous and Flexible forms of Media Mentions Count
(1)

(2)

(3)
PostElection

10.04

Election
Season
Attacks
28.99

0.94***
(0.23)

-0.18
(0.56)

0.07
(0.34)

-0.05
(0.05)

0.02
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.02)

(satellite access)*(previous week
resolve mention count)

-0.18
(0.25)

0.35
(0.60)

0.13
(0.22)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.01
(0.04)

-0.00
(0.01)

(satellite access)*(subsequent
week resolve mention count)

-0.08
(0.20)

1.20**
(0.37)

2.02*
(1.04)

-0.05**
(0.02)

-0.04
(0.02)

0.02
(0.04)

0.26

0.43

0.50

0.53

0.72

0.52

-0.31
(8.88)

1.09
(6.53)

-1.87
(19.49)

-1.56
(1.58)

0.82
(1.85)

0.48
(2.46)

(satellite access)(one week before
week with 1-3 resolve mentions)

1.29
(10.29)

4.56
(15.54)

20.87
(12.47)

-1.61
(1.06)

1.78
(1.88)

-0.13
(0.70)

(satellite access)( one week after week
with 1-3 resolve mentions)

6.15
(4.83)

-9.00
(6.41)

1.51
(8.67)

0.50
(0.81)

-2.44
(2.05)

-1.81
(2.04)

(satellite access)(week with 4-6
resolve mentions)

10.11
(6.20)

12.77
(9.27)

-15.77
(19.74)

-0.53
(0.93)

0.65
(0.68)

0.36
(1.65)

(satellite access)(one week before
week with 4-6 resolve mentions)

4.06
(7.00)

5.46
(17.65)

0.64
(10.05)

-0.96
(1.10)

0.95
(1.55)

-1.00
(1.21)

(satellite access)( one week after
week with 4-6 resolve mentions)

5.00
(6.24)

5.16
(9.51)

2.62
(9.16)

0.73
(0.94)

-0.67
(1.84)

-1.01
(2.25)

(satellite access)(week with
7-9 resolve mentions)

10.05
(10.77)

8.35
(10.90)

-7.53
(15.88)

-1.10
(1.76)

0.71***
(0.24)

-0.15
(1.46)

(satellite access)(one week before
week with 7-9 resolve mentions)

5.19
(6.77)

1.61
(16.80)

3.60
(7.69)

-1.84*
(1.01)

0.79
(1.44)

-0.83
(0.69)

(satellite access)( one week after week
with 7-9 resolve mentions)

0.23
(4.59)

2.50
(3.23)

3.57
(6.41)

0.64
(0.84)

2.98
(2.09)

-0.61
(0.87)

(satellite access)(week with 10-15
resolve mentions)

3.09
(3.44)

4.93
(16.84)

-12.25
(19.77)

-0.24
(1.18)

1.12***
(0.33)

0.06
(1.64)

(satellite access)(one week before

7.62

6.04

6.14

-1.28

1.27

0.32

PreElection
Season
Dependent Variable
Meant
Panel A: Continuous Mentions Specification
(satellite access)*(resolve
mention count)

R-squared
Panel B: Flexible Mentions Specification
(satellite access)(week with
1-3 resolve mentions)

High
Mention
Indicator = 0

High
Mention
Indicator = 1

47

32.24

(4)

(5)

(6)

PreElection Election
PostSeason
Season
Election
U.S. Military Fatalities
0.88
0.69
0.73

week with 10-15 resolve mentions)

(7.51)

(21.86)

(8.87)

(1.05)

(1.71)

(0.69)

(satellite access)( one week after
week with 10-15 resolve mentions)

1.50
(5.02)

11.08**
(4.73)

7.12
(3.64)

0.08
(0.80)

0.86
(2.07)

2.31**
(1.14)

(satellite access)(week with 16-25
resolve mentions)

0.00
(0.00)

8.29
(19.06)

4.54
(14.96)

0.00
(0.00)

1.86**
(0.83)

-0.13
(1.33)

(satellite access)(one week before
week with 16-25 resolve mentions)

4.65
(8.64)

9.76
(22.62)

9.94
(10.71)

-1.46
(0.97)

1.09
(1.89)

0.47
(0.81)

(satellite access)( one week after
week with 16-25 resolve mentions)

12.50
(7.20)

3.65
(4.95)

9.49
(6.17)

2.14
(1.45)

1.06
(1.49)

0.99
(1.12)

(satellite access)(week with >25
resolve mentions)

--

--

-5.42
(18.33)

--

--

0.16
(1.21)

(satellite access)(one week before
week with > 25resolve mentions)

--

--

2.23
(7.21)

--

--

0.53
(0.85)

(satellite access)( one week after
--4.94
--0.84*
week with >25 resolve mentions)
(9.07)
(0.48)
R-squared
0.31
0.43
0.51
0.55
0.73
0.52
Province and Week FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
392
507
473
392
507
473
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the
0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a ** (*, ***). Attacks are defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of
one or more persons. The data does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks
which result in only injuries are not included. Data and methods used to construct weekly attack counts are discussed in
appendix A. Pre-Election Season is November 2, 2004-November 8, 2005. Election Season is November 9, 2005November 7, 2006. Post-Election is November 8, 2006-November 1, 2007.

48

Appendix Table 3. Falsification Checks using Oil Production and Ethnic Composition
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

10.04

28.99

32.24

10.04

28.99

32.24

Pre-Election
Season

Election
Season
(excludes
Election Week)

Post-Election

Pre-Election
Season

Election
Season
(excludes
Election Week)

Post-Election

-3.97
(12.81)

-8.82
(15.30)

-5.25
(8.57)

-3.96
(6.87)

12.16
(13.65)

-2.12
(10.29)

(oil)*(one week after
the high mention/release week)

-5.27
(9.29)

0.82
(12.23)

1.91
(8.50)

3.95
(6.00)

3.00
(12.07)

-5.27
(9.28)

(% Sunni)*(high mention/release week)

3.67
(4.12)

-0.93
(5.05)

1.43
(2.81)

1.74
(2.11)

6.50
(4.12)

-4.84
(3.32)

(% Sunni)*(one week after
the high mention/release week)

-0.28
(2.44)

0.75
(8.68)

-1.75
(2.87)

2.62
(1.87)

3.02
(4.11)

1.22
(3.30)

(satellite access)*(high mention
release week)

9.16
(6.17)

4.66
(10.24)

2.48
(6.47)

10.97**
(4.57)

5.07
(9.94)

10.36**
(8.67)

(satellite access)*(one week after
the high mention/release week)

5.00
(4.47)

9.40**
(4.35)

2.44
(5.57)

4.53
(3.32)

8.19*
(4.98)

13.13***
(6.90)

Dependent Variable
Mean

Panel A: Oil Production
(oil)*(high mention/release week)

Attacks

R-Squared
Media Variable
Resolve
Resolve
Resolve
Poll
Polls
Polls
Province Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Week Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
392
507
473
392
507
473
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the province level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients which are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a **
(*, ***). Dependent Variable is number of attacks per region-week. Attacks are defined as non-criminal acts which result in the death of one or more persons. The data
does not distinguish between Sunni insurgent attacks and Shia militia attacks. Attacks which result in only injuries are not included. Data and methods used to
construct weekly attack counts are discussed in appendix A. Oil variable is defined as percent of total Iraqi oil production in province (source: Revenue Watch
Institute). Pre-Election Season is November 2, 2004-November 8, 2005. Election Season is November 9, 2005-November 7, 2006. Post-Election is November 8, 2006November 1, 2007. All regressions include an interaction terms that are equal to the satellite access, oil, and ethnic composition variable one week before high resolve
mentions/poll release

49

