NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING THE IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FUNDS IN EMERGING ECONOMIES:
EVIDENCE FROM LATIN AMERICA
Bronwyn H. Hall
Alessandro Maffioli
Working Paper 13835
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13835

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2008

This paper is part of the project: "IDB's Science and Technology Programs: An Evaluation of the Technology
Development Funds (TDF) and Competitive Research Grants (CRG)," by the Office of Evaluation
and Oversight (OVE) of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). We are grateful to Bertha Briceño
and Diego Ubfal, who worked on the OVE evaluation project and to Pierre Mohnen, Inder Ruprah
and Yuri Soares for useful discussions as well as to two anonymous referees. The first author thanks
the Institute of Innovation Research, Hitotsubashi University, for hospitality. The findings and interpretation
of the authors do not necessarily represent the views of Inter-American Development Bank or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Alessandro Maffioli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating the Impact of Technology Development Funds in Emerging Economies: Evidence
from Latin America
Bronwyn H. Hall and Alessandro Maffioli
NBER Working Paper No. 13835
March 2008
JEL No. O32,O38
ABSTRACT
Evaluations of government Technology Development Funds (TDF) in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and
Panama are surveyed. All the evaluations were done at the recipient (firm) level using data from innovation
surveys, industrial surveys, and administrative records of the granting units, together with quasi-experimental
econometric techniques to minimize the effects of any selection bias. TDF effectiveness is found to
depend on the financing mechanism used, on the presence of non-financial constraints, on firm-university
interaction, and on the characteristics of the target beneficiaries. Four levels of potential impact were
considered: R&D input additionality, behavioural additionality, increases in innovative output, and
improvements in performance. The evidence suggests that TDF do not crowd out private investment
and that they positively affect R&D intensity. In addition, participation in TDF induces a more proactive
attitude of beneficiary firms towards innovation activities. However, the analysis does not find much
statistically significant impact on patents or new product sales and the evidence on firm performance
is mixed, with positive results in terms of firm growth, but little corresponding positive impact on
measures of firm productivity, possibly because the horizon over which the evaluation was conducted
was too short.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Alessandro Maffioli
Inter-American Development Bank
Office of Evaluation and Oversight
1300 New York Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20577
alessandrom@iadb.org

Evaluating the Impact of Technology Development Funds in Emerging
Economies: Evidence from Latin-America
Bronwyn H. Hall# and Alessandro Maffioli∗

1. Introduction
In recent years the role of Science and Technology (S&T) in growth has gained
preeminence in the public policy dialogue of Latin American and Caribbean (LAC)
Countries and it has become a central topic in the competitiveness agenda of multilateral
organizations such as the Inter-American Development Bank, the World Bank, and the
Organization of American States. During the 1990s, LAC policy makers instituted and
expanded a number of S&T programs aimed at supporting the effort to regain
competitiveness. These programs were generally built around a demand-driven model,
that is, they relied on program participants to suggest and implement projects.
Given the increasing relevance of S&T policy for the region, the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) undertook an evaluation of the impact of a sample of IDB’s
Science and Technology Programs in order to assess the impact of the two policy
instruments most frequently financed by the IDB: i) Competitive Research Grants (CRG)
for financing basic research activities, which are usually carried out by academic
institutions; and ii) Technology Development Funds (TDF), targeted towards innovation
activities in the productive sector.1 This paper summarizes the findings from the
evaluation of the second policy instrument (TDF), covering the evaluations of TDF in
four Latin American countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Panama.2
All these evaluations were done at the recipient level using data drawn from innovation
and industrial surveys combined with the administrative records of the units that
administer the TDF. Given the absence of randomized experiments, the studies estimated
the impact of the TDF using quasi-experimental techniques applied to comparable
participating and non-participating firms in order to minimize the effects of any selection
bias. Four levels of potential impact were considered: R&D input additionality,
behavioural additionality, increases in innovative output, and improvements in
performance.
In terms of input additionality, the evidence suggests that TDF do not crowd out private
R&D investment and that they positively affect R&D intensity. In two cases (Argentina
#

UC Berkeley and University of Maastricht, e-mail: bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

∗

Inter-American Development Bank – Office of Evaluation and Oversight & University of Insubria, email: alessandrom@iadb.org
1

This evaluation was conducted by the Office of Evaluation and Oversight (OVE) during the 2005 ex post
evaluation cycle.
2

For detail on the individual studies see: Benavente et al. (2007), Binelli and Maffioli (2006), Chudnovsky
et al. (2006), De Negri et al. (2006a and 2006b) and IDB (2007). Preliminary results on a TDF in Colombia
are also available in OCyT (2007).

2

and Brazil), the TDF even produce multiplier effects on R&D. The results also suggest
that different financing mechanisms have differential impacts on firms, with low cost
credit for R&D projects having a clearer positive impact than matching grants. However,
the studies also found that for some groups of beneficiaries - notably new innovators matching grants seem to be more effective.
Behavioral additionality is defined as changes in firm innovation strategy induced by the
TDF. The empirical results suggest that the participation in TDF does produce a more
proactive attitude of beneficiary firms towards innovation activities. Although in this case
data are available only for Chile and Panama, the evidence suggests that the TDF
positively affect a firm’s willingness or capability of interacting with external sources of
knowledge and financing, which are proxies for changes in the firms’ innovation strategy.
In terms of innovative output, the results are more disappointing. In almost all the cases
the analyses did not find statistically significant impacts on conventional measures of
innovative output, such as patent grants and new product sales, although it is possible that
not enough time had elapsed between the subsidy to observe its full effects. The results
are more encouraging when patent applications are considered, although only the
Brazilian FNDCT evaluation had such data available to it.
In terms of firm performance the evidence is mixed. There are positive impacts on firm
growth, but there are no corresponding positive impacts on measures of firm productivity.
However, there are two reasons to expect fairly weak results in the case of innovative
output and performance: first, the impacts have been measured over a fairly short time
period. Second, as we show in the next section, if the TDF are working correctly, the rate
of return to innovation for firms receiving subsidies should fall, which implies that the
direct and immediate effects may be rather small.
Although this review has to be considered as a first step in a wider and more intense
effort of understanding the effectiveness of the TDF, the results do suggest the need for a
more accurate targeting of this instrument. The TDF design and implementation have to
be based on a more tailored assessment of the country specific market failures and of
firms’ constraints. In addition, the qualitative evidence suggests that financial support
should be complemented with technological services and infrastructure, such as those
provided by universities and research centers.
This paper is structured into six sections. After this brief introduction, section 2 presents
the rationale for promoting innovation through R&D subsidies and discusses the impacts
we might expect to find. Section 3 provides a review of the recent evolution of S&T
sector and policy framework in LAC and the role of the IDB in this framework. Section 4
summarizes the evaluative framework, presenting the questions of interest, the indicators
and data sources and the methodological approach followed. Finally, section 5 presents
the empirical results and section 6 gives some concluding remarks.

2. The Rationale for Promoting Innovation through R&D Subsidies
The prime justification for promoting firm investments in R&D through public financing
is related to the need to correct market failures in innovative effort arising from financial

3

constraints and the lack of appropriability.3 In addition, evolutionary scholars argue that
public intervention is also justified by the need to address issues related to the dynamic,
collective and uncertain nature of the innovation process, such as the linkages among and
absorptive capacity of the agents of the National Innovation System (NIS).
A financially constrained firm cannot undertake certain potentially profitable innovation
projects because asymmetric information and moral hazard problems increase the cost of
credit, making some marginal projects infeasible or unattractive (Hall 2002). Even for
firms that are not financially constrained, financing aid could reduce the financial risk of
innovation to the firm via cost-sharing.
Although the provision of subsidized financial resources can generally help firms to
overcome financial constraints, the effectiveness of this policy may be limited by the
presence of rent seekers. When a firm’s preferences are not observable, the provision of
subsidized financial resources will incur the risk of attracting and financing firms that
have already reached their desired level of R&D investment and seek low-cost public
resources for other types of investments.4 In this case, the potential positive effect of the
public financing is undone by an internal transfer of resources, displacing private funds
for other investments and no increase in R&D spending is observed. As Wallsten (2000)
states, if R&D investment has short-run diminishing returns and the firm has an
equilibrium level of R&D investment funded with its own funds, public funding will
cause the firm to reduce its own expenditure by the whole amount of the subsidy and its
total R&D investment would remain unchanged.
A number of policy instruments are commonly used to address appropriability problems
and financial constraints in innovation. These include public subsidies (grants and
matching grants), targeted credit, tax incentives, and the intellectual property system. The
first two (grants and credit) are the instruments reviewed in this paper. In both cases they
are targeted towards R&D investment in the countries considered. It is useful to review
the implications of economic theory for the behavior of firms receiving these two
different types of subsidies. The first and most important result is that because the
subsidies are designed to reduce the cost of R&D capital, the marginal rate of return to
R&D in the firms receiving them should fall, not rise. This counterintuitive result is
important to keep in mind when looking at the performance results of the subsidies.
The two different types of subsidy will also have different effects that depend on the
financial position of the firms receiving them. To see this, assume that each firm faces a
downward sloping demand for R&D and a supply cost of R&D capital that is flat until
internal funds for R&D investment are exhausted, then jumps up to the cost of external
funds, increasing as more and more external funds are needed. Absent the subsidies, each
firm does R&D at the level where the demand and supply curves intersect. This situation
is shown in Figures 1a and 1b: the curve labeled S is the supply of funds and D1 through
D4 represent the demand for funds by firms with various levels of financial constraint.

3

As first described by Nelson (1959) and Arrow (1962), to the extent that knowledge cannot be kept secret,
the returns from investing in the production of science and technology cannot be fully appropriated by the
investor; the private returns associated with an investment in S&T are therefore much lower than the social
ones.
4

On the so-called crowding out effect see David et al. 2000, Klette et al. 2000 and Chudnovsky et al. 2006.

4

The curve S′ in Figure 1a illustrates the effect of a (project neutral) matching grant that
lowers the cost of financing below the cost of internal funds for R&D spending up to the
amount of the grant and increases the point at which internal funds are exhausted by the
amount of the matching grant.5 In the example shown, the agency matches the recipient
spending one for one, the cost to the recipient of each additional currency unit spent on
the project will be halved. The effect will vary for the four different types of firms: firm 1
was not doing R&D before, and the matching grant will induce it to undertake R&D.
Firm 2 will substitute the funds from the matching grant for its own and will not increase
its spending on R&D, which is sometimes considered rent-seeking behavior, although it
does not really generate any deadweight loss, given the costs of capital and the rates of
return. Firm 3 (slightly financially constrained) will probably find that its cost of capital
has dropped significantly on the margin and therefore ought to increase its investment
significantly. On the other hand, firm 4 (very financially constrained), will see a smaller
fall in the cost of capital and will therefore increase its R&D only slightly.
[Figure 1a about here]
The picture for credit subsidies is slightly more complex, depending on whether the
subsidies lower the cost of capital below the cost of internal funds or not. If not, then
firms 1 and 2 will not change their behavior, nor will they apply for funds. Firm 3 will
increase its R&D slightly and firm 4 will increase its R&D more (because the decline in
capital cost will be greater). On the other hand, as illustrated by S′ in Figure 1b, if the
new cost of capital lies below the cost of internal funds up to some spending limit, firm 2
will see crowding out and the result will be similar to the case of matching grants. For
firms 3 and 4, the result is similar to the case where the cost of capital with the credit
subsidy is above the cost of internal funds.
[Figure 1b about here]
The conclusion is that crowding out is a possibility for firms that rely on internal funds
for investment, but unlikely for those that are financially constrained. Although in the
latter case, they can always divert funds to other (non-R&D) projects, given the lowered
cost of capital, it would probably not be rational to do so. A second conclusion is that
matching grants are likely to have more impact on firms that are only slightly
constrained, because they simply remove the constraint, whereas credit subsidies are
effective over a wider range of financially constrained firms, depending on the size of the
loans for which they are available. Finally, in all cases, the observed rate of return to
R&D is expected to stay the same or to fall.
There are several caveats to this analysis. First, it has assumed that both the grants and
the credit are completely project-neutral, in the sense that they are not chosen to favor
those with a high social rate of return or a high gap between the social and private rates.
It has also assumed that the firms are free to spend the funds in any way they wish, once
they have received them. If socially beneficial projects are to be favored in the selection
process, it will also be necessary to monitor the firm's activities carefully, as the

5

This analysis assumes that the R&D project is a relatively small fraction of the firm’s R&D spending. In
the case where the firm does little R&D other than that associated with the project, the effect of the grant
will be to induce the firm to undertake R&D.

5

incentives to shift the funds to other activities are greater in the case where the
opportunity cost of funds exceeds the private returns from a particular project.
Finally, the analysis above is essentially static and ignores learning and other dynamics.
One important effect of these instruments is to ease the firm’s transition into a more
innovative state, at which point its own R&D demand curve may shift out, and the supply
curve of funds may also shift out, due to increased internal funds and greater familiarity
with and reputation in the financial markets. These effects could be important, but are not
easily captured by the short period of data available in these evaluations.

3. S&T Sector and Innovation Policy in Latin America and Caribbean
This section briefly assesses the recent evolution of S&T sector and policy framework in
LAC. The discussion focuses, in particular, on the specific constraints that affect the
region’s performance in comparison to other geographical areas, and on the policies put
in place by the LAC governments in order to respond to these challenges. Much of the
evolution of S&T policy in the region has developed in tandem with shifts in the policy
focus and strategy of the IDB, as will become clear.
Recent evidence suggests that the S&T sector in Latin America has been progressing in
absolute terms but falling behind in relative terms.6 This statement certainly holds when
input variables such as R&D investment levels are observed: according to the UNESCO
science report in 2005 (UNESCO 2005), LAC economies account for just a small fraction
of the world expenditure in R&D and this share has even contracted between 1997 and
2003 (from 3.1% to 2.6%). Overall investment in R&D has always been low in the LAC
region and it has not significantly improved over time. Between 1991 and 2003, the R&D
investment rate increased only slightly (from 0.49% to 0.57% of GDP). Consequently,
not only has the gap with highly developed economies not narrowed,7 but the region has
also fallen behind other emerging areas such as East Asia and Eastern Europe, where in
2003 the R&D/GDP ratio reached 1.2% and 0.97% respectively.
In particular, the LAC economies have historically experienced a low participation of the
productive sector in R&D investment. The limited innovative effort of firms has become
more of a concern as many of the regional economies have shifted their development
strategy from the traditional “import-substitution industrialization” (ISI) to an openmarket approach at the beginning of the 1990s. Although the LAC governments expected
an overall net benefit from opening up their economies, they also acknowledged that the
potential cost of adjustment depended on the firms’ capability to adapt to a completely
new business environment.
Why do the LAC economies and, in particular, LAC firms tend to under-invest in R&D?
Recent studies clearly rule out the argument that low R&D expenditures and limited
participation of the productive sector in innovation activities are the consequence of low
rates of return to these kinds of investments (Lederman and Maloney 2003, De Ferranti
2003, and Benavente et al. 2005). Lederman and Maloney (2003) find rates of return to
6

Many surveys on this topic have been recently produced. For a detailed discussion see, among others:
IDB 2001, ECLAC 2004, Velho 2004 and Hall 2005.
7

In 2003, R&D accounted for 2.62% and 1.7% of the GDP in the US and Europe respectively (RICYT,
2006 and UNESCO, 2005).

6

R&D that are higher for developing countries – principally in LAC and Asia – than for
advanced countries.8 They then observe that since these returns far exceed those of
physical capital, LAC economies should be investing over twice what they presently do.9
Therefore, evidence suggests that the low private R&D investment in the LAC countries
depends on other factors (Lederman and Maloney 2003 and De Ferranti 2004): (i) short
planning horizons brought on by persistent macro volatility; (ii) financial constraints; (iii)
weak intellectual property rights; (iv) low quality of research institutions; (v) failure to
mobilize government resources for this activity; and (vi) a rentier mentality due to a long
history of passive natural resource exploitation.
Lack of skilled human resources has always imposed serious constraints on LAC
innovation systems. In spite of some general achievements in terms of literacy,
enrollment and tertiary education, recent studies (De Ferranti et al 2003, Velho 2004, and
Hall 2005) point out that the average educational attainment in many LAC Countries is
still low and that education is distributed less equitably that in other emerging regions. In
many LAC countries tertiary and secondary education are unbalanced, the latter being too
low relative to the former, and LAC students still perform poorly in international
comparison tests, especially in math. This unbalanced education system partially explains
the limited Latin-American capacity of absorbing new technology. In fact, although
tertiary education generates a stock of scientists and engineers in line with the income
level of LAC economies, secondary education has failed to provide the workforce with
up-to-date technical knowledge. To make this problem even worse, only a small share of
researchers and scientists works in the productive sector (around 11% in most countries)
while the majority works in public and academic sectors.
Regional performance in terms of R&D outputs is consistent with the allocation of effort
at the input level. On one hand, the region has experienced non negligible improvements
in the productivity of scientists and researchers. Figure 1 in the appendix clearly shows
that a partial catching up has occurred in terms of scientific production (both when
publications are weighted by number of researchers and when weighted by GDP). On the
other hand, the results in terms of innovative output related to the productive sector are
much more disappointing: the number of patent applications filed annually by LAC
residents increased very slowly between 1991 and 2005 (2.6% per year according to
RICYT 2006 data10) and the gap with developed economies increased.
The World Bank’s “Knowledge for Development” indicators provide further evidence of
the relative decline in LAC performance. Table A1 in the appendix shows that the overall
“knowledge divide” between the region and the G7 economies widened between 1995
and 2003.11 LAC is the only emerging area that experienced an increasing gap in the
innovation indicator, while it has slightly improved in terms of education and information
technology. Obviously enough, the cross country heterogeneity is strong: among the
8

The estimated social return rate of R&D in Latin America approaches 60% for medium income countries
such as Chile and Mexico, and 100% for relatively poor countries such as Nicaragua.
9

At global interest rates of 7 percent, the number is closer to 10 times.

10

Available online at http://www.ricyt.edu.ar

11

Note that the change in the gap between the two periods is defined as ∆ = [GAP2003-GAP1995], so that a
negative sign on the change implies worsening performance on the index.

7

upper middle income economies of the Region, only Chile reduced the gap in all the
indicators, and even rose above the G7 benchmark in terms of economic incentive and
institutional regime (EIR). Brazil was the most dynamic lower middle income country,
even though its catching up process was limited by the worsening of EIR.
What has been the policy response of LAC governments? During the import substitution
industrialization stage, LAC governments, supported by the IDB, attempted to expand
their innovation capacity by focusing on the supply side of the research and innovation
processes. Assuming a linear model of innovation from basic research to applied research
to successfully commercialized new products, governments focused on the promotion of
scientific research activities. According to this model, a critical mass of high quality
researchers, laboratories, and universities should result in codified knowledge that can be
transferred from public research organizations to the productive sector. In this context,
public administrators and representatives of the scientific community decided on the
allocation of public resources on the basis of national development priorities, with little
or no consideration of the demand for the new technologies (Velho 2004 and ECLAC
2004). As a result, public investments were concentrated on the creation of public
research infrastructure and on sectors dominated by state-owned enterprises - such as
energy, telecommunications, transport and aeronautics - or those connected to public
technology institutes – such as agriculture, nuclear, mining and forestry (ECLAC 2004).
At this very first stage, the organizational structure adopted by most of the LAC countries
provided for the central role of research councils and national research institutes. These
organizations, usually controlled by the scientific and academic community, were
responsible for both the planning and implementation of the S&T policy.12 The research
itself was then performed by public research centers, universities, and national
technology institutes. The absence of rigorous inter-agency coordination efforts severely
limited the effectiveness of these policies and usually led to fragmentation, duplication
and overlapping of initiatives (ECLAC 2004 and Velho 2004).
From the end of the 1980s, the majority of LAC governments have adopted a new
approach, based on horizontal policies to be guided by the actual demand of the
productive sector for innovation. The supply side approach to research funding began to
be replaced by the use of market incentives and the policy focus shifted towards the
needs of the productive sector. More horizontal and neutral policies towards funding have
been introduced in order to let the market dictate the direction of spending. Priority has
been given to instruments that foster the demand for knowledge by final users and that
support the transfer of technological know-how to the production sector. The allocation
of public resources shifted significantly towards instruments that supported innovation
activities in response to proposals by the firms. The structure and size of financing of the
scientific research sector changed dramatically: resources devoted to research
infrastructure were significantly reduced in favor of those allocated to innovative
activities more broadly. The remaining resources devoted to science were primarily
channeled towards direct support to scientists based on quality, and, to some extent, on
the promotion of linkages with the production sector.

12

In cases such as the Argentinean CONICET, the council was not only responsible for the definition of
political guidelines and the allocation of resources, but also directly carried out research activities.

8

To support this new approach, governments introduced many changes to the
organizational structure of the S&T sectors. Many countries undertook a significant
process of reorganization with the purpose of more efficiently dividing responsibilities
and tasks among public institutions. According to the IDB (2001), the new structure
should have been based on a clear separation of the political planning functions from the
execution and implementation functions and, within the latter, the financing from
performing activities.13 At the top of the organizational pyramid, central government
agencies were empowered to articulate the S&T policies, while the national research
councils became responsible for the implementation through the coordination of the
funding mechanisms. In some countries (Brazil, Costa Rica and Venezuela), this led to
the creation of Ministries of Science and Technology, while in others, the policymaking
authority was assigned to special divisions within other ministries.14 In yet other (smaller)
countries, the national research councils, usually under the direct supervision of the
presidency of the republic, have maintained their original role (Bolivia, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Jamaica, Panama and Paraguay).
Following this change in emphasis, in the 1990s the IDB’s approach to S&T policy also
shifted towards horizontal and demand driven policies, responding to the increasing LAC
need to maintain or regain competitiveness in a new economic environment. Within this
context, technology development funds emerged as the key instrument of the new S&T
policy. The transition from a supply side approach to a demand driven one occurred with
the implementation of programs such as the Chilean Science and Technology Program
(1991), and the Colombian Science and Technology Research Promotion Program
(1989). Indeed, FONTEC of Chile and COLCIENCIAS of Colombia rapidly became
points of reference for subsequent IDB operations.15
Although this instrument varies significantly in terms of targeting, operational
mechanisms and administration rules, recent reviews identify two main technology fund
systems in Latin-America (ECLAC 2004). The first system (implemented in Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico) allocates resources exclusively on the
basis of firm technology demand. The second system (adopted by Brazil, Chile and
Colombia) requires the coordination between supply (academic institutions and research
centers) and demand (enterprises). In either case, competition among project proposals
from the potential beneficiaries plays a central role in determining the priorities and
resource allocation of the TDF, in line with a horizontal and demand driven approach to
funding.
13

According to The Economic and Social Progress Report 2001 of the Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB 2001), the new organizational structures should have included: “(i) a central government agency in
charge of defining S&T policy; (ii) a set of executing agencies; (iii) institutions (including public and
private universities) in charge of basic and applied research; (iv) institutions responsible for defining
technical norms, standards, quality control and certification; (v) institutions in charge of technical and
vocational education as well as short term training of the labor force; and (vi) financial institutions and
funding agencies”.
14

The Ministry of Planning in Colombia, the Ministry of Education in Argentina, Mexico, Peru and
Uruguay, and the Ministry of Economics in Chile, El Salvador and Nicaragua.
15

The IDB projects frequently mention the FONTEC and COLCIENCIAS as benchmarks for other
operations in the region (see, for example, the loan proposal of the operations in Argentina, Panama,
Uruguay and Venezuela).

9

3.1 The design and goals of the TDF
The TDF operated with features and modalities that varied across the countries and the
region over time. A brief review of the funds supported by the IDB reveals six main
features of this instrument: (i) a demand driven approach; (ii) implemented via subsidy;
(iii) co-financing; (iv) evolution from neutral to targeted; (v) competitive allocation of
resources; and (vi) execution by a specialized agency.
(i)

Demand-driven approach: in the early 1990s IDB operations supported funds
that exclusively financed projects designed and submitted by final users.
Therefore, the beneficiary demand determined the policy priorities and the
resource allocation. More recent IDB operations slightly reduced this
emphasis on the demand by also financing service providers, such as
technology service centers.

(ii)

Subsidies: grants and matching-grants have become the common financing
method of the IDB funds, while over time the Bank has abandoned other
means of subsidizing innovation projects, such as conditional credit lines.16

(iii)

Co-financing: the funds never cover all costs of the financed projects. They
always require the beneficiaries to participate in the financing of the initiative,
usually on an equal cost-sharing basis.

(iv)

Evolution from neutral to targeted: although in the early 1990s IDB funds
were designed on a principle of non-discrimination, later on the funds adopted
more targeted approaches. Different justifications supported the initial
preference for neutrality. From the free market perspective, neutrality aimed at
not interfering with the market resource allocation. In a more evolutionary
perspective, the initial neutrality aimed at facilitating a policy adjustment
process. In the first phase, the governments needed to identify the industryspecific externalities and market failures. This exploratory neutral approach
was intended to allow developing more targeted policies in a second stage.
Further, in the early stages the massive and flexible support to innovation
activities aimed at facilitating the “endogenization and routinization” of R&D
in the productive sector (Teubal 1996, 1998, 2002).

(v)

Competition in the allocation of resources: the early 1990s IDB funds
operated on the basis of an “open-window” mechanism, where firms could
apply at any time and were not competing directly with other firms for funds,
except to the extent that earlier applications were more likely to be funded.
Later the funds adopted competitive mechanisms such as calls for innovation
project proposals.

(vi)

Execution by a specialized public agency: although the institutional setting for
the funds’ execution differs on a across countries and operations basis, many
funds are operated by an independent specialized organization. Over time, this
tendency has generated some concerns about the coordination between
different agencies and the definition of roles within the sector.

16

In this method, loans could be partially or even totally forgiven on the basis of three criteria: the success
or failure of the project; the nature of the beneficiary; and, the level of the project technological risk.

10

Table 1 summarizes the TDF studied in this evaluation. It is worth noticing that the
FNDCT is the only TDF evaluated that exclusively promotes partnership between firms
and research institutions (i.e. universities and research centers).
[Table 1 about here]
Because they are neutral with respect to the projects that can be proposed, TDF mainly
address market failures related to financial constraints and only incidentally those related
specifically to lack of appropriability, although project selection does take account of
social returns in some cases. To tackle asymmetric information and adverse selection
problems, the TDF institutional setting usually includes a public agency responsible for
selecting the innovation projects from among the proposals submitted. The role of this
agency is at least three-fold: first, the agency acts as a screener, conveying the technical
knowledge that the financial markets lack or are not willing to develop. This process
should reduce the usual asymmetry of information between the financial sector and the
innovative firms. Second, the agency has the possibility and the authority of monitoring
and supervising the firm investment. This function could diminish the risk of financing
firms that seek to divert resources to other uses. Third, the agency tries to select those
projects have the highest social returns, conditional on being profitable for the firm.
Under these assumptions, the agency selects projects that are unlikely to be financed
otherwise. In extreme cases, the funds may finance projects directed toward the creation
of public research goods, ensuring that firms undertake projects with very high social
returns but low private appropriability. Thus the two policy goals, mitigating financial
constraints and supporting investments with a large gap between private and social
returns, are to some extent blended.
The presence of the specialized agency marks one of the most important differences
between TDF and fiscal tax incentives. In the latter case, the firms receive the public
financing in the form of tax credits or deductions calculated on predefined accounting
categories. Governments usually adopt these kinds of incentives because they are
available to all qualifying firms automatically and therefore minimize public interference
with firm decisions. Indeed, tax incentives do not imply any quality assessment of the
firm’s R&D expenditure, nor distinguish sectors or specific areas of financing, although
they may be targeted towards growing or smaller firms in some cases. In addition,
automatic incentives avoid incurring the costs of establishing an S&T agency, which can
be high when a country lacks the technical expertise for innovation project assessment.17
Over time the TDF in the LAC region have adopted matching grants as the most common
method of financing, abandoning the use of credit lines.18 The advantage of matching
grants over credit is that they reduce administrative costs, because they do not require the
collection of repayments. In addition, matching grants do not require collateral, making
this option particularly well suited for SMEs and new firms. The disadvantages of
matching grants relative to credit are the following: i) the financial resources expended

17

On the other hand, it has to be kept in mind that such incentives will require auditing expertise in the tax
authority that is knowledgeable about the components of R&D spending.
18

Another alternative could be public procurement (public contracts). This instrument produces more or
less the same effect of a subsidy but it has the additional advantage of signaling the market that the
innovation projects undertaken by the firm do have a market.

11

are not recovered, at least in the short to medium run;19 ii) grants do not help the firm
build up a credit reputation in the financial markets; and iii) because they do not need to
be paid back, matching grants potentially attract more rent seeking firms and therefore
increase the risk of crowding out own R&D.
Some TDF include specific lines of financing designed to promote linkages between
research institutions and firms. In this case the goal of the TDF is not only to subsidize
the cost of the project, but also to reduce the technical risk as perceived by the firm. In
fact, there are situations where a firm could decide not to undertake a project even when
not financially constrained because the project requires it to invest in some technical
capability or infrastructure that has the nature of a public or semi-public good (such as
highly specialized laboratory and equipment). Firms may also have the potential to
discover new investment opportunities from the interaction with scientific institutes and
research centers, but find the cost of exploring this option too high. In this case, public
financing seeks to make research infrastructure available to firms and to reduce the costs
of accessing highly specialized researchers.
Other specific TDF promote joint ventures and alliances for the performance of
innovation and research projects. In this case, the rationale for intervention is threefold:
first, the TDF take advantage of potential economies of scale and scope of the research
activities. Second, they reduce the problem of private R&D investment duplication
(Martin and Scott 2000). Although cooperation can degenerate into collusion, it can also
significantly mitigate the negative effects of both free-riding and duplication of research
effort. To deal with this trade-off, public programs usually promote firms’ cooperation in
the first stages of R&D activities and foster competition in a second stage (Martin and
Scott 2000).20 Third, the promotion of firm-level research agreements aims at fostering
interactive learning processes. The interaction with other firms allows a firm to expand its
knowledge base beyond its own endowment. In this case systemic failures due to
coordination costs and limited absorptive capacity justify the public financing of firms’
networking activities (Maffioli 2005).
3.2 Other innovation policy interventions
Only a few of the LAC economies (Argentina, Colombia, Brazil and Mexico) have
adopted fiscal incentives for technological innovation. These incentives usually include:
(i) reduction in the corporate income tax; (ii) reduction in the value-added tax; (iii)
accelerated depreciation of capital goods and equipment acquired in the context of an
innovation project and (iv) fiscal credit for expenses in R&D. According to Hall (2005),
the scarce utilization of this policy can be ascribed to some specific features of both the
instrument and the Latin American context. First, fiscal incentives tend to be expensive in
terms of foregone tax revenue unless they are incremental, and an incremental fiscal
credit is very complex to design and administer. Second, to be effective they require
sufficient corporate tax bills and an efficient tax enforcement system.

19

In the long run and if the project financed by TDF is successful, the public financial resources should be
recovered through higher income from corporate taxes.
20

For example, in the United States, the National Cooperative Research Act of 1984 explicitly exempted
R&D cooperatives and Research Joint Ventures (RJVs) from antitrust enforcement.

12

The LAC governments’ attitude towards the strengthening of the intellectual property
rights (IPR) systems, as required by the TRIPS agreement, has been much more
controversial. This is probably due to the very nature of this institution. Although the
importance of the IPR system is widely acknowledged, scholars and policy makers are
still debating how strong the system should be and how it should evolve in developing
countries. Advocating stronger intellectual property rights presumes that the combined
positive impact of the appropriability incentive for the innovator and the disclosure
element for peers (resulting in greater innovation) outweighs the negative impact of
temporary market distortions (resulting in higher prices for consumers and slower
technology diffusion for producers) and the decreased opportunities for learning via
imitation. Therefore, timing becomes the key factor for the IPR policy: protecting IPR
very early in the technological catch-up process can discourage an important channel for
technological learning. Failing to protect IPR when private firms are launching R&D
programs could weaken the incentives to innovate. This only partially explains why LAC
economies have not yet developed IPR system in line with the TRIPS agreement. Some
institutional weaknesses could have contributed to this situation as well. Indeed, efficient
IPR systems require strong institutional capacity and credible enforcement.
In addition to fiscal measures and IPR reforms, LAC governments have also
implemented some complementary instruments to strengthen S&T policy. For example,
Brazil has used governmental procurement to support the national software industries.
Chile and Brazil have also introduced some pilot programs to promote venture capital for
innovation projects. Many countries (Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Nicaragua) have
implemented networking and clusters policies to support the technological upgrade of
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Chile, Costa Rica and Mexico have
implemented instruments aimed at attracting Multinational Enterprises (MNEs) and at
promoting linkages with local suppliers.

4. Evaluation Strategy, Data Source, and Methodology
The TDF impact evaluation strategy is inspired by the linear (sequential) models of
innovation suggested by Pakes and Griliches (1984) and Crepón et al. (1998), which
describe the relationship between firms’ investment in R&D, innovation output, and
productivity change. Although the linear model is often critiqued because it omits
feedback elements in the innovative process, from the perspective of a policy instrument
like R&D subsidies, the first order impact will be well-captured by this model. In any
case, the goal of the evaluation was not to estimate the complete model, but to use it as a
guide to the causality chain that leads from the provision of the subsidy to the R&D
investment to the innovative outputs and then finally to the performance outcomes.
Figure 2 summarizes the temporal sequence of events that are involved in the assessment
of the impact of the TDF. Table 2 summarizes the indicators (both objective and
subjective) used for evaluation and the sources for the data used for each of them. Note
that the degree of availability of these indicators varies across programs and countries.
[Figure 2 about here]
[Table 2 about here]
Before describing the four evaluations in detail, we briefly address the issue of how to
measure innovation activities and research productivity. Objective criteria of
13

innovativeness are the introduction of “new to the market” innovations in certain
industries (proxied by patents or new product sales) or the quantitative efforts of firms in
developing innovations (proxied by R&D expenditures). Considering the limitations of
these indicators in an economic context largely based on small firms, these criteria may
underestimate the innovativeness of firms and could lead to a misleading perception of
the innovation process.
On the other hand, subjective criteria are based on largely on the judgment of participants
and therefore reflect a more personal perception of innovation capabilities. Such criteria
usually rely on qualitative information collected via direct surveys. Interviewees are
asked to provide information regarding particular events such as the introduction of
innovations in the firm, which are not based on quantitative, measurable information but
on the interviewees’ perception of the issue.21 Nevertheless, despite this bias, subjective
criteria may provide a valuable source of in-depth information on firms’ innovation
activities, especially in some contexts in which the overview of R&D efforts and patent
activities do not provide a complete view of the innovation phenomenon.22 For this
purpose many efforts have been devoted to standardizing the collection of information
about innovation in firms that is based on both objective and subjective criteria. The most
successful effort is the methodology proposed and adopted by the OECD.23
Given the pros and cons of both subjective and objective measures, the evaluations
looked at four different levels of impact, involving both types of indicators wherever
possible. The first level was simply firm expenditures on R&D, in order to determine
whether they are complements or substitutes for the R&D subsidies, that is, whether the
subsidy increases the firm’s own spending on R&D.
The second and third levels of evaluation look at the impact of the subsidy on firm
behavior and innovative output. As is often pointed out by innovation scholars, when the
impact of S&T policy is formulated simply in terms of input and output measures, the
firm is largely treated as a black box and the long run impacts on its own capabilities or
organization are ignored (OECD 2005). As a partial corrective to this approach, two of
the evaluations (those for FONTEC in Chile and FOMOTEC in Panama) complement the
input level analysis with a limited analysis of the TDF impact on firm behaviour. In
particular, the evaluation looks at (i) process innovation and organizational changes and
(ii) access to external knowledge resources.
The innovative output indicators usually employed in the literature are patents, sales of
new products and the introduction of a new or improved product or process. The studies
we review use all indicators where they are available (new product information in three

21

For instance, subjective criteria may refer to the provision of information on the introduction by firms of
products and processes substantially different from the previously adopted or the introduction of industry
specific innovations, which are otherwise difficult to identify. This does not imply that the invention of
products/processes can be considered innovative for the whole industry, but evidences some incremental
efforts of the firm in improving competitiveness.
22

This is especially true for industries in which patent activity is low or for SMEs, in which R&D activity
is normally not formalized.
23

In 2000 this methodology was adapted to the LAC context by a group of scholars and experts, producing
the Bogotá Manual.

14

cases and patents in three cases), although patents have limitations as a measure of
innovative output in developing countries.
The final level of impact evaluation was firm performance, measured as growth or
changes in sales, employment, exports, and productivity. Unfortunately, the time period
available for the evaluations was rather short for full impacts on these variables to be felt.
Each evaluation we review in this paper is based on a unique dataset where both primary
sources of information, such as the surveys collected in Chile and Panama, and secondary
sources of information, such as the innovation and industrial surveys used in Argentina
and Brazil, were merged with the administrative records of the program executing unit.
This procedure allowed to exactly identify the specific firms that participated in the
evaluated programs. In addition, in all the cases the control group was constructed using a
sample of firms that did not receive any other comparable treatment, in order to
maximize the accuracy of the impact estimation.24
4.1 Evaluation Methodology
To measure the impact of TDF on outcome indicators, each individual program-level
evaluation followed the basic government program evaluation techniques developed in
the econometrics literature. To the best possible extent, each program has to be analyzed
using a counterfactual perspective in order to reduce potential selection bias. These
techniques provide for a rigorous strategy for identifying a statistically robust control
group of non-beneficiaries, and following both the “treated” and the control group over
time. The ideal evaluation design is the one that creates a valid comparison group by
randomly allocating treatment prior to the beginning of the program, which more closely
guarantees that on average the characteristics of both groups are the same.
The measurement of programs’ effectiveness poses the well-known “evaluation
problem”. Define YitT the average expenses in innovation by firm i in year t if the firm
participates in the TDF and YitC the average expenses by the same firm if it does not
participate to the program. Measuring the program impact requires a measurement of the
difference YitT − YitC , which is the effect of having participated in the program for firm i.
Computing YitT − YitC requires knowledge of the counterfactual outcome YitC that is not
empirically observable since a firm can not be observed simultaneously as a participant
and as a non-participant. The evaluation will not be able to compute the program impact
for an individual firm but we can evaluate an average effect of program
participation, E YitT − YitC  , by comparing data on participating and non-participating
firms.
Defining Di as the dummy variable for program participation, the average treatment
effect of the program will be given by:
∆ = E[YitT | Di = 1] − E[YitC | Di = 0]

(1)

24

In most of the cases the evaluated programs were the only national sources of financing specifically
devoted to innovation projects.

15

Subtracting and adding E[YitC | Di = 1] , we obtain:

∆ = E[YitT | Di = 1] − E[YitC | Di = 0] − E[YitC | Di = 1] + E[YitC | Di = 1]
= E[YitT − YitC | Di = 1] − E[YitC | Di = 0] + E[YitC | Di = 1]

(2)

The term E YitT − YitC | Di = 1 in (2) is the average effect of the treatment on the treated
that we try to isolate. The difference E[YitC | Di = 1] − E[YitC | Di = 0] is the selection bias:
besides the effect of the program there may be systematic differences between
participating and non-participating firms that affect the program’s impact.
A simple estimator of ∆ using the sample analogue E[YitT | Di = 1] − E[YitC | Di = 0] will
give an unbiased estimate of the program impact only if there is no selection bias, that is
only if E[YitC | Di = 1] − E[YitC | Di = 0] = 0 . However, participating and non-participating
firms differ in a number of dimensions (e.g. size) that are likely to affect both the level of
innovation expenditures and the probability of getting financed through the TDF.
Therefore, the simple difference in mean outcomes between participants and nonparticipants is capturing the effect of program participation together with the impact of
third factors affecting both the decision to invest in innovative activities and to participate
in the program.
The TDF evaluations follow quasi-experimental designs in all the cases, given that a truly
randomized design was not implemented for any of the projects reviewed. All the
evaluations tried to identify comparable treated and non-treated individuals in order to
minimize the effect of potential “selection biases” on the evaluation results. A control
group was identified using a number of different methods: propensity score matching
procedures, difference in differences estimation, fixed effect panel estimation, and
instrumental variable estimation.25

5. Empirical Results
This section reports the results of the four levels of the TDF impact evaluation: the TDF
impact on R&D investment (input additionality); the impact on firm’s innovative
behavior (behavioral additionality); the impact on patents and innovation outputs
(innovative output); and the program impact on sales, employment, productivity and
exports (firm performance). A detailed summary of results and methodologies is given in
an appendix Table A2. Unfortunately, the heterogeneity of available information and data
sources did not allow the studies reviewed here to adopt absolutely identical estimation
techniques for all impact evaluations. As a consequence, results are sometimes not fully
comparable, and in some cases not even available, for all countries. Nevertheless, they

25

On these techniques, see among the others: Heckman et al. (2000), Blundell and Costa-Dias (2002), Jaffe
(2002), Smith and Todd (2003).

16

offer an unprecedented opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness of an important
component of S&T policy in the LAC region during the past 15 years.
The evidence shows that TDF do not crowd out R&D investment; on the contrary, in
many cases they significantly increase firms’ investment in R&D (see Table 3). Based on
the arguments made earlier, this result implies that the financial constraints faced by
potentially innovative firms are truly an obstacle to private investment in R&D. In three
cases where the evaluations were able to estimate the impact of the TDF on R&D
investment net of the subsidy (ADTEN, FNDCT and FONTAR-TMP I), the evidence
shows that TDF have multiplier effects, where beneficiaries increase their investment in
R&D beyond the amount financed by program funds.26 Although the stylized framework
we presented in the beginning rules out such effects, this result is consistent with what
was expected from the development literature: by providing the opportunity to overcome
liquidity and credit constraints, TDF programs should allow beneficiary firms to
undertake projects at the margin of their portfolio and, eventually, to generate the
technical conditions for undertaking additional innovation projects.
The clear positive impact of the FNDCT suggests that measures to encourage cooperation
with public research institutes may be important, as the FNDCT is the only TDF
evaluated that requires the cooperation between firms and research institutes. This
particular feature of the program could have contributed to addressing both financial and
technical constraints (lack of human resources, lack of own specialized research
infrastructure and lack of technical knowledge, for instance).
[Table 3 about here]
Despite the limited evidence of matching-grants effectiveness, the data shows that this
instrument may be effective for new innovators. In the case of the FONTAR-ANR
program, although the analysis does not provide evidence of a multiplier effect at the
aggregate level, the data indicates that new innovators have seen a substantial increase in
their private investment in R&D. On the other hand, the effect of matching grants is
smaller for more experienced innovators, for which some evidence of displacement of
resources has been found. Although some caution is called for, the result is not surprising
and is consistent with the rationale that led to the implementation of the matching-grant
scheme and also with the brief theoretical discussion in Section 2 of the paper.27
As opinion surveys reflect, it appears that the project beneficiaries are using TDF as a
signal of firm technical capacity and ability to innovate. Qualitative information collected
from the beneficiaries in both the Chilean and Argentinean cases reveals that some firms
26

In the case of FONTEC, where R&D net of subsidy was not available at the firm level, the evaluation
compared the average annual impact with the average annual subsidy received by the beneficiaries, and it
found that the impact is slightly lower than the subsidy. With the required caution, the evaluation
concluded that some crowding out effects might have occurred, and that there was definitely no evidence of
a multiplier effect. In the case of FONTAR-ANR, the evaluation found that the average effect of the
program on R&D net of the subsidy was not statistically different from zero. However, the evaluation
found that the program had a positive and significant effect for new innovators, that is firms that did not
have investment in R&D before participating in the program.
27

As previously pointed out, one of the main motivations for introducing the matching-grants scheme was
to offer to those firms with a limited experience in R&D activities a more accessible support than targeted
credit.

17

are using the programs as a signaling mechanism in order to obtain complementary
financing from the financial sector. In particular, in the Chilean case the majority of the
beneficiaries consider the public subsidy an important complementary source of
financing (50%), probably associated to a helpful signal of the quality of the project to
get other sources of financing (28%).28
Opinion surveys also suggest that human resource constraints may be mitigating TDF
effects. When asked to identify the main difficulties faced during the execution of the
subsidized project, the majority of the beneficiaries mentioned the lack of skilled labor
force. This suggests that some sort of underestimation of the human resources required to
carry out the subsidized project could have displaced other R&D activities originally
included in the firms’ work plan. The fact that the participation in the program did not
have an effect on physical capital investment is quite consistent with the hypothesis that
the limited impact on R&D intensity is due more to a temporary adjustment in the
investment decisions rather than to some sort of resource displacement.
For the Chilean and Panamanian cases the evaluation was able to look at a set of
indicators of behavioural changes in firms related to innovation (Table 4). Both programs
had a positive impact on variables such as the firms’ ability to interact with external
sources of knowledge and financing, which are proxies for significant changes in the
firms’ innovation strategy. A positive impact of the programs on the introduction of
process and product innovations was also found. In general, the impacts were more
significant in Panama than in Chile, although due to the qualitative scales employed, it is
difficult to compare their magnitudes.
[Table 4 about here]
In terms of direct measures of innovative output (patents and sales of new products) the
evaluation’s results are more disappointing (Table 5). In almost all the cases the
evaluation does not find any statistically significant positive impact. However, it is worth
noting that there could be a considerable time lag between program participation and a
significant change in the traditional measure of innovative output, such as patent
registrations and the sales of new products. Unfortunately most of the estimates are
contemporary, based on changes between the year before and the year after program
participation, due to data limitations. One exception is the Brazilian FNDCT study, where
it was possible to use patent applications instead of registrations. In this case, the results
show a clear positive and significant impact of the program on patents applied for.
[Table 5 about here]
In terms of firm performance the evidence is mixed (Table 6). The evaluation shows
mostly positive (although not always significantly so) results on sales and employment
growth, but the impact on firm productivity is mostly insignificant. In general the pattern
observed was one of a negative impact on productivity in the year of the reception of the
funds and the year following that reception, and a positive or insignificant effect
afterwards. The FONTEC, FONTAR and ADTEN and programs positively affect firms’
growth in terms of employment and sales with a lag of two years, but there is no evidence

28

Furthermore, thirty percent of the beneficiaries applied to the program because they believed the project
would not receive any financing from the private sector.

18

of a significant impact of the FNDCT program. In addition, only the FONTEC program
seems to be effective in promoting firm exports, among those programs for which export
data was available.
[Table 6 about here]
In interpreting these results, especially those in Table 6, it is appropriate to recall the
analysis given earlier in the paper. Were a true random sample to be analyzed, that
analysis predicted a lower rate of return to R&D for the firms receiving the subsidy as
opposed to those that did not receive it. This may or may not translate into differences in
average productivity growth of the two kinds of firms, as we would still expect that doing
more R&D would lead to higher productivity growth on average, even if the marginal
return is lower. But there are good reasons to think that the average effects will be small
because the marginal return is lower.

6. Conclusions
In this paper we have provided a meta-review of the econometric evaluation of a number
of R&D subsidy programs operated during the 1990s by Latin American governments.
The main conclusions are easy to summarize: the impact of the programs on firm
behavior and outcomes becomes weaker and weaker as one gets further from the
immediate target of the policy instrument. There is clear evidence of a positive impact on
R&D, weaker evidence of some behavioral effects, and almost no evidence of an
immediate positive impact on new product sales or patents. This perhaps to be expected,
given the relatively short window over which the impacts were measured, but it might
bear watching in the future.
We also found that different financing mechanisms have varying impacts on beneficiary
groups. Although in general credit subsidies were more effective than grants, for new
innovators matching grants seemed to be more effective, possibly because they enabled
firms to overcome the fixed cost of starting up an R&D program. Matching grants were
also effective in the one program that encouraged cooperation between firms and
university research centers.
The analysis and results surveyed in this paper and in the supporting material on which it
is based contain several lessons for policymakers. First, the potential crowding in/out of
private resources probably should be monitored carefully, in particular when nonreimbursable resources are granted. This would not necessarily imply any additional
burden for the execution of the programs because the necessary data is already being
collected.
There is no clear evidence that the TDF can significantly affect firms’ productivity and
competitiveness within a five-year period, although there is a suggestion of positive
impacts. Although it is possible that TDF programs do not produce productivity and
competitiveness gains, it is also possible that these impacts occur over a time frame
longer that the five years for which the evaluations have data. Follow up evaluations,
allowing for larger time lags to analyze the same groups of treated and non-treated firms,
is probably a good idea in the case of most R&D public subsidies. At the same time, the
goals of the various programs need to be kept in mind: if the purpose is to increase
innovative activity by lowering its cost, a lower marginal private return is expected to
result.
19

The results here also highlight the need for other services that can complement the
financial support of innovation activities. Shortage of skilled labour could significantly
affect firms’ innovation strategy and plans (as could have happened to some extent in
Chile, for example). Government-provided access to highly educated human capital may
be desirable, in particular for those firms that have limited possibility of directly hiring
these specialists. The results for FNDCT in Brazil suggest that interaction between firms
and universities can be an effective response to this need.

20

References
Arrow, K. (1962), “Economics Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,”
in R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, Princeton University
Press, pp. 164-181.
Benavente H., J. M., De Gregorio J., and Nunez M., (2005), “Rates of Return and the
industrial R&D in Chile,” Santiago, Chile: University of Chile and Central Bank of Chile,
paper presented at the World Bank conference in Barcelona on R&D and Innovation in
the Development Process, June 9-11, 2005.
Benavente J. M., Crespi G. and Maffioli A. (2007), “Public Support to Firm Innovation:
The Chilean FONTEC Experience” OVE Working Papers 0407, Inter-American
Development Bank, Office of Evaluation and Oversight (OVE).
Binelli C. and Maffioli A. (2006), “A Micro-econometric Analysis of Public Support to
Private R&D in Argentina,” International Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 21, No. 3,
pp. 339-359.
Blundell R. and Costa-Dias, M. (2002) “Alternative Approaches to Evaluation in
Empirical Microeconomics,” London: CEMMAP Working Paper CWP10/02.
Chudnovsky D., López A., Rossi M. and Ubfal D. (2006) “Evaluating A Program Of
Public Funding Of Private Innovation Activities. An Econometric Study of FONTAR In
Argentina” OVE Working Papers 1606, Inter-American Development Bank, Office of
Evaluation and Oversight (OVE).
Crepon, B., E. Duguet, and J. Mairesse (1998) "Research, Innovation, and Productivity:
An Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level," Economics of Innovation and New
Technology 7(3), pp. 115-156.
David, P., Hall, B. and Toole, A. (2000) “Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for
Private R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence,” Research Policy, 29, pp. 497529.
De Ferranti, D., G. E. Perry, I. Gill, J. L. Guasch, W. F. Maloney, C. Sanchez-Paramo,
and N. Schady (2003), Closing the Gap in Education and Technology, Washington, D.C.:
World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Studies.
De Negri J. A., Borges Lemos M., De Negri F. (2006a) “Impact of P&D Incentive
Program on the Performance and Technological Efforts of Brazilian Industrial Firms,”
OVE Working Papers 1406, Inter-American Development Bank, Office of Evaluation
and Oversight (OVE).
De Negri J. A., Borges Lemos M., De Negri F. (2006b) “The Impact of University
Enterprise Incentive Program on The Performance and Technological Efforts of Brazilian
Industrial Firms,” OVE Working Papers 1306, Inter-American Development Bank,
Office of Evaluation and Oversight (OVE).
ECLAC 2004, Productive Development in Open Economies, United Nations
Publications, Santiago, Chile.
Hall, B. H. (2002), "The Financing of Research and Development," Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 35-51.
21

Hall, B. H. (2005), Government Policy for Innovation in Latin America, paper presented
at the World Bank conference in Barcelona on R&D and Innovation in the Development
Process, June 9-11, 2005
Heckman, J., LaLonde, R., and Smith, J. (2000) “The Economics and Econometrics of
Active Labor Market Programs,” in The Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), North-Holland.
IDB (2001), IPES 2001: Competitiveness: The Business of Growth, The John Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore and London.
IDB (2007), “IDB’s Science and Technology Programs: An Evaluation of the
Technology Development Funds (TDF) and Competitive Research Grants (CRG),” OVE
Evaluation Report, Inter-American Development Bank, Office of Evaluation and
Oversight (OVE).
Jaffe, A. (2002) “Building Program Evaluation into the Design of Public Research
Support Programs,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Spring (18), pp. 22-34.
Klette, T., Møen, J., and Griliches, Z. (2000) “Do Subsidies to Commercial R&D Reduce
Market Failures? Micro econometric Evaluation Studies,” Research Policy 29, pp. 471495.
Lederman D. and W. F. Maloney (2003), “R&D and Development,” Policy Research
Working Paper 3024, World Bank, Washington.
Maffioli A., (2005) “The Formation of Network and Public Intervention: Theory and
Evidence from the Chilean Experience” ISLA Working Papers 23, ISLA, Centre for
research on Latin American Studies and Transition Economies, Universita' Bocconi,
Milano, Italy, revised May 2005.
Martin, S. and Scott, J. (2000) “The nature of innovation market failure and the design of
public support for private innovation,” Research Policy 29, pp. 437–447.
Nelson, R. (1959) “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,” Journal of
Political Economy 67(3), pp. 297-306.
OCyT (2007), Evaluación ex-post del Programa nacional de desarrollo científico y
tecnológico. Componente de apoyo para el desarrollo tecnológico e innovación en el
sector productivo, mimeo.
OECD (2005), Behavioural Additionality of R&D Grants: Introduction and Synthesis,
Working Party on Innovation and Technological Policy, Paris.
Pakes, A. and Griliches, Z. (1984), “Patents and R&D at firm level: A first look,” in
R&D, patents and productivity, Z. Griliches (ed.), University of Chicago Press and
NBER, Chicago.
RICYT (2007), Ibero-American and Inter-American Network on Science and Technology
Indicators data available at http://www.ricyt.edu.ar.
Smith, J. and Todd, P. (2003) “Does Matching Overcome Lalonde's Critique of
Nonexperimental Estimators?” CIBC Working Paper Series No. 2003-5.
Teubal M. (1996), “R&D and Technology Policy at NICs as Learning Processes,” World
Development, 24: 449-460
22

Teubal M. (1998), Marco de Políticas para el Financiamiento de la Innovación en
economías en vías de Industrialización, SDS Working Paper, Inter-American
Development Bank, Sustainable Development Department.
Teubal, M. (2002) “What is the Systems Perspective to Innovation and Technology
Policy (ITP) and How Can We Apply It to Developing and Newly Industrialized
Economies?” Journal of Evolutionary Economics, Vol. 12, Numbers 1-2.
UNESCO (2005), UNESCO Science Report 2005, UNESCO publishing, Paris
Velho, L (2004), Science and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean: An
overview, INTECH Discussion Paper Series, United Nations University, Maastricht
Wallsten, S. (2000) “The effects of government-industry R&D programs on private
R&D: The case of the Small Business Innovation Research Program,” RAND Journal of
Economics, vol. 31, pp. 82-100.

23

Figure 1a: The supply and demand for R&D funds with a matching grant
Cost of R&D
Capital

S
S’

D4

D3
D2
D1
R&D Spending

Figure 1b: The supply and demand for R&D funds with a credit subsidy
Cost of R&D
Capital

S

S’

D4

D3
D2
D1
R&D Spending

Source: authors’ elaborations

24

Figure 2: The evaluation model

O u tc o m e
P e r fo rm a n c e

In n o v a tiv e
O u tp u t
E x te rn a l
re la ti o n s

O u tp u t
In te rn a l
o r g a n iz a tio n

R&D
in v e s tm e n t

Inpu t

S h o r t te r m

M e d iu m te r m

Source: Authors’ elaboration

25

L o n g te r m

Table 1: Technology Development Funds Evaluated
Country and
period

Name

Tools

Mechanism

Beneficiaries

Argentina (AR)
1994-2001

FONTAR-TMP I

Targeted Credit

Open Window

Firms

Argentina (AR)
2001-2004

FONTAR ANR

Matching Grants

Call for Proposals

Firms

Brazil (BR)
1996-2003

ADTEN

Targeted Credit

Open Window

Firms

Brazil (BR)
1999-2003

FNDCT

Matching Grants

Open Window / Call
for proposals

Firms and
Research centers

Chile (CH)
1998-2002

FONTEC –Line 1

Matching Grants

Open Window

Firms

Panama (PN)
2000-2003

FOMOTEC

Matching Grants

Open Window

Firms

Source: Authors’ elaboration

Table 2 – Indicators and Data Sources for TDF Impact Evaluation
Indicator (type)

Sources

Horizon

Amount invested by
beneficiaries in R&D

Firm balance
sheets;
Innovation
surveys;
Industrial surveys

Short
term

Behavioral
additionality

What is the impact of the TDF on the
innovative behaviour of beneficiaries? The
evaluation assesses the effectiveness of the
public financing in inducing a change in the
behaviour of the beneficiaries and
increasing their capability of developing
process and product innovations and
allowing them to be more connected to the
National Innovation System.

Subjective indicators
on product
innovation, process
innovation, linkages
with other agents in
the NIS

Innovation
surveys

Short/
medium
term

Innovative
Outputs

What is the impact on innovation capacity
of beneficiaries? Was a significant product
or process innovation introduced? Were
patents applied for?

Patents;
Sales due to new
products

Patents databases;
Innovation
surveys

Short/
medium
term

Performance

What is the impact on competitiveness of
beneficiaries - change in sales, employment,
productivity and a share of sales exported?
An innovative and efficient firm is expected
to be able to improve its competitiveness in
relation to non-beneficiaries.

Total factor
productivity
Labor productivity;
Growth in sales,
exports, employment

Firm balance
sheets;
Innovation
surveys;
Industrial
surveys;
Labor surveys

Short/
medium/
long
term

Input
additionality

Evaluation Questions
Does public financing crowd out private
resources? The evaluation looks at the
impact of the TDF on the beneficiaries' own
financial resources devoted to R&D and
innovation activities, as a test for the
potential crowding out effect of the public
financing.

Source: Authors' elaborations

26

Table 3: Input Additionality - Testing for Crowding in / Crowding out Effects
Indicator

Impact

Signif.

FONTEC (CH)

R&D intensity *

0.74%

10%

FONTAR-ANR (AR)

R&D intensity *

0.18%

5%

ADTEN (BR)

R&D intensity **

0.66%

5%

FNDCT (BR)

R&D intensity **

1.63%

5%

FOMOTEC (PN)

R&D elasticity ***

0.28

5%

FONTAR-TMP I (AR)

R&D elasticity ****

0.15

5%

Conclusion
Possible slight crowding out; no
multiplier effect
No crowding out, but no multiplier
effect
Positive and significant impact, net of
subsidy
Positive and significant impact, net of
subsidy
No crowding out
Positive and significant impact, net of
subsidy

* Difference-in-Difference [(Treated After-Treated Before) - (Control After – Control Before)] with
Propensity Score Matching; R&D variable is gross of public subsidy.
** Single difference [Treated After - Control After] with Propensity Score Matching; R&D variable is net
of public subsidy.
*** Panel Data Fixed Effects. Available data do not allow us to test for the presence of a multiplier effect.
**** Panel Data Fixed Effects and Instrumental Variable; R&D variable is net of public subsidy.
Source: Authors’ elaboration on the basis of IDB (2007).

Table 4: Innovative Output and Behavioral Changes
Indicator
Product innovation
(strategic relevance on a 1-5 scale)
Process innovation
(strategic relevance on a 1-5 scale)
Financial access
(improvement on a 1-5 scale)
Training & org. activities
(1-5 scale)
Use of external sources of
knowledge (1-5 scale)

Impact
FONTEC (CH)*

Significance

Impact
FOMOTEC (PN)*

Significance

- 1.45

NS

0.08

5%

0.46

10%

0.10

5%

0.13

10%

0.15

1%

- 0.06

NS

0.05

NS

0.10

5%

0.07

5%

Single difference [Treated After – Control After] with propensity score matching.
Source: Authors’ elaboration on the basis of IDB (2007).

27

Table 5: Innovative Output
FONTEC (CH)

FONTAR-ANR (AR)
ADTEN (BR)
FOMOTEC (PN)
FNDCT (BR)

Indicator
Number of new patents,
1998-2002 *
Number of new
products, 1998-2002*
Sales of new products
(1000s of pesos), 20012004*
Number of patents,
1996-2003*
Share of sales of new
products, 2000-2003*
Number of patents,
1999-2003*
Patent applications,
1999-2003**

Impact

Signif.

Conclusion
Positive, but not significant
impact
Negative, but not significant
impact

0.15

NS

-1.15

NS

1,013

NS

Positive, but not significant
impact

0.87

NS

Positive, but not significant
impact

14.2%

1%

Positive and significant impact

-1.35

NS

Negative, but not significant
impact

14.06

5%

Positive and significant impact

* Difference-in-Difference [(Treated After - Treated Before) - (Control After – Control Before)] with
Propensity Score Matching
** Difference-in-Difference [(Treated After - Treated Before) - (Control After - Control Before)]
Source: Authors’ elaboration on the basis of IDB (2007).

Table 6: Performance
FONTEC (CH)

FONTAR-ANR (AR)

ADTEN (BR)

FOMOTEC (PN)

FNDCT (BR)

Indicator
Employment (∆%)*
Sales (∆%)*
Productivity (∆%)*
Exports (% of sales)*
Employment (∆%)*
Sales (∆%)*
Productivity (∆%)*
Exports (% of sales)*
Employment (∆%)*
Sales (∆%)*
Productivity (∆%)*
Sales**
Productivity (∆%)**
Exports**
Employment (∆%)*
Sales (∆%)*
Productivity (∆%)*

Impact
3.1%
39.6%
24.9%
2.7%
1.5%
11.5%
-85.4%
-0.1%
79.0%
64.0%
- 1.0%
2.57
0.14
41.87
12.0%
20.0%
27.5%

Signif.
NS
10%
NS
10%
NS
NS
NS
NS
1%
5%
NS
NS
5%
NS
NS
NS
NS

Conclusion
Positive, but not significant impact
Positive and significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact
Positive and significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact
Negative, but not significant impact
Negative, but not significant impact
Positive and significant impact
Positive and significant impact
Negative, but not significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact
Positive and significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact
Positive, but not significant impact

* Difference-in-Difference [(Treated Before-Treated After) - (Control Before - Control After)] with
Propensity Score Matching
** Panel fixed effects; amount of subsidy rather than a dummy on the right hand side.
All “after” indicators are measured two years after the receipt of the subsidy.
Source: Authors’ elaboration on the basis of IDB (2007).

28

Appendix A
Figure A1. R&D Input and Output: Evolution of the Gap between LAC and US (1991-2003).
R&D/GDP

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
Publications (GDP)

Firms' R&D (%)

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Publications (RES)

Resercher (%)

Patents (APP)

LAC/US 1991

LAC/US 2003

Source: Authors’ elaboration on the basis of RICYT

29

Parity

Table A1 – Knowledge Divide between LAC and G7 (2003 and change 1995 – 2003)
KEI (1)

EIR (2)

INN (3)

EDU (4)

ICT (5)

GAP*

∆**

GAP*

∆**

GAP*

∆**

GAP*

∆**

GAP*

∆**

52.5

-2.7

50.4

-9.6

48.9

-3.4

49.5

1.3

61.2

0.1

Argentina

64.1

-4.7

35.4

-36.5

68.8

2.5

87.3

15.8

63.0

-2.7

Barbados

70.8

14.3

72.0

32.3

36.5

-2.6

91.2

11.0

85.1

19.6

Bolivia

42.3

-1.1

54.3

-23.1

18.3

4.5

64.0

18.1

34.8

-5.3

Brazil

60.8

7.7

54.5

-4.5

57.3

6.4

65.9

22.9

65.4

5.6

Chile

80.8

9.7

112.4

24.2

64.6

3.0

73.6

7.9

75.4

4.6

Colombia

45.7

-5.6

40.2

-17.8

37.4

1.8

51.9

1.2

53.3

-8.7

Costa Rica

65.1

-2.4

77.3

3.8

61.1

1.0

49.4

-10.3

73.8

-3.8

Dominican Rep.

36.3

-2.6

42.4

12.4

3.5

-28.7

47.3

-0.4

53.4

8.5

Ecuador

38.0

-1.5

30.4

-15.9

29.1

15.5

44.5

-4.8

48.1

-1.7

El Salvador

42.8

-0.4

66.9

4.0

19.4

-2.5

36.7

-1.9

50.8

-0.3

Guatemala

28.6

9.1

46.5

20.0

5.8

-2.2

25.5

0.5

38.6

19.2

Haiti

17.6

7.7

26.0

22.4

0.9

0.0

13.9

0.7

30.4

8.8

Honduras

26.1

-7.5

39.4

7.6

10.7

-25.5

28.3

-1.2

27.3

-9.4

Jamaica

58.2

-0.3

51.8

-13.6

55.3

-15.0

50.8

6.3

74.2

20.3

Mexico

59.7

0.4

68.1

-7.2

55.3

3.0

51.5

2.3

64.7

2.4

Nicaragua

30.5

5.6

51.4

31.5

8.4

2.1

33.6

-0.1

30.7

-8.6

Paraguay

31.9

-4.5

30.9

-28.4

8.4

3.6

49.1

6.8

40.3

-1.2

Peru

49.4

1.9

46.7

3.4

38.0

-0.3

59.9

-0.4

53.2

5.9

Uruguay

64.1

-7.6

72.4

-13.8

35.2

-21.1

82.8

8.1

67.9

-3.0

Venezuela

46.2

-8.7

13.3

-30.9

51.5

-3.0

61.3

7.1

56.4

-9.3

Latin America

Notes to table:
* GAP = [(Value for the country i)/(Value for G7)];
** ∆ = [GAP2003 – GAP1995]
(1) KEI = Knowledge Economy Index
(2) EIR = Economic Incentive and Institutional Regime
(3) INN = Innovation System
(4) EDU = Education
(5) ICT = Information and Communication Technologies.
Source: World Bank K4D

30

Table A2 – Overview of the Case Studies
Method

Impact variable

Covariates *

Interpretation of the impact

1. Country and Period: Argentina 1994-2001; Program name: FONTAR-TMP I; Data type: Panel; No. of Obs.: 420 x 7; Period of exposure: 1995-2001

FE** + IV

R&D elasticity (net of subsidy)

Sales, employment, exports, ratio of qualified
employees to the total employees
Additional inst. = N of offices promoting program
located in the province of the firm.

Fixed effects, instrumented. The impact is the within firm elasticity of
R&D with respect to the subsidy.

2. Country and Period: Argentina 2001-2004; Program name: FONTAR-ANR; Data type: Panel; No. of Obs.: 414 x 4; Period of exposure: 2002-2004

DD with
PSM***

R&D intensity change (gross of subsidy)
Sales of new products (1000s of pesos) (∆,
2001 - 2004)
Employment (∆%, 2001 - 2004)
Sales (∆%, 2001 - 2004)
Productivity (∆%, 2001 - 2004)
Export share of sales (∆, 2001 - 2004)

Group, sales, the ratio of qualified employees to
number of employees, economic sector, location

Difference in difference with propensity score matching. The impact
is the average difference of the changes in the variables between
treated and untreated firms that have been matched using the
propensity score.

3. Country and Period: Brazil 1996-2003; Program name: ADTEN; Data type: Panel; No. of Obs.: 11,645 x 8; Period of exposure: 1997-2003
D with
PSM ***

R&D intensity (net of subsidy, 2000)

Sales, firm’s solvency (dummies), firm’s age,
market share, foreign capital (dummy), exporting
firm (dummy), economic sector, location

Differences with propensity score matching. The impact is the average
difference of R&D intensity between treated and untreated firms that
have been matched using the propensity score.

DD with
PSM***

Number of patents (∆, 1996 – 2003)
Employment (∆%, 1996 – 2003)
Sales (∆%, 1996 – 2003)
Productivity (∆%, 1996 – 2003)

Sales, firm’s solvency (dummies), firm’s age,
market share, foreign capital (dummy), exporting
firm (dummy), economic sector, location

Difference in difference with propensity score matching. The impact
is the average difference of the changes in the variables between
treated and untreated firms that have been matched using the
propensity score.

4. Country and Period: Brazil 1999-2003; Program name: FNDCT; Data type: Panel; No. of Obs.: 15,466 x 5; Period of exposure: 1999-2003
D with
PSM ***

R&D Intensity (net of subsidy, 2003)

DD with
PSM***

Number of patents (∆, 1996 – 2003)
Patent applications (∆, 1996 – 2003)
Employment (∆%, 1996 – 2003)
Sales (∆%, 1996 – 2003)
Productivity (∆%, 1996 – 2003)

Differences with propensity score matching. The impact is the average
difference of R&D intensity between treated and untreated firms that
have been matched using the propensity score.
Sales, firm’s solvency (dummies), firm’s age,
market share, foreign capital (dummy), exporting
firm (dummy), economic sector, location

31

Difference in difference with propensity score matching. The impact
is the average difference of the changes in the variables between
treated and untreated firms that have been matched using the
propensity score.

Method

Covariates *

Impact variable

Interpretation of the impact

5. Country and Period: Chile 1998-2002; Program name: FONTEC; Data type: Panel; No. of Obs.: 439 x 4; Period of exposure: 1999-2001

DD with
PSM ***

D with
PSM ***

R&D intensity (gross of public subsidy)
Number of patents (∆, 1998 – 2002)
No. of new products (∆, 1998 – 2002)
Employment (∆%, 1998 – 2002)
Sales (∆%, 1998 – 2002)
Productivity (∆%, 1998 – 2002)
Export share of sales (∆, 1998 - 2002)

Difference in difference with propensity score matching. The impact
is the average difference of the changes in the variables between
treated and untreated firms that have been matched using the
propensity score.
Sales, firm’s age, firm’s age square, economic
sector

Product innovation (relevance,1-5 scale)
Process innovation (relevance,1-5 scale)
Financial access (relevance,1-5 scale)
Training & org. (1-5 scale)
Use of external knowledge (1-5 scale)

Differences with propensity score matching. The impact is the average
difference of the variables between treated and untreated firms that
have been matched using the propensity score.

6. Country and Period: Panama 2000-2003; Program name: FOMOTEC; Data type: Panel; No. of Obs.: 179 x 4; Period of exposure: 2001-2003
FE
PSM with
common
support

R&D elasticity (net of subsidy)
Sales elasticity
Productivity elasticity
Export elasticity
Share of sales of new products (2000-2003)

FE: Sales, ratio export sales, average salary, year
dummies
PSM: Export share, total employment, firm’s age,
investment in machinery, economic sector

Fixed effects. The impact is the within firm elasticity of the left hand
variable with respect to the subsidy.

D with
PSM ***

Product innovation (relevance,1-5 scale)
Process innovation (relevance,1-5 scale)
Financial access (relevance,1-5 scale)
Training & org. activities (1-5 scale)
Use of external knowledge (1-5 scale)

Ratio export sales, total employment, firm’s age,
investment in machinery, economic sector

Differences with propensity score matching. The impact is the average
difference of the variables between treated and untreated firms.

Notes: FE = Fixed effect; D = Difference (compares levels); DD = Difference in Difference (compares growth rates); PSM = Propensity Score Matching; IV = Instrumental Variable
* In the case of FE models, this column gives the right hand side variables included. For PSM it gives the variables included in the propensity score, which is computed using the values in the year before the
subsidy began.
** The impact was calculated through a fixed effect estimation of the following model:
log(yit) = β1* log(x)it + β2*log( Sit )+ β3* θt + γi + εit
where yit is the level of private R&D investment in innovation of firm i in year t, xit is a vector of observable covariates, Sit is the actual amount received through the program, θt denotes year dummies; γi is a
firm-specific component common to all firms and εit is an i.i.d. zero mean random variable assumed to be independent of xit.
*** The impact was estimated as average effect of the treatment on the treated (ATT):
ATT = E[E(Y1 | D = 1, p(x)) –E(Y0 | D = 0, p(x)) | D = 1]
where Y is the impact variable, D = {0,1} is a dummy variable for the participation in the program, x is a vector of pretreatment characteristics and p(x) ≡ P(D = 1 | x) = E(D | x) is the propensity score. In the
case of DD, the impact variable is a growth rate (the change in logY) or a difference (∆Y).

32

