                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE ROLE OF LABOR MARKET CHANGES IN THE SLOWDOWN OF EUROPEAN
                       PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

                                          Ian Dew-Becker
                                          Robert J. Gordon

                                        Working Paper 13840
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13840


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




Thanks to Bobby Krenn for superb research assistance, including his authorship of the Data Appendix.
 We are grateful to Bart van Ark, Susanto Basu, Nick Bloom, Allan Drazen, Richard Freeman, Greg
Mankiw, Bill Nordhaus, Barbara Petrongolo, and Charles Wyplosz for their perceptive comments
on earlier versions and to Andrea Bassanini, Romain Duval, Magnus Henrekson, and Guido Schwerdt
for providing data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ian Dew-Becker and Robert J. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Labor Market Changes in the Slowdown of European Productivity Growth
Ian Dew-Becker and Robert J. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 13840
March 2008
JEL No. E0,E23,E24,E60,J20,J21,J23

                                               ABSTRACT

Throughout the postwar era until 1995 labor productivity grew faster in Europe than in the United
States. Since 1995, productivity growth in the EU-15 has slowed while that in the United States has
accelerated. But Europe's productivity growth slowdown was largely offset by faster growth in employment
per capita, leaving little difference in growth of output per capita between the EU and US going back
to 1980. This paper is about the strong negative tradeoff between productivity and employment growth
within Europe. We document this tradeoff in the raw data, in regressions that control for the two-way
causation between productivity and employment growth, and we show that there is a robust negative
correlation between productivity and employment growth across countries and time. Our primary explanatory
variables to explain both the revival of EU employment growth and the slowdown in productivity
growth include six policy and institutional variables. We find that several of these variables have significant
negative effects on employment per capita, both before and after 1995. We also find a significant
time effect, that the increase in European employment per capita increased after 1995 for reasons that
go beyond our six explanatory variables, and we link this time effect to a secular increase in the labor-force
participation of women, particularly in southern European countries. We conclude by suggesting that
evaluations of alternative policy reforms in Europe should take into account any offsetting effects
on employment and productivity by examining the ultimate impact on changes in income per capita.


Ian Dew-Becker
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
idew@fas.harvard.edu

Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER, and CEPR
rjg@northwestern.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

        Throughout the postwar era until 1995 labor productivity grew faster in Europe
than in the United States. But since 1995, productivity growth in the EU‐15 has slowed
while that in the United States has accelerated. What caused this reversal? In principle
one could imagine any number of causes, including a spontaneous acceleration in total‐
factor productivity (TFP) growth in the U.S., a spontaneous deceleration of TFP growth
in Europe, a change in labor‐market policies and institutions in Europe that made labor
both cheaper and less productive, a change in the level of investment in Europe, or any
combination of these.

       The starting point for the paper is the observation that after 1995, just as Europe’s
labor productivity growth slowed down relative to the US, its relative growth in hours
worked per capita surged. Moreover, the countries within Europe that had the largest
decelerations in productivity growth also had the largest increases in hours. As a result,
the growth of European output per capita has fallen behind that of the US by a much
smaller margin than its shortfall in the growth of labor productivity. Are the
simultaneous turnarounds of productivity and hours per capita in opposite directions
independent or related events, and if related in which direction does the causation run
and what were the underlying causes? Is there a tradeoff between growth in hours and
productivity, and what are the implications for policy? 1

        While we begin with contrasts between the US and EU‐15, most of this paper is
about heterogeneity within the EU‐15. To facilitate generalizations about heterogeneity
within Europe, we group European countries into the same geographical sub‐aggregates
as in Boeri et al. (2005), namely the Nordic, Anglo‐Saxon, Continental, and
Mediterranean countries. 2 We pay particular attention to the contrast between the
Mediterranean group and the other three groups, because the slowdown in productivity
growth and revival of growth in hours per capita has been particularly pronounced in
the two largest Mediterranean countries, Italy and Spain. The average population shares
of the four groups over 1980‐2004 were 5 percent for the Nordic group, 17 percent for
the Anglo‐Saxon group, 49 percent for the Continental group, and 29 percent for the
Mediterranean group.

        Our first empirical task is to describe the behavior of the leading policy and
institutional variables that have been identified as relevant in the past literature on the
pre‐1995 decline in European hours per capita relative to the US. Our list of policy and


1 The phrase “tradeoff” to describe the offsetting effects of labor supply shifts on productivity and
employment may originate in Gordon (1997) and was implicit in Blanchard (1997).
2
  The only difference is that we label their “Other Europe” group as “Continental” and we group
Ireland with the UK in the “Anglo‐Saxon” group rather than in the “Other Europe” group as they
do.


                                                 1
institutional variables includes four policy variables – the labor tax wedge, the average
replacement rate of unemployment insurance, and indices of employment protection
legislation and product market regulation. Also included are two institutional variables
describing outcomes rather than policies themselves, trade union density and an index
of “high corporatism.”

         We examine changes in these policy/institutional variables over the time period
between 1978 and 2003 and find that the turnaround from making labor more expensive
to less expensive occurred with a different time path for each variable. This difference in
the time path of the policy/institutional variables provides some caution to the easy
verdict that everything—policy, institutions, and outcomes – all turned around
simultaneously after 1995. We attribute the policy turnaround in the policy/institutional
variables to two major sets of impetus to change the EU policy framework, the 1994
OECD Jobs Strategy and the 2000 Lisbon Agenda.

         Next we ask is whether there is any systematic relationship between these
sources of lower post‐1995 labor costs and the subsequent post‐1995 upsurge in
European employment per capita. Before 1995, Europe could have been described as
making labor more expensive, driving its labor market northwest along the labor
demand curve with an accompanying decline in employment and increase in
productivity. Starting at different dates for different policies, Europe began the process
of shifting to the southeast, toward higher employment per capita but lower average
productivity per hour.

        Standard economic theory treats this southeast movement as a temporary
phenomenon that occurs during a short period while the labor demand curve is held
fixed. Soon dynamic responses should emerge that begin to restore the now‐reduced
ratio of capital to labor input toward its initial level. However, we find that this
stimulus from higher employment to capital growth has not happened yet in most
European countries; growth in capital per capita fell substantially from 2000 to 2004 for
most European countries and regions. Thus, while our paper quantifies only the
immediate static response of labor supply shifts on labor productivity, we find that there
has been thus far no dynamic medium‐term turnaround either in the growth rates of
productivity or in capital per capita.

       Our results need to be highly qualified. Policy and institutional variables do not
explain all or even most of the post‐1995 upsurge in European employment per capita.
Much of the post‐1995 employment increase has occurred for females, not males, and we
interpret this not as a result of specific policy interventions but rather as a shift in culture
and social norms toward a greater acceptance of females in the labor force, especially in
Southern Europe.




                                               2
        We distill a large European literature on the adverse effects of policies and
institutions in dampening European employment per capita and raising labor
productivity before 1995 and in reversing this process after after 1995. 3 We develop
regression models building on the best recent research to identify which policies and
institutions changed and how much of the employment turnaround can be explained by
these models. The size of our dataset – 23 years of data for 14 countries – gives us
substantial power for identifying the relevant effects. Our paper is also unique in
developing post‐1995 simulations that quantify the effect of the policy and institutional
variables on both employment per capita and productivity growth. 4

       The paper then proceeds to the relationship between employment and
productivity. We develop an explicit econometric model that attempts to explain
changes in labor productivity growth as a function of the turnaround in employment
per capita. This model uses standard statistical procedures to eliminate the feedback
from productivity growth to employment growth and allows us to measure the feedback
from policy changes in explaining slower productivity growth after 1995.

        Our results do not explain the majority of the post‐1995 productivity turnaround
in Europe. Rather, our focus is on identifying as precisely as possible the magnitude of
the effects of policy on employment and productivity growth. We find that there is a
strong and robust negative correlation between the growth of labor productivity and
employment per capita across the EU‐15. Last, we study the complete effects of policy
changes output per capita.

         Our story of declining European productivity growth emerges with multiple
dimensions, including the impetus from changes in policies and institutions, and from
other possible independent causes of employment growth, particularly the increasing
role of female employment in the Mediterranean countries due to a combination of
changes in social norms, the innovation of temporary employment contracts, and the
role of immigration.




3Two important books on the European reform agenda are Baily and Kirkegaard (2004) and
Alesina and Giavazzi (2006). Background on the 1994 OECD jobs strategy is given in OECD
(2006, p. 24) and on the Lisbon agenda in Pissarides (2005, pp. 9‐10).
4
 Even some of the most recent papers in this literature, e.g., Ohanian, Raffo, and
Rogerson (2007), carry out analyses that focus on pre‐1995 relationships without any
attempt to test their pre‐1995 hypotheses on post‐1995 data.


                                             3
2. DATA ON THE TWIN TURNAROUNDS

2.1 The Opposite Movements of Growth in Labor Productivity and
    Hours per Capita

         The story of the joint post‐1995 turnaround in productivity and hours per capita
is best told in Figure 1. Figure 1 plots our three core variables, labor productivity or
output per hour (Y/H), versus hours per capita (H/N), and their product (output per
capita, or Y/N), in a form that smooths the annual year‐to‐year wiggles of the data into
long‐run trends. 5 We express hours and output on a per‐capita basis, which partly
levels the playing field due to the 0.7 percent per annum slower rate of population
growth in the EU than in the US. 6

        The upper frame of Figure 1 exhibits the growth trends of EU and US output per
hour since 1970 in the total economy (not the more frequently cited private business
sector). The EU growth trend uniformly falls from about 5 to 1 percent per year, with a
brief hiatus in the decline between 1988 and 1996. The US growth trend declined in the
1970s to a trough in 1981, then exhibited a modest recovery in the early 1980s and a
much more significant revival after 1996. The difference between the EU and US growth
trends changed from +2.2 percentage points in 1970 to ‐0.6 percentage points in 2006.

        The bottom frame of Figure 1 expresses growth in both output and hours per
capita. The graph shows that the US trend growth in hours per capita was positive in
most years until 2000, but negative from 2000 to 2005. In contrast, trend growth in
Europe’s hours per capita was strongly negative from 1970 to 1995, with a brief
interruption in 1986‐89. This negative trend reversed itself over the past decade,
recording a positive trend growth rate of hours per capita in each year after 1995.

         When Y/H is multiplied by H/N, the divergent trend growth rates of
productivity and hours per capita imply a surprisingly small EU‐US difference in the
growth rate of output per capita (Y/N). While Europe did show faster growth in the
early 1970s, since then there has been a tie game, with average trend growth rates over
1975‐2006 of 1.92 percent per year for the EU and 1.97 percent for the US. The problem
is that Europe has failed to catch up to the US level of output per capita since 1975, with
the EU‐US ratio of output per capita roughly fixed at around 70 percent of the US level.

5 The trends are created by a Hodrick‐Prescott filter applied to annual data with a smoothing
parameter of 12.5. The US trends are based on taking the annual average of trends fitted to
quarterly data through 2007Q2, in order to highlight the 2004‐06 downturn in US productivity
growth.
6 The difference between EU‐15 and US population growth differs by concept and data source.

With GGDC data EU‐15 growth in total population grew 0.7 percent slower than in the US over
1970‐2006. With OECD data the difference for total population was 0.54 percent and for
population aged 15 and over was 0.53 percent.


                                              4
        Growth of hours per capita is equal by definition to the growth of hours per
employee (H/E) plus the growth of employees per capita (E/N). We choose in this paper
to focus our analysis on the European turnaround in E/N. As shown in Figure 2, the
post‐1995 turnaround in E/N is much more dramatic than in H/N. For the rest of this
paper, we will use the metric of E/N to summarize the European post‐1995 turnaround.

        Figure 1 raises an important question relevant to the interpretation of this paper.
We are intrigued by the joint turnaround in opposite directions after 1995 between the
US and EU‐15 in the growth rates of employment per capita and in labor productivity.
But clearly this turnaround‐tradeoff story is not adequate to characterize the entire post‐
1970 period plotted in Figure 1, where in the top frame the growth of labor productivity
slowed much more between 1970 and 1980 and with no apparent corollary of rapid
growth in hours or employment per capita. We view the story of declining productivity
growth in the 1970s in both the US and EU‐15 as outside of the scope of this paper. The
focus and regression analysis of this paper concentrates on the turnaround in the
behavior of both productivity and employment growth between the periods 1980‐95 as
contrasted to the period 1995 until 2003. 7

2.2 The Turnaround by Country and EU Country Group

    Table 1 summarizes the 1970‐95 and 1995‐2006 growth rates of Y/H, H/N, and Y/N
for the US, the EU‐15, each EU country, our four EU country groups, and for the EU‐15
excluding the Mediterranean countries. We focus here primarily on the turnarounds,
that is, the difference between the 1995‐2006 and 1970‐95 growth rates for each of the
three variables. The EU‐US turnaround difference is ‐2.20 percentage points for Y/H,
+1.99 points for H/N, and a mere ‐0.19 points for Y/N. These numbers are not listed
explicitly in Table 1; they are calculated by taking the EU line and subtracting the US
line in the column labeled “difference.”

    The role of the Mediterranean countries is shown by a separate “EU‐15xMed”
aggregate that excludes the three Mediterranean countries. The negative Y/H
turnaround when the EUxMed countries are compared with the row for the US becomes
smaller from ‐2.20 points to ‐1.65, the H/N turnaround becomes smaller from +1.99 to
+1.50 points, and the Y/N turnaround becomes smaller from ‐0.19 to ‐0.15 points. Thus,
while the Mediterranean countries contribute disproportionately to the post‐1995
turnarounds in Y/H and H/N, still a substantial turnaround in both productivity and
employment growth remains in the rest of the EU‐15. The negative correlation between
growth in H/N and Y/H remains intact when the Mediterranean countries are excluded,
and this is an important fact that is replicated in our subsequent econometric analysis.


7We are grateful to our discussant Allan Drazen for pointing out that the data for the 1970s and
1980s does not exhibit any tradeoff.


                                                5
       An important development in Europe since 1995 has been an increase in
heterogeneity across countries. The bottom line in Table 1 shows that there has been an
increase in the standard deviation across EU countries of all three variables, with a
doubling in the standard deviation for H/N and Y/N. With only a few exceptions, pre‐
1995 growth in Y/N was in the range of two to three percent, but after 1995 the range
was from a low of 1.18 percent for Italy to a high of 6.17 percent for Ireland.

    2.3 Labor and Capital Ratios and Total Factor Productivity

        We now bring together data on countries including the US, the EU, and the four
EU country groups, and compare the turnaround in Y/H and E/N with other
components of growth accounting, namely the growth of hours per employee (H/E), in
capital input per hour (K/H), capital deepening (the income share of capital times
growth in K/H), and growth in total factor productivity (TFP). The numbers on the Y/H
and E/N post‐1995 turnarounds are slightly different in Figure 3 and Table 2, which
applies to 1980‐2004, than in Table 1 that covers the longer period 1970‐2006. This
difference in dates is due to data availability regarding capital and TFP.

        Figure 3 examines data on the trend growth rate in capital per hour (K/H) and in
total factor productivity (TFP). The time path of EU growth in K/H roughly parallels
that of Y/H, with respective 1980‐2004 decelerations between 5 and 2 percent annual
growth for K/H versus between 3 and 1 percent annual growth for Y/H. As shown in
the bottom frame of Figure 3, the growth rate of TFP slowed steadily in the EU from
1983 to 2004 while that in the US accelerated in stages. The difference in TFP growth
between the EU and US may be exaggerated by data discrepancies. 8

         We find several interesting facts in the bottom section of Table 2. For the US the
turnarounds of Y/H and TFP were identical and there was no turnaround in the capital
deepening effect. This occurred as the result of slowdowns in the growth of capital per
capita and hours per capita by the same amount, ‐0.49 percent. In the EU as a whole, the
capital growth turnaround was about the same as the output growth turnaround, as
shown by the small positive turnaround in the K/Y ratio at the bottom of the table. This
implies that the negative turnaround in K/H growth was almost as large as the positive
turnaround in H/N growth. As a result of this turnaround in the capital‐deepening
effect, the turnaround of TFP growth was ‐0.80 percentage points, slightly less than the
‐0.93 turnaround of Y/H growth.

         The four country groups display interesting differences. To what extent was


8Standard growth accounting data for the US from US sources obtained from Kevin Stiroh
suggests much slower K/H growth and much faster TFP growth in the 1980s than implied by the
EU‐KLEMS data displayed in Figure 3.


                                             6
growth in capital stimulated by growth in employment? An easy way to obtain this
information from Table 2 is to compare the turnaround in capital per capita growth with
that in employment per capita growth. The Nordic group had a modest negative
turnaround in Y/H growth and hardly any negative turnaround in TFP growth. This
difference by definition is due to the fact that the negative turnaround in capital
deepening was nearly twice as large as the TFP turnaround and thus accounts for most
of the negative Y/H turnaround. The negative turnaround in the K/H ratio was entirely
due to the increase in H/N, as the K/N turnaround was close to zero. Thus our main
impression is that the Nordic countries had a disappointing performance of investment
despite a large turnaround in employment and a relatively strong productivity
performance.

        The Anglo‐Saxon group is mainly driven by the UK. This group had the smallest
Y/H turnaround of the four European groups by a narrow margin, and the second‐
smallest TFP turnaround. The slowdown in K/H was much smaller than the increase in
hours, due to a substantial increase in the growth rate of K/N. The Anglo‐Saxon group
thus has the best performance overall, with a modest slowdown in labor productivity
and growth in capital per capita that was almost half the turnaround in employment per
capita.

         Not surprisingly, with its 49 percent population share in the EU‐15, the
performance of the Continental group was similar to the EU as a whole. The decline in
both Y/H and TFP growth was similar to the EU, while the sluggish revival of growth in
E/N was partly compensated for by an atypical turnaround toward positive growth in
H/E. The slowdown in the capital deepening effect was dampened both by a modest
increase in growth of K/N and a small increase in the income share of capital. The
modest positive turnaround in capital per capita growth was roughly one‐third of the
size of the turnaround in employment per capita growth.

        As we have already seen, the Mediterranean group had the most noteworthy
turnarounds for Y/H, E/N, K/H, capital deepening, and TFP. The slowdown in
Mediterranean capital deepening was relatively modest, because the sharp negative
turnaround in K/H growth was partially offset by a sizeable increase in the income share
of capital (from 28 to 34 percent). We note that the negative turnaround in K/H growth
was entirely due to faster growth in E/N, and that the turnaround in capital per capita
growth was less than one‐tenth of the turnaround in employment per capita. Thus a
surprising finding is that the Mediterranean countries shared with the Nordic countries
a disappointing performance of capital growth, while both the Anglo‐Saxon and
Continental groups display a positive response of capital per capita to more rapid
growth in employment per capita.

       The time‐series dynamics of capital investment in the individual EU country
groups is beyond the scope of this paper. We merely note a fact in the data, that the



                                            7
growth rate of capital investment was relatively weak in the Nordic and Mediterranean
countries. This in turn helps to explain why the employment‐productivity tradeoff,
which would be assumed to be temporary, seems to have persisted at least through
2003. Something held back investment in Europe that would otherwise be expected to
respond to the upsurge of employment growth.



3. DEMOGRAPHIC VARIATION IN THE TURNAROUND OF EMPLOYMENT
PER CAPITA

    In this section we look more closely at the turnaround in the growth of European
employment per capita. We provide an analysis of the demographic components of the
post‐1995 increase in EU employment growth by decomposing employment into twelve
age‐sex groups. Did the post‐1995 turnaround consist of increases across‐the‐board in
each age‐sex group or because the composition of employment shifted toward age‐sex
groups which already had relatively high employment per person? We can answer
these questions with a simple shift‐share analysis of 1985‐95 and 1995‐2005 E/N growth
rates for the EU and our four EU country groups. Following Stiroh (2002), we calculate
“employment” and “share” effects as,

                   employment _ effect = 0.5(enti − enti− n )( sti + s ti− n )
                                                                                 (1)
                   share _ effect = 0.5(enti + enti− n )( sti − s ti− n ),

where eni is the employment to population ratio for group i, si is the population share of
group i, and i indexes age‐sex groups. By definition, the employment and share effects
sum to the total change in employment between time periods t‐n and t for a given
country. The employment effect gives the contribution of the change in a group’s
employment to the total change in employment. The share effect calculates the effect of
an increase in the group’s population share. Since the sum of the share changes must be
zero, the share effects will account for movements among groups with relatively high
and low E/N ratios, e.g., movements to low‐participation groups like teenagers or the
elderly from prime‐age adults, or vice versa.

       Figure 4 plots employment and share effects for our four country groups.
Employment effects are shown in black and share effects are shown in grey. The top
two panels display results for the Nordic and Anglo‐Saxon country groups. The black‐
bar employment effects are generally small, although there was a substantial increase in
male and female employment in both groups in the 55‐64 age group. All Anglo‐Saxon
female groups from ages 64 down to 25 had substantial employment effects.

         The Nordic and Anglo‐Saxon groups also share a notable zig‐zag in the share
effects, with positive share effects for both men and women in the 55‐64 age groups and



                                                    8
negative share effects in the 25‐34 age groups. This is likely the result of the aging of the
population. It is also the result of post‐1995 reforms which reduced “incentives to
withdraw” and discouraged the early retirement of those in the 55‐64 age groups
(OECD, 2006, p. 133). It turns out that the share effects all cancel out, and their sum is
only ‐0.01. Intuitively, this is because the groups across which the population has been
shifting all have similar employment rates. 9

       The bottom left quadrant of Figure 4 shows that employment effects in the
Continental countries were less important than in the Nordic and Anglo‐Saxon
countries. But there were substantial share effects, particularly for the 25‐34 age group.

       The bottom right panel of figure 4 plots data for the Mediterranean countries.
Again, there is the same effect of aging on the share effects, but the employment effects
are substantially larger. 91 percent of the 6.6 percentage point increase in the
employment rate in the Mediterranean countries is explained by employment effects,
and the remainder by share effects. Since women started the period with much lower
employment than men, we would expect most of the increase to be concentrated among
women. As it turns out, 70 percent of the total Mediterranean employment increase can
be explained by employment effects for women. Moreover, this increase is not just
concentrated among the young; it is spread across all age groups except 65+, and is
focused on the prime working years.

        The pattern of female employment explaining employment changes extends
across three of our four country groups. In addition to the Mediterranean countries,
female employment effects explain 68 and 59 percent of the total employment increases
in the Nordic and Anglo‐Saxon countries, respectively. In the Continental countries,
female employment contributed a 1.3 percent increase in aggregate employment, but
share effects and male employment canceled out essentially all of that. In the end,
Figure 4 summarizes two important findings of this paper. First, we confirm the result
that the European work force is aging, but aging has not yet substantially reduced
employment in part because incentives for early retirement have been reduced.

        The second result is that the majority of employment changes in Europe
following 1995 can be explained by increases in prime‐age female employment. The
shift‐share analysis helps us narrow down which variables are likely to be the most
important, and these are the variables affecting women in their prime working years. 10



9 There is no reason that share effects have to sum to near zero. For example, if a country’s
employment rates by age stayed constant but the country suddenly went from being composed
mainly of prime age workers to mainly retirees, the associated decline in employment would be
entirely explained by share effects.
10 For instance, both Allard and Lindert (2006) and Bassanini and Duval (2006) study the effects of

retirement benefits. Our shift‐share analysis shows that changes in employment rates of those


                                                9
The distinctly different behavior of the female from the male employment ratios in
Figure 4 leads us now to develop regression equations explaining E/N that distinguish
between men and women.



4. THE BEHAVIOR OF THE POLICY AND INSTITUTIONAL
VARIABLES

        The basic question addressed in this paper is whether changes in policy and
institutional variables in Europe, including cultural attitudes regarding female labor
force participation, contributed to the post‐1995 upsurge in European employment
growth. In this section we first examine the time series behavior of the policy and
institutional variables and then examine the background of these changes.

4.1 Changes in the Policy and Institutional Variables

        Figure 5 shows the time series behavior for the six policy/institutional variables
for our four country groups. The first of these is the tax wedge, defined as the total
percentage rate of personal income and payroll taxation. This variable exhibits a sharp
turnaround at exactly 1995 for all the groups except the continental countries. The
largest decline was in the Anglo‐Saxon countries, where taxes fell from 26 percent of
income in 1995 to only 17 percent by 2002. The declines in Mediterranean and Nordic
tax rates were 3 and 6 percentage points, respectively.

        The OECD index of employment protection legislation (EPL) also exhibits a
sharp turnaround at the same time; it was relatively flat until the early 1990’s and then
exhibited a substantial decline in the Nordic and Mediterranean countries. The index of
product market regulation (PMR) declined through almost the entire period, though the
decline began at varying times in the different country groups. Union density shows
similar behavior by declining steadily over the entire period plotted in Figure 4 except
for the Mediterranean countries.

       Unemployment benefits as measured by the average replacement rate (ARR)
displays the opposite trend as do the other variables. If anything, ARR rose during our
sample. Overall the behavior of these policy/institutional variables does not support a
simple story that these variables turned around in tandem after 1995 and provide the
main explanation of the employment and productivity turnarounds illustrated in
Figures 1 and 2 above. The most promising variables for this interpretation are the tax
wedge, EPL, and to a lesser extent PMR.



around retirement age were not large enough to explain substantial amounts of variation in
aggregate employment.


                                              10
       It is important to note that the country group averages displayed in Figure 5
represent an expositional device that has no bearing on our subsequent regression
analysis. Our regressions attempting to explain the behavior of growth in employment
per capita and in labor productivity are based on data for 14 individual countries for
each year, not the four country groups.

4.2 Background of the Changes

        Why did policies move in the 1970s and 1980s in the direction that reduced
employment per capita? There is a consensus view that this occurred because policies
adopted to fight unemployment had adverse effects on employment per capita (see
Nickell et al. 2005). To deal with the individual hardship caused by higher
unemployment, governments increased the generosity and duration of unemployment
benefits. To limit the increase in unemployment itself, they attempted to regulate layoffs
through employment protection legislation (EPL). To spread the available jobs across
the population, they resorted to legislation favoring early retirement and shorter hours
of work, so‐called “work sharing” (Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote, 2006).

        As shown in Figure 5, the policy and institutional variables turned around at
different times in different countries, with the clearest post‐1995 turnaround in the tax
wedge in three of the four EU country groups. A catalyst for the post‐1995 turnaround
was the 1994 OECD Jobs Strategy. This landmark agenda had a major influence on EU
policymakers to shift their focus from alleviating the impact of high unemployment to
reforming labor markets with the aim of raising employment per capita. Five of the ten
key recommendations of the 1994 OECD Jobs Strategy involved turning around several
of the key policy variables that enter into our analysis of the growth rates of
employment per capita and productivity. These included reforming EPL, PMR, and
ARR (see OECD, 2006, p. 24).

        The Lisbon Agenda of 2000 reinforced the change in emphasis toward raising the
ratio of employment per capita, especially for females, by reducing the unemployment
rate and particularly by raising the labor‐force participation rate. Quantitative targets
were set for the employment‐population ratio of women in 2005 and 2010 (Pissarides et
al. 2005).

         Several policies were changed that are not included in our regression analysis.
Unemployment benefits were reformed not only by reducing the unemployment
benefits ratio (ARR), but also by reducing the duration of benefits. Another change that
is difficult to quantify is the strictness with which eligibility for unemployment benefits
was administered , so‐called “gate‐keeping mechanisms” (OECD, 2006, p. 62, 75).

       Overall, it would appear that the turnaround in the policy and institutional
variables was a very gradual process, reacting at first to high unemployment by



                                             11
adopting measures that made labor more expensive, but then recognizing after some lag
the benefits of making labor cheaper. Given the long lags evident in this process, and
the very different timing of the turnaround in the policy and institutional variables, we
are not concerned that these variables are systematically endogenous to the time‐series
behavior of employment per capita or of labor productivity.



5. THE RESPONSE OF EMPLOYMENT PER CAPITA TO POLICY
AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGES

       The point of departure for our study of the EU employment turnaround is a
substantial literature that debates the sources of the postwar decline in the ratio of EU to
US hours per capita – 48 percent (in logs) from 1960 to 1995. There is widespread
agreement that Europe made labor more expensive, at least before 1995, but less on the
ultimate causes. There is much less work on understanding how much of the post‐1995
turnaround in H/N can be linked to a reversal of the underlying policy and institutional
variables.

5.1 The Previous Literature on Changes in Hours per Capita and
Employment per Capita

    Prescott (1994) is the best‐known advocate of the view that the sharp decline in
European hours per capita is entirely due to high labor taxes. Prescott establishes his
result with theory and calibration methods, and a paper that interprets his results by
Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote (2006) calculates that Prescott’s elasticity of hours per
capita to a change in the tax wedge is ‐0.92. The Alesina et al. paper argues that, because
males have a small labor elasticity, the tax elasticity may be only as high as ‐0.40 to ‐0.45.

        Several papers, including Davis and Henrekson (2004), attempt to replace the
assumed tax elasticity of Prescott with elasticities estimated from the data. They find a
tax elasticity of ‐0.22, but their results are qualified by using data only for four years
between 1977 and 1995. A paper closely related to ours is Allard and Lindert (2006).
Their aim is to sort through all of the exogenous policy variables that might have
reduced European hours and employment, but, surprisingly, they do not notice the
post‐1995 turnaround in hours or in employment per capita. In the end the Allard‐
Lindert analysis is uni‐dimensional. They pluck candidates to explain lower European
hours growth or productivity growth, with no recognition that there may be a negative
tradeoff between them. They also fail to recognize that there may be a two‐way
causation between productivity and employment changes. 11


11
  Among other previous sources estimating regressions to explain changes in European labor
input are Beaudry and Collard (2001), Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), and Pissarides et al. (2005).
Ljungqvist and Sargent (2006) have joined the debate with Prescott by emphasizing the


                                                12
5.2 Regression Equations Explaining Employment per Capita

        The most recent and convincing paper in this literature is from Bassanini and
Duval of the OECD (2006), hereafter B‐D, who explain movements in the unemployment
rate and per‐capita employment in a variety of econometric specifications. We
incorporate their data developed at the OECD but provide a different set of regression
equations that are used both to obtain coefficients on the effects of alternative policy and
institutional variables. Unlike B‐D and previous authors, we use the estimated
coefficients to estimate counterfactual simulations. Did the post‐1995 upsurge in
employment per capita respond to changes in our set of variables, or was there an
unexplained component?

        Since we are asking different questions than B‐D, we use a somewhat different
specification than theirs. Whereas B‐D studied the determinants of changes in
employment per capita in 20 OECD countries, including the US, Canada, and Japan, our
sample consists of the EU‐15 minus Luxembourg. We also weight our regressions by
population in order to provide the most appropriate results for discussing the EU, in
contrast to their unweighted regressions that give the same importance to Luxembourg
and the United States. The larger countries better represent the EU as a whole and
should be treated as such in the regressions. 12 Furthermore, in the interest of obtaining
results that apply at the aggregate level, we run regressions using the total employment
rate, not just broken down by age and gender.

        Last, we run the regressions in growth rates, rather than levels, because we have
found that the residuals in the levels regressions seem to follow a random walk. 13 Our
basic model posits that the level of employment is driven by the levels of the policy
variables and the output gap. We then take the first difference of the entire equation so
that the actual regression is of the growth rate of the employment rate (E/N) on the
growth rates of the policy variables and the change in the output gap. 14

        In addition to the important change from levels to logarithmic growth rates,
there are several other technical details in our regressions that differ from B‐D and make


disincentive role of the welfare state that is paid for by the tax wedge. A comprehensive list of
such studies is presented in OECD (2006, p. 93), but this list applies only to studies in which the
dependent variable is the unemployment rate, not E/N.
12
   Tables 4 and 5 below display results comparing identical specifications with and without
population weights.
13 This fact likely explains Bassanini and Duval’s finding of R2’s equal to 1.0.

14 The final regressions are actually run with two‐year changes of the policy variables expressed

as an annual rate. This allows their effects to have up to a one year lag. The coefficients reported
all correspond to the long run relationship between the levels of the variables and the level of the
employment rate.


                                                13
them more appropriate for the questions that we ask in this paper. Our baseline results
differ from those of B‐D by including males and females from ages 15‐64 rather than
their 25‐54, by eliminating splits (pre, post 1992) in country effects for Germany, Finland,
and Sweden, and by further filling in some missing data in their data set so that our
results cover 1979‐2003 rather than their 1982‐2003. 15

5.3 Employment Regressions Based on OECD Employment Data

        Table 3 presents our regression results for total employment per capita for both
sexes and then separately for men and women. The data begin in 1979 and so the
variables, expressed in the form of rates of change, begin in 1980 and extend through
2003. The observations are across all years and all the EU‐15 countries excluding
Luxembourg. Thus we have more than 300 observations. Our device of summarizing
the four EU country groups in part 2 of this paper has no impact on the regression
analysis. The observations that we examine here are for individual countries, year‐by‐
year, and the country aggregates are not included in any way.

         The explanatory variables are arranged in groups. The first four rows,
corresponding to the first four frames of Figure 5, exhibit the four policy variables, that
is, the tax wedge (TW), employment protection legislation (EPL), product market
regulation (PMR), and the average replacement rate of unemployment insurance (ARR).
The next two explanatory variables are better described as “institutional” rather than
“policy,” namely union density and a dummy variable for “high corporatism.” The first
six rows of explanatory variables would be expected to have negative coefficients, as
they represent factors that make labor more expensive and thus to reduce E/N. The next
explanatory variable is the change in the output gap, a measure of the influence on
employment of the business cycle. Finally, we also include a dummy variable equal to
1.0 after 1995 and 0.0 before 1995, to detect changes in the trend that are not explained
by the policy and institutional variables. 16

       The most important finding from Table 3 is that all of the policy/institutional
variables listed on the first six lines have significant effects with the expected negative
sign with the exception of the EPL and PMR regulatory variables. The change in the
output gap has the expected positive coefficient at a high level of significance, and the
post‐1995 time dummy has a significant positive coefficient representing a separate
cause of faster growth rate of E/N in Europe for men, women, and the combined both‐


15Details are in the data appendix.
16To call attention again to important differences between our research and that in one of the
more recently published paper on this topic (Ohanian, Raffo, and Rogerson, 2007), we include all
policy/institutional variables together whereas they introduce them only as one‐by‐one
alternatives rather than together, they do not include any variable like the output gap to control
for the business cycle, and they do not consider the possible issue of a time‐shift effect after 1995.


                                                  14
sex results that goes beyond the explanation available from the quantitative policy
variables.

        The negative coefficients for the change in the tax wedge are highly significant.
Our baseline coefficient for both sexes of ‐0.28 is lower than that favored by Alesina et al.
(2006) in the range of ‐0.40 to ‐0.45 but higher than the ‐0.22 coefficient obtained by
Davis‐Henrekson on the basis of a much smaller data set than ours. For the results
divided by sex, our tax wedge coefficient for men of ‐0.21 is not too far below the B‐D
coefficient of ‐0.30, and our female tax‐wedge coefficient of ‐0.37 not too far below the B‐
D coefficient of ‐0.50. Given the different samples, time periods, and our shift from
levels to rates of change, differences of this magnitude are to be expected. The
important point to recognize is that changes in the tax wedge are highly significant
determinants of changes in employment per capita.

        How much of the change after 1995 do these employment regressions actually
explain? This is perhaps the first paper to ask that question. We have a set of
explanatory variables and regression coefficients for the entire 1980‐2003 period. Figure
6 takes the regression results from Table 3 and converts those changes in the dependent
and explanatory variables into levels.

        We can use these 1980‐2003 regression coefficients to decompose the post‐1995
behavior of employment per capita based on three assumptions which correspond to the
three lines in Figure 6, in which the top frame reports results for males and the bottom
frame reports the results for females. The “predicted” line plots the prediction of the
econometric equations assuming the actual values of the policy/institutional variables
and the actual values of the time dummy coefficients. The “Fixed Policy” line sets the
six policy/institutional variables at their 1995 values and calculates how much difference
would have been made to employment if those six variables had maintained their actual
post‐1995 values rather than their fixed counterfactual 1995 value. Then the “no
dummy” line calculates an alternative results which eliminate the effect of the time
dummy on the results.

        The regressions are run with the growth rate of E/N as the dependent variable. It
is quite possible for this growth rate to be negative, as it was for men as shown in the top
frame of Figure 6. The graphs in the top and bottom frames of Figure 6 convert these
growth rates into levels. For both males and females, the growth rate of employment
would have been much lower without the help of the time dummies.

5.4 Interpretation of the Time Effects

        This section provides an interpretation of the time effects estimated in Table 3.
Why might the growth rate of E/N have turned around after 1995 for reasons not related
to our six policy and institutional variables? The 1994 OECD Jobs Strategy and the 2000



                                             15
Lisbon Agenda (discussed above in section 4.2) focus their reform efforts on a primary
goal of boosting the ratio of employment per member of the working population (E/N),
particularly for women. In 1978 the female E/N ratio ranged between 54 percent in
Sweden and 25 percent in Spain, with an EU‐15 average of 35 percent. By 2003 this ratio
had remained the same for Sweden at 54 percent but had risen for Spain to 36 percent
and for the EU‐15 to 43 percent. The quantitative goals of the Lisbon reforms were very
ambitious, to raise the EU average to 57 percent by 2005 and 60 percent by 2010
(Pissarides et al. 2005, pp. 9‐10). We observe in Figures 4 and 6 a substantial increase in
employment per capita for women, particularly in the Mediterranean countries. What
caused the ongoing convergence in employment per capita for women compared to
men, and for Mediterranean women in particular?

       Our basic regression results in the third column of Table 3 imply that there was a
substantial shift over time captured in the largely positive country fixed effects for
females plus the added impact of the post‐1995 time effect. For Spanish females, there
was a country‐specific positive growth rate of female employment per capita of 1.62
percent between 1980 and 1995 period, rising by 0.66 percent to 2.28 percent
subsequently. We need to determine the causes of this substantial shift in the actual
employment rate of Spanish women from 25 percent in 1978 to 36 percent in 2003, a total
increase of 44 percent, or an annual log growth rate of 1.46 percent.

         Basic explanations for the movement of women into the labor force begin with
the literature on the United States where female participation surged between 1965 and
1985 (as summarized in Pissarides et al. 2005, pp. 26‐28). The invention and diffusion of
consumer durables freed up the time of women previously devoted to household
drudgery, and the arrival of contraceptives provided a chance for women to gain control
over the timing of pregnancies and work effort. This effect has been christened by Galor
and Weil (1995) as “female‐biased technological change.”

         “Persistence” and “social norms” are often discussed in this literature. Once
mothers entered the labor force, it became more acceptable for daughters and their
sisters to enter. Authors suggest that there was simultaneously a new acceptance of
market employment by potential female employees, and a change by employers in their
willingness to accept that new employees would be females.

        Previous research (including Bertola et al. 2002 and Davis and Henrekson 2004)
notes the relatively small size of the retail and service sectors in Europe compared to the
United States, and this formerly deprived women of opportunities for flexible and part‐
time employment in these sectors. Reduction of product market regulations may have
played some role in allowing women to enter the labor force, but that cannot explain the
positive post‐1995 dummies in our regressions since PMR is included as a regressor.




                                            16
        An important recent innovation in European labor markets is temporary job
contracts. These allow employees to be hired without the previous overhang of
regulations against firing. These new types of contracts may explain the role of the
positive time dummy variables in the regressions of Table 3, but they are part of the
definition of the EPL variable and indeed the reduction of regulations preventing
temporary employment contracts is the single biggest factor that caused the OECD’s
EPL index to decline after 1995 ((OECD, 2006, p. 95). The growth of temporary contracts
was very important in contributing to the growth of E/N in Spain (Paramio and Zoffo,
2005).

        In addition, increased immigration to countries like Spain (as examined by Heinz
and Ward‐Warmedinger 2005) may be an exogenous event helping to explain why the
time dummy in Table 4 is positive. Bentolila et al. (2007) document that the percentage
of foreign‐born in the Spanish population increased from a mere one percent in 1991 to
11 percent in 2006. These potential new members of the labor force may have been
pulled into Spain by employment opportunities and could have contributed to the post‐
1995 increase in the growth rate of employment in Spain.

5.5 Employment Regressions Based on GGDC Employment Data

       We now turn to the primary objective of this paper, which is to relate the post‐
1995 mutual positive turnaround in the growth rates of employment per capita (E/N)
and the negative turnaround in in the growth rate of labor productivity (Y/H). Because
the primary data relevant to our study of productivity comes from the Groningen Center
(GGDC) rather than the OECD upon which we have previously relied for the
decomposition of E/N by sex, we now present regressions explaining changes in
employment identical to those of Table 3 but now using a different data source for the
dependent variable (the log growth rate of employment per capita). All the data on the
explanatory variables are identical throughout the paper.

        These regressions will be used as a first stage for the productivity regressions
that are the centerpiece of our analysis. Our goal is to find good instruments for
employment, i.e. variables that explain employment as well as possible but that have no
independent effect on productivity.

        Table 4 reports results from the employment regressions. Due to lack of data,
these refer only to both sexes combined, in contrast to the results in Table 3 for the two
sexes separately. As in Table 3, the observations are across all years from 1979 to 2003
and EU‐15 countries, with exceptions noted in the data appendix. Column 1 reports
results for a simple regression with country fixed effects. The coefficients on the tax
wedge, PMR, ARR, union density, and the output gap are all significant and have the
“correct” signs, i.e. higher levels of taxes and regulation lower the employment rate. We
find no effects from EPL. This result holds through all of our specifications. The output



                                            17
gap has by far the most explanatory power for employment, with a t‐statistic of nearly
11. Next most powerful are the tax wedge and union density. These two variables will
be our most powerful instruments in the productivity regressions.

        Column 2 of Table 4 adds a dummy equal to 1 following 1995 and 0 otherwise to
account for a possible exogenous shift in the growth of the employment rate. The
coefficient on this dummy is highly significant and indicates that average employment
growth across Europe rose by nearly a full percentage point following 1995 (the
accompanying box discusses possible reasons for this shift in employment growth after
1995). The other coefficients remain largely unchanged. The only notable differences
are that the coefficients on ARR and union density rise somewhat.

        Columns 3 and 4 present two important robustness tests for the model. 17 In
column 3 we drop the population weights. The results are nearly identical to column 2.
All of the changes in the coefficients are less than one standard error. EPL becomes
marginally significant, but this result is unique to column 3. In column 4 we add
dummies for each year so that the model is fully saturated, i.e. there is a dummy for
each country and each year. Our results remain essentially unchanged. The coefficient
on the tax wedge declines somewhat, to only ‐0.15, and the coefficient on corporatism
declines to ‐1.59, being significant at only the 10% level. We view the inclusion of the
year‐by‐year time dummies as a robustness check, not a part of our basic results, and it
is encouraging that this robustness check makes very little difference to our basic results.

       Column 2 is our preferred specification and will be used as the first stage for
instrumental variables regressions explaining the annual growth rate of labor
productivity in section 6. We have a number of candidate instruments: union density,
ARR, high corporatism, the tax wedge, and the post‐1995 dummy. The prime test for
whether these instruments are valid is whether they have an independent effect on
productivity, which we will examine below. We will also further discuss the intuition
behind our identification. The post‐1995 dummy in particular is somewhat questionable
and will not be used in our primary regressions.




17In the appendix we include a table of extra robustness tests. When Spain or the Mediterranean
countries are excluded, we find that the coefficient on the post‐1995 dummy falls from 0.9 to 0.7.
When the US is included with its own post‐1995 dummy, the coefficient on that variable is ‐0.38,
indicating an unexplained decline in US employment growth, primarily due to a substantial
decline in the US labor force participation rate of youth that has been widely noted and
discussed.


                                                18
6. THE IMPACT OF POLICY AND EMPLOYMENT ON
PRODUCTIVITY

        We now combine all the aspects of growth in employment per capita and in
output per hour in the European economy since the late 1970s in order to estimate the
effect of employment growth on productivity growth. As before, we focus on the
turnaround after 1995.

         Before presenting the empirical results, it is worth stopping to understand why
there might be a causal relationship between productivity and employment. Standard
models of production posit that labor productivity is an increasing function of the
quantity of capital supplied per worker. 18 If the capital stock is fixed in the short‐run,
that is, if any response of investment to changes in labor market conditions takes time,
measured as several years. When employment rises, the capital to labor ratio falls,
driving labor productivity down.

        If investment responds quickly and positively to changes in employment, then
the tradeoff between employment and productivity will be quantitatively small.
Alternatively, if capital responds slowly or not at all, then the tradeoff will be long lived.
In general, theory tells us to expect a response of investment, but this is unlikely to occur
with sufficient speed to obscure the short‐run productivity‐employment tradeoff.

       If employment increases but the new workers are on average less skilled than
those who were already working, then we will also find a negative relationship between
employment and productivity. The remainder of section 6 is devoted to quantifying this
tradeoff. If it exists, it has important implications for policy choices.

6.1 Reduced Form Regressions

        We attempt in this subsection to unite two separate but related strands of
literature. The first is the work discussed in Section 5.1 and 5.2 that analyzes the
determinants of employment. The second literature is the one that examines the
relationship between productivity and employment. Layard, Nickell and Jackman
(2005) in their first two chapters provide microeconomic foundations for the classic labor
supply and demand framework. Subsequent researchers used various methods to
quantify the short‐run employment‐productivity tradeoff; 19 they were essentially


18 We can consider a constant returns to scale production function F(K,L). Constant returns
implies that we can write F in its so‐called “intensive form” F(K,L) = L∙F(K/L,1) = L∙f(K/L). We
then can write labor productivity as Y/L = f(K/L), where f is an increasing and concave function.
19 Bourles and Cette, 2005, are the state of the art in this literature, but see also Beaudry and

Collard, 2002; Beaudry, Collard, and Green, 2005; and McGuckin and van Ark, 2005, among
others.


                                                19
tracing the labor demand curve. In this and the following sections, we merge these two
strands of research, attempting fully to quantify the effects of policy choices on
productivity and employment, and to begin to identify the mechanisms through which
these choices act. As indicated before in the introduction, our analysis is static and
short‐run. It does not trace through the full dynamic response of productivity to
employment, because we cannot find that so far Europe has begun to experience the
dynamic response predicted by theory.

        The structural model in the previous section provided two reasons why an
increase in employment can create a short‐run negative relationship between
employment and productivity—that is, a downward sloping short‐run labor demand
curve. When employment rises, the capital to labor ratio necessarily falls since
investment cannot respond instantaneously. Secondly, when employment rises the new
workers tend to be less skilled and less experienced. Following an increase in
employment, it takes time for the capital stock to grow enough so that the capital to
labor ratio returns to its initial level and for average experience to rise.

       Following the work of past authors, we begin with a simple regression of
productivity growth on growth in employment per capita, the results of which are
reported in Table 5. 20 As in section 5, the model underlying this regression is one in
which the level of productivity is affected by the levels of employment and the policy
variables. We take first differences before running the regression.

        Of the policy variables, EPL and ARR both have significant effects on
productivity after controlling for employment, which rules them out as valid
instruments. Both of their coefficients are positive, a result that is robust across all of our
specifications. This result is surprising because we usually think of government
regulation as interfering with the market and lowering productivity. The result that
unemployment insurance could raise productivity is not original to this paper, however.
Acemoglu and Shimer (1999, 2000) develop a model of employment with matching in
which higher unemployment benefits give firms incentives to create better matches and
hence higher productivity. Similarly, EPL, by making employer‐employee relationships
last longer, could increase job‐specific human capital. 21

        Past authors, most notably McGuckin and van Ark (2005), have tested whether
there is a long run effect of employment on productivity. That is, they regress multi‐
year averages of productivity growth on the same averages of employment growth. An
alternative to this method is to regress productivity on both the current and lagged
values of employment growth. If the long run impact of employment on the level of
productivity is zero, then the initial negative coefficients of employment should be

20 As in the employment regressions above, the sample is the EU‐15 excluding Luxembourg for
1980‐2003 and observations are weighted by population except as noted otherwise.
21 Barbara Petrongolo initially pointed this out to us.




                                              20
followed by offsetting positive coefficients on the lags of employment growth. When we
add lagged values of employment to the productivity regressions, the results are entirely
unchanged. In other words, we find that the short‐run effect of employment seems to be
permanent. 22 This result is consistent with our finding in Figure 3 and Table 2 above
that growth in capital slowed in Europe while growth of employment was increasing.

       We suggest three speculative explanations for a minimal response of investment
to employment growth. First, new inexperienced entrants to the labor force could be
employed in retail, trade, and service establishments that were previously underutilized.
If PMR previously required that shops closed in evenings and on Sundays, and PMR
was loosened to allow longer hours, then some of the new employees might have been
employed with the same capital stock that existed before. We think this is an important
reason why capital investment did not respond to the increase of employment,
especially in the trade and service sectors.

        The second explanation relies on the fact that marginal workers tend to be the
least skilled and have the least income. Workers with low incomes likely have relatively
high marginal propensities to consume out of income. In this case, the income that goes
to the new entrants to the labor force may not drive up saving or investment.

       A third more speculative explanation for the failure of investment to respond to
higher EU E/N concerns the cross‐border aspect of capital investment within Europe. If
the Spanish E/N increases because of an inflow of previously at‐home females and of
immigrants from Morocco, does that trigger an inflow of investment to Spain from other
countries? It is possible that this provides an incentive to domestic and foreign
investment firms to invest more in the Spanish retail and service sectors, but this
response time may be very long, at least longer than the time horizon of this paper.

6.2 Identifying Causation by Using Instrumental Variables

        Up to this point these regressions do not identify causation from employment
growth to productivity growth, because the opposite direction of causation could create
the same negative productivity‐employment correlation. That is, the regression would
not be identifying the slope of the short‐run labor demand curve. 23 For example, a



22 We also ran regressions similar to those of van Ark and McGuckin with moving averages of
employment growth, and our results remained unchanged.
23 Theoretical work, e.g. Acemoglu and Shimer (1999, 2000) and Lagos (2006), using matching

models has shown that there may be more complex interactions than the simple supply‐demand
framework can describe. In the Acemoglu‐Shimer model, unemployment benefits impact
workers’ decisions whether or not to accept job offers. Because workers are less motivated to
accept a job offer when benefits rise, firms essentially choose a different production function that
has higher output per hour worked. Policy only directly affects employment rates. Because labor


                                                21
classic technology shock, such as the internet revolution, could raise worker efficiency
and productivity and lead to a decline in the demand for workers. 24 It would change
both productivity and employment growth, and therefore conventional OLS estimates
would be inconsistent.

        On the other hand, the classical Real Business Cycle (RBC) technology shock that
causes an economic expansion, simultaneously raising employment and productivity,
would go in the opposite direction as our results and hence does not present an
identification problem. Past studies of the employment‐productivity tradeoff have used
various instrumental variables methods, but they have not included as rich a model of
employment dynamics as we have developed previously in this paper. We therefore
take advantage of the power of this model to predict employment.

        Column 2 of Table 5 reports results from a two‐stage least squares (2SLS)
regression using the tax wedge as the instrument. The key identifying assumptions are
that the tax wedge has no direct impact on productivity and that the effect of taxes on
productivity is mediated by employment. Since taxes simply affect the labor supply
decision, we see no reason why they should directly affect labor productivity.
Moreover, since the tax wedge only drives labor supply decisions, presumably any
effects on productivity must be driven by employment.

       Table 4 shows that the tax wedge is a good predictor of employment changes,
and table 5 shows that is has no effect on productivity after controlling for
employment. 25 We find a highly significant negative coefficient on employment growth
but now somewhat smaller, ‐0.65 in column 2 as compared to ‐0.84 in column 1. The
standard error, however, is substantially larger, at 0.20. Our estimated employment‐
productivity tradeoff is nearly identical to that estimated by Bourles and Cette (2005),
even though they also used a slightly different sample in terms of countries and years
included and a substantially different set of instruments.

        It is worth asking whether the tax wedge might be somehow caused by
productivity, and if so, what the results would be. There are two opposing ways that
taxes might be driven by productivity. First, governments might raise taxes when the
budget is in deficit, and lower them when there is a surplus. In that case, we would
expect to see taxes fall when labor productivity is high, and vice versa. This would
induce a negative correlation between taxes and productivity. Since employment is
negatively related to tax rates, this would imply a positive relationship between

supply falls, productivity rises. This is an interesting alternative mechanism for the productivity‐
employment tradeoff that we do not further explore here.
24 See, e.g. Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006).

25 Our 2SLS regressions also pass the Sargan test for instrument validity. We can never the null

hypothesis that our instruments are valid even at the 20 percent level. The regressions using
alternative sets of exogenous instruments also pass this test.


                                                22
employment and productivity. A tax policy responding to fiscal balances would run
against our results and hence does not present an identification problem.

        In order for taxes to be an invalid instrument, they would need to be positively
correlated with productivity. Suppose governments follow a Keynesian policy whereby
they raise tax rates during booms, when productivity is high, and lower taxes during
recessions when productivity is low. In that case, taxes would be positively correlated
with productivity. Since employment is negatively correlated with the tax wedge, this
would mean that we should find a spurious negative correlation between productivity
and employment.

        It is not possible in our model statistically to differentiate between these two
stories about taxes. We therefore present a set of alternative identification strategies in
the appendix. We drop the tax wedge and use only the high corporatism dummy and
union density as instruments and find results nearly identical to those obtained using
the tax wedge. The appendix also explores using alternative lag structures, dropping
the output gap from the right hand side of the regression, and changing the sample of
countries. In some specifications, the coefficient on employment is no longer statistically
significant, but it is never less negative than ‐0.24, and the point estimate is almost
always more negative than ‐0.40.

        Moving back to our main results, the size of the coefficient we find on
employment is surprisingly large. A coefficient of ‐0.64 on employment growth is larger
than a simple Cobb‐Douglas production function would predict. That model would tell
us that we should expect the coefficient on employment to be equal to the capital share
of income in the economy. We find a value of ‐0.64 that is roughly twice the typical one‐
third share of capital. This is evidence in support of the proposition that when
employment rises, the new workers tend to have lower human capital, which could be
embodied in education, acquired skills, or simply experience.

        Column 3 adds the post‐1995 dummy as an instrument. Identification with the
dummy variable comes from regressing the average unexplained productivity change
after 1995 on the average unexplained employment change. In other words, we are
taking the entire employment residual as being exogenous. A motivation for this
method would be that most of the change following 1995 was driven by social factors
encouraging female employment such as those discussed above in section 5.4, or by
policy variables not included in the regressions, rather than reverse causation from
productivity to employment. The main advantage of making this assumption is that we
cut the standard error on the employment coefficient in half, from 0.20 to 0.10. The point
estimate rises somewhat to ‐0.74. This model, as all of our others, passes the (admittedly
weak) Sargan test for instrument validity. Moreover, it is notable that in none of the
regressions in table 5 or the appendix do we find a significant coefficient on the post‐




                                            23
1995 dummy in the second stage. That said, in the interest of conservatism, the
remainder of the results are identical to those in column 2.

         In columns 4 to 6, we take every variable that was significant in the employment
regressions but not the productivity regressions and use them as instruments. The set
includes the tax wedge, union density, and high corporatism. This instrument set gives
us identification as powerful as in column 4, but without the concerns about reverse
causation. In this case, the coefficient on employment is still ‐0.65, with a standard error
of 0.11.

        Last, columns 5 and 6 add two robustness tests as in table 4. In column 5, we
drop the population weights. This causes the coefficient on PMR to become
substantially larger, and marginally significant, and the coefficient on EPL to shrink
somewhat. The coefficient on employment growth, however, remains unchanged. In
column 6, we add year dummies. This could be motivated by the possibility that there
are common technology shocks that affect labor productivity in every country in a given
year. In this case, we find a somewhat larger standard error on the employment
coefficient. The coefficient on EPL also declines somewhat, from 1.77 to 1.19. Looking at
table 5 as a whole, what we are finding is that the negative relationship between
employment and productivity is robust to a variety of different identification schemes
and panel models. We never find a coefficient less negative than ‐0.60. The positive
effects of EPL and PMR are also robust across all the specifications.

        Our results are somewhat in tension with those found by Nikoletti and Scarpetta
(2003) and Allard and Lindert (2006). Nikoletti and Scarpetta find a negative
relationship between PMR and TFP at the industry level. Allard and Lindert, in macro
regressions similar to ours, report three specific results. They find that EPL and PMR
both have negative impacts on productivity, and tax wedges have no net effect. Our
regressions find near zero coefficients on all five variables except for PMR and EPL,
which have positive coefficients. The fact that we include a broad set of controls in our
regressions helps to explain our different results. Moreover, since we only use short lags
of the policy variables, it is possible that Allard and Lindert are taking account of much
longer‐term behavior (i.e. over the span of decades) than in our results.

6.3 Post-1995 Simulations

        Table 6 reports turnarounds in productivity and employment growth for the four
country groups. Recall that all these results are based on regressions for the 14 EU
countries, and the country group averages emerge for expositional purposes only after
the regressions are run. For each group, we report pre‐ and post‐1995 growth rates for
the actual data, predicted values from the regressions, and a counterfactual simulation
in which the policy variables are fixed at their 1995 levels.




                                             24
        It is easiest to understand the meaning of this simulation by taking an example.
Let us begin with the data for labor productivity in the Mediterranean countries. For
1980‐1995, the regression predicts annual LP growth of 2.12 percent. Had policy been
fixed at its 1995 level for the entire period though, productivity growth would have been
a somewhat slower 1.82 percent. So during that span, policy effects raised productivity
growth by 0.30 percent per year. In the post‐1995 sample, however, with fixed policy,
productivity would have been 0.28 percent higher. The change following 1995 in the
“policy effect” column is then the effect on productivity of the change in policy. For the
Mediterranean countries, this comes out to be ‐0.58 percent. This is nearly half the
predicted decline in productivity growth.

        In all the country groups except the Anglo‐Saxons, we estimate that policy and
institutional changes after 1995 lowered productivity growth. As we just saw, for the
Mediterranean countries, we estimate that policy choices lowered productivity growth
by ‐0.58 percent per year. For the Continental countries, the effect was ‐0.15 percent,
while in the Nordic countries, the effect was ‐0.47 percent. For the Anglo‐Saxon
countries, we estimate that policy changes actually raised productivity growth by 0.13
percent. This is because pre‐1995, they were the only country group with policies that
substantially lowered productivity growth.

        Looking at the results of the simulations for employment, we find by far the
largest effect in the Nordic and Mediterranean countries – policy choices raised growth
in the employment rate by 0.46 percent per year in each group. In the Continental and
Anglo‐Saxon countries, policy actually lowered employment growth by 0.04 and 0.07
percent, respectively. This is consistent with the result that policy also had relatively
small effects on productivity in these groups.

        The bottom three rows of table 6 report the results for the full EU‐15. For
productivity, of the total negative turnaround of ‐0.89 percent, the policy variables drive
‐0.29 percent, about 1/3. For employment, of the 1.31 percentage point increase in
growth, only 0.26 percentage points, or 1/5 of the total, is explained by the policy
variables.

       In general, the employment regressions do not explain much of the post‐1995
change in employment – the post‐1995 dummy is forced to explain the majority of the
change. The average acceleration in employment growth across the four groups is 1.33
percent. Since the post‐1995 dummy is estimated to be approximately 0.9, there is not
much left for the policy variables to explain. 26




26The changes in the output gap can also explain some of the higher rate of employment growth
following 1995.


                                             25
         Figure 7 plots predictions for the EU‐15 that are analogous to table 6. The top
panel shows the predicted level of labor productivity, with a linear trend taken out to
make it easier to understand. The linear trend is the average growth rate prior to 1995,
so that the decline in the lines following 1995 shows how much productivity fell below
where it would have been if had grown at its pre‐1995 rate. The levels of productivity
are all set to 100 in 1994. The post‐1995 turnaround is immediately apparent in the
decline in the productivity lines displayed following 1995. For the counterfactual
simulation, policy had roughly no effect prior to 1995, but subsequently, it lowered the
level of productivity – accounting for a 2.5 percent decline in the level by 2003 – about
1/3 of the total.

        The third line in figure 7 shows what happens if the effects of the post‐1995
dummy on employment are turned off. That is, we still allow the dummy to affect
productivity directly, but we simulate employment following its pre‐1995 growth rate.
In order for this exercise to carry any meaning, we must assume that productivity
changes did not drive the post‐1995 acceleration in employment; i.e., this would be valid
if the employment acceleration were driven by social factors. We then find that there
would have been no decline at all in the level of productivity. In fact, productivity
would have risen above its pre‐1995 trend.

         This is a key finding. If the employment shift in Europe was exogenous, it
explains 100 percent of the decline in European productivity growth since 1995. This
result is the same as the finding that the post‐1995 dummy in the productivity
regressions is not statistically significant – after controlling for employment and policy,
there is no significant change in European productivity growth following 1995. 27
However, we can explain only 1/3 of the total decline in productivity using the policy
and institutional variables.

         The question then becomes whether the unexplained shift in employment was
driven by changes in productivity or whether it was exogenous. The fact that the post‐
1995 dummy is insignificant in the productivity regressions, along with the fact that the
regressions using the post‐1995 dummy pass the Sargan test for instrument validity, is
evidence in favor of the proposition that employment was not driven by productivity.
Furthermore, in section 5.4 above, we discuss social factors, separate from productivity,
that could have driven the unexplained rise in employment. In the end, we have no
statistical evidence that the rise in employment growth was driven by productivity, and
we believe that there are social factors orthogonal to productivity that explain recent
employment behavior. So there is a solid case to be made that in fact, we can explain
100% of the decline in European productivity, as a combination of labor market
liberalization and social changes.

27When employment is dropped from the regression, the post‐1995 dummy is significant with a
coefficient of ‐0.70. A similar regression for the US gives a mirror image positive coefficient of
0.70.


                                                26
       The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows employment results. In this case no trend is
taken out. The effects of policy on employment are estimated to be smaller than for
productivity. The employment rate is predicted to have risen by 10 percent following
1994, but only 2.3 percent, or 1/5, is driven by the policy variables. The counterfactual
simulation does not begin to diverge noticeably until 1998. By construction,
employment growth is flat when we drop the post‐1995 dummy. So 4/5 of the rise in
employment following 1995 is driven by this unexplained residual.

6.4 The Combined Effects of Policy and Institutions on Productivity
Growth in Europe

         In order to get a better view of the effects of the policy variables on employment
and productivity, we need to combine the effects that act through both stages of our
2SLS estimation. In particular, the policy variables all have effects on employment,
which will affect productivity, and some also have independent effects on productivity
growth. Table 7 reports results from this exercise. For each variable, we calculate the
effect of a unit standard deviation shock, where the standard deviations are measures on
post‐2000 data (except for the high corporatism dummy, for which we simply look at
what happens when it is turned on).

        Column 1 reports the size of the shocks. Column 2 displays the effect on
employment and column 3 the effect on productivity. In column 4, we calculate an
implicit impact on output per capita where we assume that the variables have no effect
on hours worked per employee. Standard errors calculated using the Delta method are
reported in parentheses. Of the six variables studied, three have positive net effects on
output per capita and three have negative effects. However, the standard errors on
these estimates are fairly large – only three of the coefficients for output per capita are
more than two standard errors away from zero.

        The three variables with a positive net effect on output per capita are PMR, ARR
and EPL. This result is caused by the fact that they all have independent positive effects
on productivity that help overcome the negative effect on output from lower
employment. Even in the case of no independent effects, the estimated elasticity of
output with respect to employment is only ‐0.31, so it does not take a big effect to
overcome this. The effect of PMR on productivity has a very large standard error, so we
do not put much weight on it. For EPL and ARR, on the other hand, the effects on
productivity are highly significant. The positive effect on output per capita of EPL has a
coefficient more than two standard errors away from zero, and the positive effect of the
ARR on output per capita is close to twice its standard error.

       For the tax wedge, we estimate that an increase of 9 percentage points (where the
average level is 30.8 percent) lowers the employment rate by 2.67 percent, but only


                                             27
lowers output by 0.83 percent. This is a relatively small cost to a policy that chooses
higher rather than lower taxes. Moreover, the standard error on this estimate is small –
only 0.4 percent.

        The last of the three variables that has a statistically significant effect on output
per capita is union density. The standard deviation of union density across Europe is
23.32 percentage points. An increase of this magnitude in union density is predicted to
lower the employment rate by 7.93 percent. It raises productivity, however, by 5.07
percent. Its net effect on output per capita is then only ‐2.85 percent. This is still a large
change, and the standard error is only 1.07 percentage points. Looking back at the time‐
series plot of the policy variables in Figure 5, we see that changes in union density near
the magnitude of 20 percentage points have indeed occurred within the time period of
our data. In the Anglo‐Saxon countries, union density declined by 20 percentage points
between 1978 and 1998. In the Mediterranean and Continental countries, there were
smaller declines of about 6 percentage points between 1993 and 2003.

         Throughout the paper we have explored the interplay between changes in the
growth rates of employment and productivity. Certain qualitative features are robust.
First, the effects of the six policy and institutional variables on productivity are
uniformly positive. This is due to the fact that they can work both directly and through
decreasing employment. Second, union density has a robustly negative effect on output
per capita, and EPL’s effect is robustly positive. More importantly, we find this method
a useful framework in which to understand the effects of policy on some of the major
variables of concern in the macroeconomy.

         The finding that the six policy and institutional variables all drive productivity
up is, once again, surprising. It is worth taking a step back to consider exactly what this
result means. First, note that we do not find that the variables all have direct effects on
productivity—only EPL and ARR have significant coefficients in the second stage
regressions. Moreover, one explanation for these two positive coefficients is that we are
seeing residual effects of these variables on employment that are not captured by the
first stage regression.

        The second surprising result is that we find no bounce‐back response of
productivity to employment. That is, the lags of employment growth do not have
positive coefficients, indicating that the short‐run negative correlation between
employment and productivity is actually a permanent effect. While this result is
surprising, we are not aware of other researchers who have robustly found a bounce‐
back. Only McGuckin and van Ark (2005) find that the relationship between 5‐year
growth rates of productivity and employment is not significantly different from zero,
but they do not include as extensive a set of controls as we do.




                                              28
       Macroeconomic theory tells us that we should expect a bounce‐back. But theory
does not always accord with the facts. Going beyond the data in Table 2 on the average
post‐1995 growth rates of capital per capita (K/N), we find a uniform pattern across all
four European country groups that growth in K/N declined, in some cases precipitously,
in 2000‐05 as compared to 1995‐2000. This disappointing performance of capital growth
lies behind our surprising result that the employment‐productivity tradeoff was
permanent, at least as far as our data extend, rather than temporary.



7. CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

        The single most notable change after 1995 in Europe has been heterogeneity.
Prior to 1995, European countries followed relatively similar paths. They had high
growth rates of productivity, and were converging to the productivity level of the US.
At the same time, they were experiencing high levels of unemployment and little
employment growth. .

        Following 1995, European countries also diverged from each other. In some, we
observe impressive employment growth, both due to policy and to cultural factors
including immigration and a greater acceptance of women entering the workforce; in
other countries, employment grew more slowly. This paper studies the negative
correlation between growth in labor productivity and employment per capita, country
by country and year by year. We link changes in policy and institutional variables to
both changes in growth rates of labor productivity and of employment per capita. We
use statistical methods to control for reverse feedback from productivity to employment,
and we find dual effects of policy on labor productivity and employment. Our baseline
results in Table 6 suggest that, at least in the short run, lower taxes and looser
regulations raise employment growth and reduce productivity growth. We have
identified this negative correlation in reduced‐form regressions that allow both direct
and indirect effects of changes in the policy and institutional variables on productivity
growth.

         The post‐1995 heterogeneity across Europe provides a fertile setting in which to
study the effects of various policy changes, and this heterogeneity helps us to find
significant effects of policy and institutional variables not only on employment per
capita and on productivity, but also on output per capita. We find that by reducing EPL,
PMR, unemployment benefits, and average tax rates, countries cause productivity
growth to decline, partly or completely offsetting the benefit of higher employment.

     Ultimately, the effects of these policy changes on output per capita are ambiguous.
Some factors, such as unions, seem to have a strong negative effect on output per capita.
On the other hand, EPL and unemployment benefits have a positive effect on output per
capita. PMR and the tax wedge, as far as we can tell, have roughly no effects. It is



                                           29
certainly true that these results can be fragile, and there are wide confidence intervals
around some but not all of our estimates.

      Surprisingly, we find that every one percentage point increase in the tax wedge
only lowers output per capita by 0.1 percent. Since the coefficient on taxes in the
employment regressions is estimated to be approximately ‐0.3, the tradeoff between less
work and only slightly less income should not be rejected out of hand in the perspective
of the valuable social services that these taxes can finance.

      More generally, the most important innovation of our approach to these policy
questions is to change the current focus of European policy discussions. Europeans in
the Lisbon Agenda placed major emphasis on raising employment per capita, especially
of females, but now lament that their productivity and TFP growth has been slower than
the US since 1995. Our analysis suggests that some of the policy reforms that are at the
top of the European reform agenda may raise employment per capita but may also
reduce productivity, leaving as in our simulations perhaps negligible effects on output
per capita. 28

      The reason we find that these policies work is that when employment growth rises,
labor productivity growth declines. If workers were homogeneous, we would expect
the elasticity of productivity to employment to equal, at most, to capitalʹs share of
income, about 1/3. We find an elasticity of at least ‐0.5. This implies a further effect from
the fact that marginal workers tend to be the least skilled and experienced. This is in
accord with our finding that most of the additional workers have been females with little
previous work experience, and that the recent rise of employment also in some countries
such as Spain consists to a substantial degree of immigrants.

       One interpretation of our results is that had employment not risen in Europe
following 1995, labor productivity growth would not have slowed. In the US though,
after controlling for employment and policy, there was still an unexplained rise in
productivity growth. This is reflected in the acceleration of US TFP relative to the EU.
In other words, even if employment had not risen in Europe, productivity growth would
still have slowed relative to the US. Since we do not model TFP in this paper, we cannot
explain the divergence in TFP trends.

      Laws that protect incumbents and limit entrance to markets tend to inhibit
adoption of new technologies. While two of our policy variables (EPL and ARR) seem to
go in the direction of raising income per capita, the effects of regulation on technological
change must also be taken into account and this additional channel is outside of the

28
  The policy tradeoff emphasized here is not unique to our paper. Pichelmann and Roeger (2008)
have the same point of departure as this paper about the policy tradeoff. They minimize its
empirical importance based on a simple three‐equal VAR model that does not address any of the
issues of simultaneity and endogeneity upon which we focus here.


                                             30
scope of our analysis. In the end, a policy should be judged based on two effects: a static
effect and a dynamic effect. When a policy reform is first enacted, it will have an
immediate impact in raising employment while reducing productivity. This is the short‐
run static effect that is the subject of this paper. In the long run, there are two important
dynamic effects. The first is that investment may rise after employment rises. The
second is that when policy reforms raise the incentives for adoption of new technologies,
an economy may adopt new technologies faster and move closer to the technological
frontier.

         This paper has been only about the static effect. Moreover, we looked for the
first of the two dynamic effects – the response of investment to employment changes –
and were unable to find it. In particular, the growth of capital per capita slowed rather
than increased between 2000 and 2005. However, the second dynamic effect is critical to
the long run prosperity of Europe. Creation and adoption of new technology is the
engine that drives long run growth. The effects of unemployment benefits are probably
driven by their static component. On the other hand, we find that product market
regulation has few static effects, and it is likely mainly a dynamic policy. In the long
run, liberalization that encourages competition will be a good thing. This paper shows
that liberalization can have short run costs, but when the long run benefits are large,
those costs should not dissuade policymakers from making the right decision.




                                             31
                                    REFERENCES

Acemoglu, D. and R. Shimer (1999). “Efficient Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of
     Political Economy, 107, 893‐928.

Acemoglu, D. and R. Shimer (2000). “Productivity Gains from Unemployment
     Insurance.” European Economic Review, 44, 1195‐1224.

Alesina, A., and F. Giavazzi (2006). The Future of Europe: Reform or Decline? MIT Press.

Alesina, A., E. Glaeser, and B. Sacerdote (2006). “Work and Leisure in the United States
       and Europe: Why So Different?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, April, 1‐64.

Allard, G.J. and P.H. Lindert (2006). “Euro‐Productivity and Euro‐Job since the 1960s:
        Which Institutions Really Mattered?” NBER Working Paper 12460, August.

Baily, M. N. and J. Kirkegaard (2004). Transforming the European Economy, Institute for
        International Economics, Washington, D. C.

Bassanini, A. and R. Duval (2006). “Employment Patterns in OECD Countries:
       Reassessing the Role of Policies and Institutions”. OECD Social, Employment,
       and Migration Working Paper no. 35.

Bassanini, A., S. Scarpetta, and P. Hemmings (2001). “Economic Growth: the Role of
       Policies and Institutions. Panel Evidence from OECD Countries.” OECD
       Economics Department Working Paper no. 283.

Beaudry, P. and F. Collard (2001). “Why has the Employment‐Productivity Tradeoff
      among Industrialized Countries been so Strong?” UBC working paper,
      September.

Beaudry, P., F. Collard, and D.A. Green (2005). “Demographics and Recent Productivity
      Performances: Insights from Cross Country Comparisons.” Mimeo.

Bentolila, S., J. J. Dolado, and J. F. Jimeno (2007). “Does Immigration Affect the Phillips
        Curve? Some Evidence for Spain,” mimeo, May.

Bertola, G., F. D. Blau and L. Kahn (2002). “Labor Market Institutions and Demographic
       Employment Pattern,” Discussion Paper no. 3448, Centre for Economic Policy
       Research, London.

Blanchard, O.J. (1997). “The Medium Run,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 89‐
       158.



                                             32
Blanchard, O.J. and J. Wolfers (2000). “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
       European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,” The Economic Journal, 110,
       March, C1‐C33.

Boeri, T., D. Del Boca, and C. Pissarides (2005). Women at Work: An Economic Perspective.
        Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York.

Bourles, R. and G. Cette (2005). “A Comparison of Structural Productivity Levels in the
       Major Industrialised Countries.” OECD Economic Studies no. 41.

Davis, S.J. and M. Henrekson (2004). “Tax Effects on Work Activity, Industry Mix, and
       Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from Rich‐Country Comparisons,” NBER
       Working Paper 10509, May.

Eichengreen, B., M. Landesmann, and D. Stiefel (2008). The European Economy in an
       American Mirror. Abingdon UK and New York, Routledge.

Freeman, Richard B. (2008). “How Well do the Clothes Fit? Priors and Evidence in the
      Debate over Flexibility and Labor Market Performance” in B. Eichengreen et al.
      (2008), 104‐16.

Galor, O. and D. N. Weil (1996). “The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth,” American
       Economic Review, 86, June, 374‐87.

Gordon, R.J. (1997). “Is There a Tradeoff between Unemployment and Productivity
      Growth?” in D. Snower and G. de la Dehasa, eds., Unemployment Policy:
      Government Options for the Labor Market. Cambridge U.K.: Cambridge University
      Press, 433‐463.

Heinz, F.F. and M. Ward‐Warmedinger (2005). “Cross‐border Labor Mobility within an
       enlarged EU,” ECB Occasional Paper, July.

Izquierdo, M. and J.F. Jimeno (2007). “On the Aggregate Effects of Immigration in
       Spain.” Banco de Espana Working Paper no. 0714.

Lagos, R. (2006). “A Model of TFP.” Review of Economic Studies, 73, October, 983‐1007.

Layard, R., S. Nickell, and R. Jackman (2005). Unemployment: Macroeconomic Performance
      and the Labor Market, Oxford University Press.

Ljungqvist, L. and T.J. Sargent (2006). ”Indivisible Labor, Human Capital, Lotteries, and
      Personal Savings: Do Taxes Explain European Employment?” presented at



                                            33
       NBER Macroannual conference, April 7‐8.

Mankiw, N.G., D. Romer, and D.N. Weil (1992). “A Contribution to the Empirics of
     Economic Growth.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, May, 407‐437.

McGuckin, R. and B. van Ark (2005). “Productivity and Participation: An International
     Comparison,” Groningen Growth and Development Centre, Research
     Memorandum GD‐78, August.

Nickell, S. (1981). “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 49,
       November: 1417‐1426.

Nickell, S., L. Nunziata, and W. Ochel (2005). “Unemployment in the OECD since the
       1960s: What do we know? Economic Journal, 115, January, 1‐27.

Nikoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta (2003). “Regulation, Productivity, and Growth, OECD
       Evidence,” OECD Policy Research Working Paper no. 2944.

OECD (2006). OECD Employment Outlook: Boosting Jobs and Incomes. Paris.

Ohanian, L., A. Raffo, and R. Rogerson (2007). “Work and Taxes: Allocation of Time in
      OECD Countries,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, 92, 3, 37‐
      58.

Olivetti, C. (2006). “Changes in Women’s Hours of Market Work: The Role of Returns
        to Experience,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, October, 557‐587.

Paramio, J.L. and J. L. Zofio (2005). “Labor Market Duality and Leisure Industries in
      Spain: Quality of Life versus Standard of Living,” Mimeo.

Pichelmann, K, and W. Roeger (2008). “Employment and Labor Productivity in the EU:
       Reconsidering a Potential Trade‐off in the Lisbon Strategy,” in Eichengreen, et al.,
       128‐42.

Pissarides, C., et al. (2005). “Women in the Labor Force: How Well is Europe Doing?” in
        Boeri, Del Boca, and Pissarides (2005), 7‐120.

Prescott, E.C. (2004). ”Why Do Americans Work So Much More than Europeans?”
       Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28, July, 2‐13.

Ramsey, F.P. (1928). “A Mathematical Theory of Saving”, The Economic Journal, 38,
      December, 543‐559.




                                            34
Rogerson, R. (2005). “Comments” on Pissarides et. Al. (2005), in Boeri, Del Boca, and
      Pissarides (2005), 109‐114.

Romer, P.M. (1987). “Crazy Explanations for the Productivity Slowdown.” NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 1987, December, 163‐201.

Schwerdt, G. and J. Turunen (2006). “Growth in Euro Area Labor Quality.” European
      Central Bank Working Paper no. 575.

Stiroh, K.J. (2002). “Information Technology and the US Productivity Revival: What do
        the Industry Data Say?” The American Economic Review, 92, December, 1559‐1576.




                                           35
APPENDIX A.          ROBUSTNESS TESTS

         Tables A1 and A2 provide robustness tests for the employment and productivity
regressions, respectively. The first two columns of table A1 remove Spain and then the
Mediterranean countries from the sample. The post‐1995 dummy falls from its estimate
of approximately 0.9 in the main text, to roughly 0.7 However, the change is not
statistically significant. In column 3 we add the US to the sample and find similar
results as in the main text. The US has a negative post‐1995 dummy of ‐0.38, and the
coefficient on PMR becomes significant. Since we use population weights, the results in
column 3 are largely driven by the US. Last, column 5 lags all of the explanatory
variables by 1 year in order to avoid any possible simultaneity. The results do not
change notably.

        Table A2 presents robustness tests for the productivity regressions. Column 1
removes the Mediterranean countries from the sample. The coefficient on employment
is now only significant at the 5 percent level, rather than the 1 percent level, because the
standard error is larger. EPL also loses its significant coefficient. In column 2, we try
dropping the output gap, since it could cause simultaneity bias in our results. The
coefficient on employment rises to ‐0.46. This is likely due to the fact that the regression
is now picking up some of the short‐run correlation between employment and
productivity.

        In columns 3 and 4, we lag all of the explanatory variables by one year except for
the output gap. Using only the tax wedge as an instrument, the coefficient on
employment is no longer significant, as its standard error is relatively large. The 95
percent confidence interval extends from ‐0.75 to 0.25. Column 4 adds union density
and high corporatism as dummies. This brings the standard error down and makes the
coefficient significant at the 1 percent level. Column 5 shows that excluding the tax
wedge from the regression does not affect the results.

       Columns 6 and 7 add the US to the analysis. As before, since we use population
weights, the US data dominates the sample. In column 6, the point estimate on
employment is in line with other columns, but the standard error has risen to 0.31. In
column 7, using a full set of instruments, employment is once again significant at the 1
percent level.

        Looking across the columns, the positive coefficients on EPL and ARR are clearly
very robust to a variety of specifications. The point estimate on the post‐1995 dummy is
usually negative, but it is never statistically significant at even the 10 percent level. In
the US, on the other hand, the post‐1995 dummy has a coefficient of 0.45, which is
significant at the 1 percent level. So while it seems that there was no exogenous negative
shock to European productivity growth, there was some sort of positive shock for the
US.



                                             36
APPENDIX B. DATA SOURCES BY ORDER OF APPEARANCE

Section 2.2
Source: GGDC Total Economy Database, Jan. 2007. http://www.ggdc.net/index‐
dseries.html:

Output (1970‐2006): Linear average of GK and EKS measures of GDP.
Data adjustments: Values for Germany ratio linked to W. Germany (GK only) in 1989.
USA measures are from BEA NIPA Table 1.1.6 (last updated July 27, 2007). USA
measures for Table 2 are from GGDC as defined above for the sake of uniformity when
comparing levels.

Hours (1970‐2006): Total annual hours worked.
Data adjustments: Values for Germany ratio linked to W. Germany in 1989. USA
measures are the latest BLS numbers released August 7, 2007 provided by Phyllis Otto
via email.

Population (1970‐2006): Midyear population.
Data adjustments: Values for Germany ratio linked to W. Germany in 1989

Employment (1970‐2006): Persons engaged.
Data adjustments: Values for Germany ratio linked to W. Germany in 1989

Source: EU KLEMS Database, Mar. 2007. http://www.euklems.net:

Gross Output (1979‐2004): Price indexes, 1995=100. Basic Files, tab “GO_P.”
Data adjustments: Due to missing data, Greece GO_P values were set equal to tab
“VA_P” (Value Added Price Index) values from 1979‐1994. Also due to missing data,
GO_P values for Luxembourg industries 21t22 and 34t35 were set equal to industry D
from 1979‐1994.

1997 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) Index: National currency per 1997 German Euro.

Nominal Capital Compensation (1979‐2004): Basic Files, tab “CAP.”
Data adjustments: Negative CAP observations were replaced by multiplying VA by Total
Economy CAP divided by Total Economy VA in that year.
Notes: Nominal amounts converted to German Euros by 1997 industry PPP’s using the
formula:
‘CAP in 1997 German Euros = CAP in national currency / [((GO_P / 1997 GO_P) /
(German GO_P / 1997 German GO_P)) * 1997 PPP].’

Real Growth in Capital (1980‐2004): Basic Files, tab “CAP_QI.”




                                          37
Data adjustments: No CAP_QI data is available for Greece, Netherlands, and Portugal.
These countries are therefore dropped from all calculations involving capital. No
significant difference arises in non‐capital measures from the exclusion of these three
countries, and thus we continue to use the entire EU‐15 when possible. No CAP_QI
data is available before 1993 for Sweden. Therefore, Sweden was dropped from all
calculations involving capital prior to 1993.
Notes: Real growth of aggregated and sub‐aggregated industries and countries
calculated using a weighted average of the components’ real growth rates. The
weighted average is calculated using the geometric mean across each year pair of the
industry or country’s nominal share of capital compensation.

Hours (1980‐2004): Total hours worked by persons engaged. Basic Files, tab “H_EMP.”

Nominal Value Added (1979‐2004): Gross value added. Basic Files, tab “VA.”
Notes: Nominal amounts converted to German Euros by 1997 industry PPP’s using the
formula:
‘VA in 1997 German Euros = VA in national currency / [((GO_P / 1997 GO_P) / (German
GO_P / 1997 German GO_P)) * 1997 PPP].’

Real Growth in Value Added (1980‐2004): Basic Files, tab “VA_QI.”
Notes: Real growth of aggregated and sub‐aggregated industries and countries
calculated using a weighted average of the components’ real growth rates. The
weighted average is calculated using the geometric mean across each year pair of the
industry or country’s nominal share of gross value added.

Capital’s Share in Total Output (1980‐2004): Geometric mean across each year pair of
nominal capital divided by nominal value added.

Capital Deepening Growth (1980‐2004): (Real capital growth minus growth in total
hours worked multiplied by capital’s share in total output.

Total Factor Productivity (TFP) Growth (1980‐2004): Output per hour growth minus
capital deepening growth.

Employment (1980‐2004): Number of persons engaged. Basic Files, tab “EMP.”

EU‐KLEMS Notes:
        Due to missing data: All values for Ireland industry 71t74 set equal to Ireland
industry K before 1995, all nominal values for Ireland industries 60t63 and 64 set equal
to 0.5*Ireland industry I before 1995, all index values for Ireland industries 60t63 and 64
set equal to Ireland industry I before 1995, and all index values for Germany industries
60t63 and 64 set equal to Germany industry I before 1991.




                                             38
       Aggregated total economy results may not match up perfectly to comparable
estimates in the EU‐KLEMS Database because we used their total economy PPP’s to
convert total economy numbers to a common currency, whereas EU‐KLEMS only
converted by industry and then added up the converted industry numbers to make a
converted total economy total. We did it this way to keep total economy growth rates
by country equal to the estimates given on the EU‐KLEMS website. Converting by
industry and then summing to make new total economy values distorts these growth
rates.



Section 3.2.2
Source: OECD Population and Labor Force Statistics, Volume 2006 release 02.
http://www.oecd.org:

Employment per Capita (1978‐2003): Employment divided by population for men,
women, and combined.

Source: Allard‐Lindert Database, Jan. 2006. See website for their sources and data
adjustments. http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/fzlinder/OECD_1950‐
2001_annual1.xls:

Labor Tax Wedge (1978‐2001): Total tax wedge including employerʹs social security
contributions.

EPL (1978‐2001): The Allard (2003) measure of the strictness of employee protection
laws.

Source: GGDC Total Economy Database, Jan. 2007. http://www.ggdc.net/index‐
dseries.html:

Output Gap (1978‐2003): Measure of the gap between actual and potential output as a
percentage of potential output. Potential output created using a Hodrick‐Prescott filter.
For specific calculations, see our Stata do‐file.

Source: Bassanini‐Duval Dataset, obtained via email in April 2007. See Bassanini‐Duval
(2006) for their sources and data adjustments.

Labor Tax Wedge (1978‐2003): Tax wedge between the labor cost to the employer and
the corresponding net take‐home pay of the employee for a single‐earner couple with
two children earning 100% of APW earnings. The tax wedge expresses the sum of
personal income tax and all social security contributions as a percentage of total labor
cost.




                                            39
Data adjustments: Data ratio linked to Allard‐Lindert’s tax wedge measure for missing
years.

EPL (1978‐2003): OECD summary indicator of the stringency of employment protection
legislation.
Data adjustments: Data ratio linked to Allard‐Lindert’s EPL measure prior to 1982.

ARR (1978‐2003): Average unemployment benefit replacement rate across two income
situations (100% and 67% of APW earnings), three family situations (single, with
dependent spouse, with spouse in work) and three different unemployment durations
(1st year, 2nd and 3rd years, and 4th and 5th years of unemployment).

PMR (1978‐2003): OECD summary indicator of regulatory impediments to product
market competition in seven non‐manufacturing industries: gas, electricity, post,
telecoms (mobile and fixed services), passenger air transport, railways (passenger and
freight services) and road freight.

Union Density (1978‐2003): Trade union density rate.
Data adjustments: Due to missing data, data for Finland, Germany, and Sweden years
1991 and 1992 obtained by linear interpolation. Data for Greece years 2002 and 2003 set
equal to Greece 2001. Data for Spain years 1978, 1979, and 1980 set equal to Spain 1981.

Output Gap (1978‐2003): OECD measure of the gap between actual and potential
output as a percentage of potential output.
Data adjustments: Data ratio linked to output gap measure derived from the GGDC Total
Economy Database for missing years.
Notes: Output gap measures are updated from Bassanini and Duval’s paper. They used
output gap measures from OECD Economic Outlook 76, December 2004. The OECD
output gap measure was chosen in favor of the output gap measure derived from the
GGDC using an H‐P trend because the OECD measure has more plausible gaps and
more stable growth rates of potential output.

Degree of Corporatism (1978‐2003): Indicator of the degree of centralization/co‐
ordination of the wage bargaining processes, which takes a value of 1 for high degrees of
centralization and coordination and zero otherwise.

Demographic Predictions
      Predictions for future demographic trends were downloaded from the UN’s
“World Population Prospects” database at http://esa.un.org/unpp/index.asp?panel=2.

Additional Notes on the Productivity Regressions




                                           40
         The regressions all pass the standard specification tests. In particular, the Sargan
test indicates that our instruments are valid, the Wu‐Hausmann test rejects the null that
employment growth is not endogenous, and the Cragg‐Donald test for identification
rejects the null that the model is underidentified at the .01 percent level.

        The coefficients we find are nearly identical to those found by Bourles and Cette
(2005), but are larger than those found by McGuckin and van Ark. Their sample is
different from ours in its time period and selection of countries. Moreover, in at least
some of their regressions, they do not control for the business cycle. Given the short run
positive correlation between output, productivity and employment, we would expect
the exclusion of the output gap to bias the estimated coefficient on employment
upwards. In unreported experiments, we find that it does.

       The other controls we include on the right hand side are slightly different from
both Bourles and Cette (2005) and McGuckin and van Ark (2005). We try to be as careful
as possible in avoiding simultaneity bias, which leads us to use fewer controls than
Bourles and Cette.

Stata Commands

      We used extensively the ivreg2 and xtivreg2 commands in stata:
Baum, C.F., Schaffer, M.E., Stillman, S., 2006. ivreg2: Stata module for extended
      instrumental variables/2SLS, GMM and AC/HAC, LIML and k‐class regression.
      http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s425401.html

Schaffer, M.E., Stillman, S., 2007. xtivreg2: Stata module to perform extended IV/2SLS,
       GMM and AC/HAC, LIML and k‐class regression for panel data models.
       http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456501.html

Other Notes:

       All trends were generated using Hodrick‐Prescott filter with annual data
smoothing parameter of 6.25. An extra year was added on to smooth the end of each
trend. The value given to this year equaled the average growth rate of previous four
years.

       Growth rates were generated using the exponential growth rate formula.




                                             41
                       Figure 1. Trend in Output per Hour, Output per Capita, and
                       Hours per Capita, US and EU‐15, Annual Growth Rates, 1970‐
                                                  2006

              6

              5
                                         EU‐15 Y/H
              4
  Percent




                                                                   US Y/H
              3

              2

              1

              0
                  1970         1975    1980    1985      1990      1995      2000       2005



                  4
                                  EU‐15 Y/N
                                                                 US Y/N
                  3


                  2


                  1
    Percent




                  0


              ‐1

                                                       EU‐15 H/N
              ‐2
                             US H/N
              ‐3
                      1970      1975    1980    1985      1990      1995     2000        2005
Source: GGDC Total Economy Database except BEA, BLS for the United States, see data appendix
                    Figure 2. Trend in Employment per Capita and Hours per
                    Employee, US and EU‐15, Annual Growth Rates, 1970‐2006
             2


           1.5
                                                         US E/N
             1
 Percent




           0.5


             0


           ‐0.5
                            EU‐15 E/N
            ‐1
                  1970    1975    1980     1985     1990       1995       2000       2005

              1

                                                  US H/E
            0.5


              0
 Percent




           ‐0.5


             ‐1

                                             EU‐15 H/E
           ‐1.5


             ‐2
                  1970    1975     1980    1985     1990       1995       2000       2005
Source: GGDC Total Economy Database except BLS for the United States, see data appendix
                      Figure 3. Trend in Capital Input per Hour and Total Factor
                     Productivity, US and EU‐15, Annual Growth Rates, 1980‐2004
            7


            6


            5


            4
  Percent




            3


            2
                                                                      EU‐15 K/H

            1
                                             US K/H

            0
                  1980          1985          1990            1995       2000



            2.5

             2
                                                      EU‐15 TFP
            1.5

             1

            0.5
Percent




             0

          ‐0.5
                              US TFP
            ‐1

          ‐1.5

            ‐2
                  1980          1985          1990            1995       2000
Source: EU‐KLEMS Database, see data appendix
         Figure 4: Employment and Share effects for the Turnaround in Employment per Capita Growth, 1995‐2005 versus 1985‐1995

                                            Nordic                                                                         Anglo‐Saxon

                                     65+                                                                                         65+

                                    55‐64                                                                                       55‐64
               Men                  45‐54                                                                                       45‐54

                                    35‐44               Employment Effect                                                       35‐44

                                    25‐34                                                                                       25‐34

                                    15‐24                                                                                       15‐24

                                     65+                                                                                         65+

                                    55‐64                                                                                       55‐64

              Women                 45‐54                                                                                       45‐54

                                    35‐44                       Share Effect                                                    35‐44

                                    25‐34                                                                                       25‐34

                                    15‐24                                                                                       15‐24



                                        Continental                                                                       Mediterranean
                                     65+                                                                                          65+

                                55‐64                                                                                           55‐64

                                45‐54                                                                                           45‐54

                                35‐44                                                                                           35‐44

                                25‐34                                                                                           25‐34

                                15‐24                                                                                           15‐24

                                     65+                                                                                          65+

                                55‐64                                                                                           55‐64

                                45‐54                                                                                           45‐54

                                35‐44                                                                                           35‐44

                                25‐34                                                                                           25‐34

                                15‐24                                                                                           15‐24


 ‐0.02    ‐0.015   ‐0.01   ‐0.005           0   0.005    0.01      0.015       0.02   0.025   ‐0.02   ‐0.015   ‐0.01   ‐0.005           0   0.005   0.01   0.015   0.02
Source: Authorsʹ calculations
                                Figure 5. Policy and Institutional Variables, 1980‐2003
                                    Tax Wedge                                              Employment Protection Legislation
45                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                    Mediterranean
                                                               Nordic        3.5
40
                                                                                                                     Continental
                                                                              3

35
                  Continental                                                2.5
                                                      Mediterranean

30                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                           Nordic
                                                                             1.5
25
                     Anglo‐Saxon                                              1
                                                                                              Anglo‐Saxon
20
                                                                             0.5


15                                                                            0
        1980             1985        1990          1995         2000               1980             1985            1990            1995              2000



                          Product Market Regulations                                               Unemployment Benefits (ARR)
7                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                            Continental
                                                                             45
           Continental
6
                                                                             40
                                                     Mediterranean
5                                                                            35
                                                                                                               Nordic

                                                                             30
4

                                        Nordic                               25
3
                                                                             20


2                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                            Anglo‐Saxon
                                    Anglo‐Saxon
                                                                             10
1                                                                                                  Mediterranean
                                                                              5

0                                                                             0
     1980              1985          1990           1995          2000             1980            1985            1990            1995             2000



                                   Union Density                                                      High Corpratism Dummy
90                                                                            1


80                                                                           0.9

                                        Nordic                               0.8
70
                                                                             0.7          Nordic
60
                                                                                                                           Mediterranean
                                                                             0.6
50                 Anglo‐Saxon
                                                                             0.5
40
               Mediterranean                                                 0.4
                                                                                           Continental
30
                                                                             0.3
20
                                                                             0.2
                                             Continental
10
                                                                             0.1                                                           Anglo‐Saxon

    0                                                                         0
        1980             1985         1990           1995             2000         1980             1985            1990             1995             2000



Source: Authorsʹ calculations
              Figure 6: EU‐15 Male and Female Employment per Capita
                               Simulations, 1980‐2003

                                                Men

  70

  68

  66

  64
                                                                                Predicte
  62

  60
                                                                                Fixed
  58

  56                                                           No Post‐1995
  54

  52

  50
             1981   1983   1985   1987   1989    1991   1993   1995   1997    1999   2001   2003


                                            Women

  47


  45
                                                                              Predicte

  43

                                                                                  Fixed
  41


  39                                                                    No Post‐1995



  37


  35
             1981   1983   1985   1987   1989    1991   1993   1995   1997    1999   2001   2003
Source: Authorʹs Calculations
        Figure 7: Actual, Predicted, and Fixed‐Policy Labor Productivity and
                                     Employment
                                             Labor Productivity
  104
                                                                      No Post‐1995
  102                                                                 Employment Dummy


  100


   98

                   Counterfactual
   96
                                                                                  Predicted

   94


   92


   90


   88
    1980    1982      1984     1986   1988      1990   1992   1994      1996    1998    2000    2002



                                                Employment
  112


  110                                                                                     Predicted


  108
                                                                     Counterfactual
  106


  104


  102


  100
                                                                          No Post‐1995 Dummy
   98


   96


   94
    1980    1982      1984     1986   1988      1990   1992   1994     1996     1998    2000    2002


Source: Authorʹs Calculations
                                                                Table 1

                           Growth in Output per Hour, Hours per Capita, and Output per Capita,
                               Countries and Country Groups, selected intervals, 1970‐2006

                             Labour Productivity                       Hours per Capita                        Output per Capita
                                Growth Rates                            Growth Rates                             Growth Rates
                      1970‐1995  1995‐2006 Difference         1970‐1995   1995‐2006 Difference         1970‐1995  1995‐2006 Difference

United States            1.42         2.13         0.71          0.55       ‐0.04          ‐0.58         1.97       2.09        0.12
EU‐15                    2.89         1.41        ‐1.49         ‐0.82        0.59           1.41         2.07       2.00       ‐0.07
  EU‐15xMed              2.81         1.87        ‐0.94         ‐0.84        0.07           0.92         1.97       1.94       ‐0.03
Nordic                   2.41         2.09        ‐0.32         ‐0.77        0.56           1.33         1.64       2.66        1.02
  Denmark                2.74         1.15        ‐1.59         ‐0.85        0.67           1.52         1.89       1.82       ‐0.07
  Finland                3.29         2.48        ‐0.80         ‐1.27        0.97           2.24         2.02       3.45        1.44
  Sweden                 1.72         2.49         0.76         ‐0.41        0.26           0.68         1.31       2.75        1.44
Anglo‐Saxon              2.73         2.18        ‐0.55         ‐0.72        0.46           1.18         2.01       2.64        0.63
  Ireland                4.03         4.16         0.13         ‐0.66        2.01           2.67         3.37       6.17        2.80
  United Kingdom         2.68         2.04        ‐0.64         ‐0.72        0.37           1.09         1.96       2.41        0.45
Continental              2.88         1.75        ‐1.14         ‐0.89       ‐0.13           0.76         1.99       1.62       ‐0.37
  Austria                3.12         2.28        ‐0.85         ‐0.66       ‐0.18           0.48         2.46       2.09       ‐0.37
  Belgium                2.85         1.42        ‐1.43         ‐0.68        0.50           1.17         2.17       1.92       ‐0.25
  France                 3.05         1.85        ‐1.19         ‐1.15       ‐0.16           0.99         1.90       1.70       ‐0.20
  Germany                2.91         1.67        ‐1.23         ‐0.96       ‐0.33           0.63         1.94       1.34       ‐0.60
  Luxembourg             2.50         1.92        ‐0.58          0.29        1.28           0.99         2.78       3.20        0.41
  Netherlands            2.30         1.54        ‐0.76         ‐0.54        0.47           1.01         1.76       2.01        0.25
  Portugal               2.85         1.70        ‐1.15          0.16        0.05          ‐0.11         3.01       1.75       ‐1.26
Mediterranean            3.15         0.24        ‐2.91         ‐0.75        1.92           2.67         2.40       2.15       ‐0.25
  Greece                 2.36         2.53         0.17         ‐0.33        1.13           1.46         2.03       3.66        1.63
  Italy                  2.71         0.44        ‐2.28         ‐0.43        0.74           1.16         2.29       1.18       ‐1.11
  Spain                  4.19        ‐0.24        ‐4.43         ‐1.35        3.69           5.04         2.84       3.46        0.61
Standard Deviation       0.63         1.00                #      0.46        1.02                  #     0.55       1.27

Source : GGDC Total Economy Database except BEA for the United States, see data appendix
                                                          Table 2

      Annual Growth Rates and Turnaround in Growth Rates of Labour Productivity, Labour and Capital Ratios,
                     and Total Factor Productivity, Countries and Country Groups, 1980‐2004

                                        United States   EU‐15       Nordic   Anglo‐Saxon   Continental   Mediterranean
1980‐1995 Growth Rates
  Labour Productivity (Y/H)                 1.34        2.34         2.30       2.46          2.46           2.07
  Hours per Employee (H/E)                  ‐0.13       ‐0.49        ‐0.02      ‐0.16         ‐0.77          ‐0.32
  Employent per Capita (E/N)                0.51        ‐0.04        ‐0.74      ‐0.23          0.03           0.11
  Capital per Hour (K/H)                    3.56         3.68         4.06       4.44          3.47           3.52
  Capital Deepening                          1.17        1.11         1.23       1.25          1.07           1.05
  Total Factor Productivity (TFP)            0.17        1.23         1.07       1.21          1.39           1.02
1995‐2004 Growth Rates
  Labour Productivity (Y/H)                 2.29         1.41         1.92       2.11          1.63           0.63
  Hours per Employee (H/E)                  ‐0.16       ‐0.39        ‐0.16      ‐0.37         ‐0.57          ‐0.29
  Employent per Capita (E/N)                0.06        0.92         0.56        1.01          0.49           1.73
  Capital per Hour (K/H)                    3.56        2.81         2.86        3.99          2.99           2.01
  Capital Deepening                          1.20        0.95         0.96       1.20          1.01           0.73
  Total Factor Productivity (TFP)            1.09        0.46         0.96       0.91          0.63          ‐0.10
Difference, 1995‐2004 minus 1980‐1995
  Labour Productivity (Y/H)                  0.95       ‐0.93        ‐0.37      ‐0.34         ‐0.82          ‐1.44
  Hours per Employee (H/E)                  ‐0.03        0.10        ‐0.14      ‐0.21          0.20           0.03
  Employent per Capita (E/N)                ‐0.46        0.95         1.30       1.24          0.46           1.62
  Capital per Hour (K/H)                    ‐0.01       ‐0.87        ‐1.20      ‐0.45         ‐0.48          ‐1.51
  Capital Deepening                         0.03        ‐0.16        ‐0.27      ‐0.05         ‐0.06          ‐0.32
  Total Factor Productivity (TFP)            0.92       ‐0.77        ‐0.11      ‐0.29         ‐0.76          ‐1.12
Memo Items:
  Capital‐Output Ratio (K/Y)                ‐0.96       0.06         ‐0.82      ‐0.10         0.34           ‐0.07
  Capital per Capita (K/N)                  ‐0.49       0.18         ‐0.04       0.59         0.18            0.15

Source : EU‐KLEMS Database, see data appendix
                                         Table 3

                Regressions of Employment per Capita Growth
                on Policy and Institutional Variables, 1980‐2003

                                            Combined            Men            Women

Δ Tax Wedge                                      ‐0.28    ***    ‐0.21   **      ‐0.37   ***
Δ Employment Protection Legislation               0.25            0.34           ‐0.14
Δ Product Market Regulation                      ‐0.55           ‐0.29           ‐0.75
Δ Average Replacement Rate                       ‐0.17    ***    ‐0.11   **      ‐0.27   ***
Δ Union Density                                  ‐0.47    ***    ‐0.41   ***     ‐0.56   ***
Δ Output Gap                                      0.51    ***     0.56   ***      0.46   ***
Δ High Corporatism                               ‐2.76    **     ‐1.87   *       ‐4.20   ***
Post‐1995 Dummy †                                 0.95    ***     1.09   ***      0.66   ***
Nordic
 Denmark                                         ‐0.41           ‐0.64           ‐0.23
 Finland                                         ‐0.43           ‐0.69           ‐0.23
 Sweden                                          ‐0.88 *         ‐1.12 **        ‐0.56
Anglo‐Saxon
  Ireland                                        ‐0.33           ‐1.16            1.38
 United Kingdom                                  ‐1.02 ***       ‐1.45 ***       ‐0.41
Continental
  Austria                                        ‐0.30           ‐0.87            0.50
 Belgium                                         ‐0.16           ‐0.76            0.82
 France                                          ‐0.57    ***    ‐1.16 ***        0.33
 Germany                                         ‐1.78    ***    ‐2.44 ***       ‐0.86 **
 Netherlands                                      0.66    *      ‐0.30            2.46 ***
 Portugal                                        ‐0.68    *      ‐1.32 ***        0.33
Mediterranean
 Greece                                          ‐0.14           ‐0.80 *         1.09 **
 Italy                                           ‐0.54 **        ‐1.06 ***       0.55 *
 Spain                                            0.02           ‐0.77 ***       1.62 ***

R2                                                 0.47           0.47           0.37
N                                                   314            312            312
RMSE                                               1.32           1.34           1.65

* Indicates significance at 10% level, ** 5%, *** 1%
† Equal to 1 if within 1996‐2003, otherwise 0
All regressions weighted by population
Source: New specifications and analysis based on data obtained from
Bassanini‐Duval (2006) and the OECD. See Data appendix.
                                                 Table 4

          First‐Stage Regressions of Employment per Capita Growth on Policy
                         and Institutional Variables, 1980‐2003

                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)

Δ Tax Wedge                                             ‐0.38 ***     ‐0.28 ***      ‐0.25 ***      ‐0.15 **
                                                       (0.08)        (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.08)
Δ Employment Protection Legislation                     ‐0.20          0.86           1.57 *         0.27
                                                       (0.82)        (0.79)         (0.87)         (0.83)
Δ Product Market Regulation                             ‐1.11 *       ‐0.44           0.66          ‐0.05
                                                       (0.57)        (0.55)         (0.62)         (0.67)
Δ Average Replacement Rate                              ‐0.21 ***     ‐0.18 ***      ‐0.13 **       ‐0.18 ***
                                                       (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)
Δ Union Density                                         ‐0.43 ***     ‐0.46 ***      ‐0.45 ***      ‐0.41 ***
                                                       (0.11)        (0.10)         (0.10)         (0.11)
Δ High Corporatism                                      ‐2.27 **      ‐2.04 **       ‐1.70 *        ‐1.59 *
                                                       (1.04)        (0.98)         (0.86)         (0.96)
Δ Output Gap                                             0.54 ***      0.52 ***       0.51 ***       0.38 ***
                                                       (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.06)
                     †
Post‐1995 Dummy                                                        0.94 ***       0.86 ***       1.15 ***
                                                                     (0.15)         (0.17)         (0.44)


R2                                                      0.46           0.52           0.48           0.59
N                                                        320            320           320            320
RMSE                                                    1.25           1.18           1.31           1.09

Weighted by Population                                   Yes           Yes             No            Yes
Year Dummies Included                                    No            No              No            Yes

* Indicates significance at 10% level, ** 5%, *** 1%. Time and fixed effects coefficients not reported.
† Equal to 1 if within 1996‐2003, otherwise 0
All regressions include country fixed effects
Source: Authorsʹ Calculations
                                                              Table 5

                   Second‐Stage Regressions of Productivity Growth on Employment per Capita
                            Growth and Policy and Institutional Variables, 1980‐2003

                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

Employment Rate                                  ‐0.84 ***      ‐0.64 ***       ‐0.74 ***      ‐0.64 ***      ‐0.63 ***      ‐0.62 ***
                                                (0.04)         (0.20)          (0.10)         (0.12)         (0.14)         (0.16)
Δ Tax Wedge                                      ‐0.04
                                                (0.06)
Δ Employment Protection Legislation               1.82 ***       1.66 ***        1.77 ***       1.62 **        1.07           1.19 *
                                                (0.62)         (0.65)          (0.60)         (0.63)         (0.81)         (0.64)
Δ Product Market Regulation                       0.48           0.56            0.54           0.58           0.98 *          0.8
                                                (0.43)         (0.45)          (0.44)         (0.44)         (0.56)         (0.52)
Δ Average Replacement Rate                        0.10 ***       0.14 ***        0.12 ***       0.13 ***       0.13 **        0.14 ***
                                                (0.04)         (0.05)          (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)
Δ Union Density                                  ‐0.06           0.03           ‐0.02
                                                (0.08)         (0.12)          (0.09)
Δ High Corporatism                               ‐0.94          ‐0.49           ‐0.73
                                                (0.77)         (0.94)          (0.82)
Δ Output Gap                                      0.78 ***       0.68 ***        0.73 ***       0.67 ***       0.74 ***       0.76 ***
                                                (0.04)         (0.11)          (0.07)         (0.08)         (0.09)         (0.08)
                     †
Post‐1995 Dummy                                   0.06          ‐0.14                          ‐0.14           0.15
                                                (0.13)         (0.24)                         (0.18)         (0.21)

R2                                                0.65           0.63           0.64            0.62           0.52           0.69
N                                                 320             320            320             320            320            320
RMSE                                              0.92           0.95           0.93            0.95           1.18           0.86

Weighted by Population                           Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            No             Yes
Year Dummies Included                            No              No               No            No             No             Yes
Exogenous Instrument(s)                         None          Tax wedge      Tax wedge       Tax wedge      Tax wedge      Tax wedge
                                                                            Post‐1995 TE     High Corp.     High Corp.     High Corp.
                                                                                            Union Dens.    Union Dens.    Union Dens.

* Indicates significance at 10% level, ** 5%, *** 1%. Year and country dummy coefficients not reported.
† Equal to 1 if within 1996‐2003, otherwise 0
All regressions include country fixed effects
Source: Authorʹs Calculations
                                                                Table 6

              Actual, Predicted, and Counterfactual Simulations of Productivity and Employment Growth

                                          Labor Productivity                             Employment per Capita
                                Actual   Predicted Fixed Policy Policy Effect   Actual    Predicted Fixed Policy Policy Effect
                 Pre‐95           2.53      2.12        1.82         0.30        ‐0.27       0.06       0.35         ‐0.29
Mediterranean    Post‐95          0.52      0.90        1.18        ‐0.28         1.87       1.63       1.46          0.17
                 Change          ‐2.01     ‐1.23       ‐0.65        ‐0.58         2.14       1.57       1.11          0.46

                 Pre‐95          2.26       2.38         2.41        ‐0.03      ‐0.04       ‐0.12       ‐0.28         0.16
Continental      Post‐95         1.76       1.57         1.75        ‐0.18       0.76        0.92        0.80         0.12
                 Change         ‐0.50      ‐0.81        ‐0.66        ‐0.15       0.80        1.04        1.08        ‐0.04

                 Pre‐95          2.00       2.33         2.27         0.06      ‐0.61       ‐0.80       ‐0.64        ‐0.17
Nordic           Post‐95         1.92       1.38         1.80        ‐0.41       0.70        1.02        0.73         0.29
                 Change         ‐0.08      ‐0.95        ‐0.47        ‐0.47       1.31        1.82        1.36         0.46

                 Pre‐95          2.52       2.56         3.14        ‐0.57      ‐0.23       ‐0.25       ‐0.92         0.67
Anglo‐Saxon      Post‐95         2.23       2.13         2.57        ‐0.44       0.83        0.86        0.26         0.60
                 Change         ‐0.29      ‐0.43        ‐0.57         0.13       1.06        1.12        1.18        ‐0.07

                 Pre‐95          2.32       2.33         2.39        ‐0.06      ‐0.15       ‐0.15       ‐0.28         0.13
EU‐15            Post‐95         1.44       1.44         1.73        ‐0.29       1.16        1.16        0.91         0.25
                 Change         ‐0.88      ‐0.89        ‐0.66        ‐0.23       1.31        1.31        1.19         0.12

Source: Authorsʹ Calculations
                                                      Table 7

                         Effects of Unit Standard Deviation Policy Shocks on Employment
                                        Productivity, and Output per Capita

                                   Shock Size            Employment        Productivity    Output Per Capita

Tax Wedge                             9.21                   ‐2.67 ***          1.71 ***              ‐0.96 **
                                                            (0.64)            (0.53)                   (0.4)

Employment                            0.87                    0.74 **           0.23                   0.97 ***
Protection Legislation                                      (0.36)            (0.37)                 (0.31)

Product Market Regulation             0.9                    ‐0.14              0.35                   0.21
                                                            (0.24)            (0.25)                 (0.22)

Average Replacement Rate             11.31                   ‐0.90 ***          1.37 ***               0.47 *
                                                            (0.34)            (0.31)                 (0.25)

Union Density                        23.32                   ‐7.93 ***          5.07 ***              ‐2.85 ***
                                                            (1.17)            (1.23)                 (1.07)

High Corpratism                        1                     ‐1.02 **           0.65 **               ‐0.37 *
                                                            (0.48)            (0.33)                 (0.21)

Note: Standard errors (Delta method) in parentheses

Source: Authorsʹ Calculations
                                                               Table A1

                   First‐Stage Regressions of Employment on Policy Variables, 1980‐2003

                                                  1                                2                              3                          4
Tax Wedge                                     ‐0.25 ***                        ‐0.25 ***                       ‐0.2 ***                  ‐0.14 *
                                             (0.06)                           (0.07)                         (0.07)                     (0.07)
Employment                                     0.88                             1.38                           0.90                      ‐1.03
Protection Legislation                       (0.75)                           (0.86)                         (0.30)                     (0.79)
Product Market                                 0.24                             0.34                          ‐0.99 **                   ‐0.84
Regulation                                   (0.49)                           (0.51)                         (0.48)                     (0.56)
Unemployment                                  ‐0.08 *                          ‐0.01                          ‐0.19 ***                  ‐0.21 ***
Benefits (ARR)                               (0.05)                           (0.06)                         (0.05)                     (0.05)
Union Density                                 ‐0.29 ***                        ‐0.35 ***                      ‐0.49 ***                  ‐0.44 ***
                                             (0.10)                           (0.11)                         (0.10)                     (0.10)
High Corpratism Dummy                         ‐2.95 ***                        ‐2.32 *                        ‐2.18 **                   ‐2.04 **
                                             (0.83)                           (1.22)                         (1.02)                     (0.97)
Output Gap                                     0.46 ***                         0.55 ***                       0.54 ***                   0.64 ***
                                             (0.04)                           (0.04)                         (0.03)                     (0.05)

Post‐1995 Dummy                                0.66 ***                         0.75 ***                       0.93 ***                   0.91 ***
                                             (0.14)                           (0.14)                         (0.16)                     (0.16)
Post‐ʹ95 Dummy (U.S.)                                                                                         ‐0.38 **
                                                                                                             (0.17)

R2                                               0.48                          0.53                            0.58                      0.53
RMSE                                             1.02                          0.99                            0.96                      1.15
N                                                 296                          251                             344                       306
Notes                           Spain Excluded            Mediterranean Countries          U.S. included, with a          All explanatory
                                                          Excluded                         separate post‐ʹ95 dummy        variables except
                                                                                                                          output gap lagged
                                                                                                                          by one year


All regressions include population weights and fixed country dummies
Source: Authorsʹ Calculations
                                                                                         Table A2

                                      Second‐Stage Regressions of Productivity on Employment and Policy Variables

                                                        1                  2                         3                          4                                                5                      6
Employment Rate                                     ‐0.56 **           ‐0.46 **                  ‐0.24                      ‐0.43 ***                 ‐0.64 ***              ‐0.39                  ‐0.51 ***
                                                   (0.26)             (0.22)                    (0.23)                     (0.13)                    (0.16)                 (0.31)                 (0.15)
Tax Wedge                                                                                                                                              0.01
                                                                                                                                                     (0.04)
Employment                                           1.05               1.88 **                   2.43 ***                   2.72 ***                   1.6 **                1.49 *                 1.56 **
Protection Legislation                             (0.94)             (0.92)                    (0.90)                     (0.86)                    (0.64)                 (0.82)                 (0.76)
Product Market                                       0.27              ‐0.56                      0.93                       0.65                      0.59                   0.47                    0.4
Regulation                                         (0.50)             (0.63)                    (0.68)                     (0.63)                    (0.44)                 (0.50)                 (0.44)
Unemployment                                         0.25 ***           0.15 **                   0.17 **                    0.14 **                   0.13 **                0.16 **                0.14 **
Benefits (ARR)                                     (0.06)             (0.07)                    (0.07)                     (0.06)                    (0.05)                 (0.08)                 (0.05)
Union Density                                        0.05              ‐0.16                      0.14                                                                        0.08
                                                   (0.14)             (0.18)                    (0.18)                                                                      (0.17)
Output Gap                                           0.65 ***                                     0.28 ***                   0.31 ***                  0.67 ***               0.49 ***               0.56 ***
                                                   (0.15)                                       (0.07)                     (0.06)                    (0.10)                 (0.17)                 (0.09)
High Corpratism Dummy                                1.23              ‐0.57                      1.37                                                ‐0.25                   0.24
                                                   (1.37)             (1.30)                    (1.31)                                               (0.21)                 (1.24)
Post‐1995 Dummy                                     ‐0.06               0.20                     ‐0.36                      ‐0.13                     ‐0.13                  ‐0.41                  ‐0.28
                                                   (0.27)             (0.28)                    (0.33)                     (0.24)                    (0.19)                 (0.36)                 (0.21)
Post‐ʹ95 Dummy (U.S.)                                                                                                                                                         0.46 ***               0.44 ***
                                                                                                                                                                            (0.17)                 (0.15)

R2                                                0.51                0.27                 0.31                       0.30                            0.63                 0.51                  0.56
RMSE                                              0.97                  1.3                1.28                       1.28                            0.95                 0.93                  0.88
N                                                  251                 329                  305                         305                           320                  344                    344
Exogenous Instruments                       Tax Wedge           Tax Wedge         Tax Wedge                  Tax Wedge                                               Tax Wedge           Tax Wedge
                                                                                                             High Corp.                 High Corp.                                       High Corp.
                                                                                                             Unions                     Unions                                           Unions
Notes                           Mediterranean Countries         Output Gap        All explanatory            All explanatory            Tax wedge not             U.S. included,         U.S. included,
                                Excluded                        Excluded          variables except           variables except           used as an                with a separate        with a separate
                                                                                  output gap lagged          output gap lagged          exogenous                 post‐ʹ95 dummy         post‐ʹ95 dummy
                                                                                  by one year                by one year                instrument



All regressions include population weights. In all cases, the Sargan statistic cannot reject the null of instrument validity at the 20% level
Source: Authorsʹ Calculations
