                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 LANGUAGE IN VISUAL ART:
                                 THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

                                          David Galenson

                                       Working Paper 13845
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13845


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Language in Visual Art: The Twentieth Century
David Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 13845
March 2008
JEL No. J01

                                             ABSTRACT

Words have appeared in visual art since classical times, but until the modern era their use was generally
restricted to a few specific functions. In the early twentieth century, the Cubists Braque and Picasso
began using words in their paintings and collages in entirely new ways, and their innovation was quickly
adopted by other artists. Words, phrases, and sentences were subsequently used by visual artists for
a variety of purposes -- to refer to popular culture, to pose verbal puzzles, to engage with philosophy
and semiotics, and for political and social commentary. Throughout the century, the use of language
in visual art was dominated by conceptual artists, and the increasing role of language over time was
symptomatic of the fact that visual art was progressively intended less as an aesthetic product, to be
looked at, and increasingly as an intellectual activity, to be read. The prominence of language is yet
another way in which the visual art of the twentieth century differs from all earlier periods, as a result
of the increasingly extreme practices of conceptual artists after the development of a competitive market
for advanced art in the late nineteenth century freed them from the constraints that had previously
been imposed by governments and other powerful patrons.


David Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu
                                                   3

Introduction

        A distinctive feature of visual art in the twentieth century is its use of language. Words

had appeared in paintings and sculptures since classical times, but their use was generally

restricted to a few specific functions. From an early date inscriptions served religious purposes,

identifying the protagonists in a biblical scene or referring to a relevant biblical text. Artists’

signatures identified the person responsible for a work, and dates were often included to specify

when a work was completed. And artists sometimes included the title of a painting within the

work’s image.1 In the early twentieth century, however, some artists began using language in

their works for very different reasons. Over time this practice spread, as words and even

sentences became more conspicuous in a number of artists’ work. Eventually, in some cases

language became more important than images, and for some artists words replaced images

altogether.

        The introduction of language into art for new purposes is a symptom of the increasingly

conceptual nature of visual art during the twentieth century. The increasing acceptance of the use

of language equally became an independent factor fueling the conceptual orientation of art, for

the possibility of using language appealed to many young artists with conceptual goals: the

example of important visual artists whose work featured language helped make visual art an

attractive activity for many conceptually oriented artists, and provided them with points of

departure for new conceptual innovations.

Word Counts

        Determination of which twentieth-century artists made the most important use of

language was done by surveying 13 textbooks, all of which covered the art of the entire century,
                                                   4

and all of which were published in 2000 or later. The ranking of Table 1 was made by counting

all illustrations in these books of works that included letters or other inscriptions, excluding

artists’ signatures. The artists listed are the 20 who had the most such works illustrated in the

books surveyed.

        The inscriptions included in the works counted for Table 1 vary enormously, from a few

stenciled letters or a word fragment torn from a newspaper, through a cartoon caption or the

label of a commercial product, to full sentences or even paragraphs of printed text.

Understanding why artists used words in these many varied forms is central to this analysis of

the role of language in twentieth-century art. But in spite of the diversity, the listing of artists in

Table 1 provides a good basis for identifying the most influential uses of language in visual art in

the past century. The following sections of this paper will consider how and why each of these

artists used language, ordered chronologically by the most important appearances of language in

their art.

Language in Art

        In the fall of 1911, Georges Braque used stencils to paint letters and numerals on two

paintings. On one, Le Portugais, the letters included the word “BAL.”2 This marked the

introduction of lettering into Cubist painting. The act cannot have been a casual one: Braque had

been working closely with Pablo Picasso in developing the new form of art, and the two were so

sensitive to the appearance of their works that for a time they had put their signatures on the

backs or sides of their paintings, in order not to interfere with the compositions.3 Picasso quickly

seized on Braque’s new practice. Before the year was out he had inscribed “MA JOLIE” at the

bottom of his painting Woman with a Guitar, and the next year he prominently placed the letters
                                                  5

“JOU” on the first collage, Still Life with Chair Caning. Letters began to appear in almost all of

the two artists’ paintings. When Braque made the first papier collé in 1912, Fruit Dish and

Glass, he included the letters “BAR.” And when Picasso responded with his first papier collé,

Guitar, Sheet Music and Glass, one of the pieces of paper pasted to it was torn from a

newspaper, including the letters “JOU.”4

       Braque’s use of a stencil had set in motion a process that would have an enormous impact

on both the form and content of advanced art in the twentieth century. Braque would later say

that he had done this “as part of a desire to come as close as possible to a certain kind of reality.”

The stenciled letters called attention to the two-dimensional surface of the painting, and thus

created a contrast, effectively pushing other elements of the painting back into space, and calling

attention to the solidity of the shaded facets of the objects depicted: as Braque put it, “they were

forms which could not be distorted because, being quite flat, the letters existed outside space and

their presence in the painting, by contrast, enabled one to distinguish between objects situated in

space and those outside it.”5 John Golding observed that the stenciled letters and numbers also

served to emphasize the nature of Cubist paintings as objects. Picasso and Braque often spoke of

“le tableau objet,” and Golding argues that this represented a new concept of paintings “as

constructed objects having their own independent existence, as small, self-contained worlds, not

reflecting the outside world but recreating it in a completely new form.” The artificial letters and

numerals emphasized the novelty of the form of the paintings because - just like the pieces of

cloth or paper, or fragments of glass or tin that the Cubists would later attach to their canvases -

they were foreign to the traditional practice of painting, and therefore made the viewer aware of

the material existence of the work as an object. Braque’s first use of a stencil thus became a
                                                6

conceptual prelude to both collage and papier collé.6

       Braque’s use of letters also affected the content of his paintings. The word “BAL” in Le

Portugais referred to a popular dance, and this reference to low culture was not an isolated event.

Picasso’s inscription, “Ma Jolie,” was not only a coded reference to a new love who would soon

replace his current companion, but also the refrain of a song that was popular at the moment.7

And when Picasso began to attach pieces of newspaper to his paintings, he consistently cut them

from the sensationalistic Le Journal, an inexpensive paper aimed at a wide audience, rather than

more sophisticated newspapers intended for more prosperous readers.8 By bringing popular

images and artifacts squarely into their new art, Kirk Varnedoe observed that Braque’s lettering

and Picasso’s enthusiastic response “initiated a sequence of events that was decisive for the

whole future process of modern art’s engagement with the materials of popular culture.” The

departure could not have failed to amaze the advanced art world, because of the stark contrast

between the austerity and cerebrality of the images the Cubists had developed by 1911 and the

banality of the references to popular culture that they introduced thereafter. Varnedoe

commented that “having perfected an exquisite, chamber-music harmony, Picasso and Braque

seem to have decided that the perfect next step was to add a kazoo counterpoint.”9

       At a general level, the introduction of letters into their works by Braque and Picasso

underscored the radically conceptual nature of their innovation in creating Cubism. Letters that

did not function as illusionistic elements of images were obviously a conceptual device, and the

challenge they posed to viewers to decipher their meanings within these paintings added another

level of difficulty for viewers already faced with the problem of interpreting the fragmented

motifs of these works. Conceptual artists had made images that carried symbolic meanings
                                                  7

throughout the history of western art, but the signs they used for these were generally familiar

and easily understood by their intended audiences. What was novel in the practice of Picasso and

Braque, so much so as to inaugurate a new era of conceptual art, was the use of signs that were

not generally familiar to any audience, and that consequently had to be studied and learned, like

a new or unfamiliar language. As early as 1915 Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, who was the dealer

for Picasso and Braque during their collaboration, wrote explicitly of Cubism as a new language,

and noted that its images could not be immediately understood “when the spectator is unfamiliar

with the new language.”10 Picasso echoed this metaphor in 1923, when he told Marius de Zayas

that “The fact that for a long time cubism has not been understood and that even today there are

people who cannot see anything in it, means nothing. I do not read English, an English book is a

blank book to me. This does not mean that the English language does not exist, and why should I

blame anybody else but myself if I cannot understand what I know nothing about?”11 Fragments

of words, or incomplete sentences, were obvious puzzles, and they reinforced the basic message

that the entire works in which they appeared were puzzles. But letters and words were a

particular kind of puzzle, for they are associated with reading, and their inclusion thus carried the

implication that Cubism itself was a symbolic language, that the observer had to decipher or

translate. The letters in Cubist paintings have therefore been seen as indicators of a transition in

conceptual art, in which spectators would no longer simply be viewers, but would instead

become readers.

       Art historians have attempted to find political or social commentary in the specific

newspaper clippings Picasso chose to include in his papiers collés. Yet the ambiguous fragments

of words and phrases he used do not appear to offer decisive support for these specific
                                                 8

interpretations, nor does the fact that he offered virtually no independent statements on these

subjects. Varnedoe concluded that “An attempt to decrypt from these works specific messages

about the epoch would seem simplistic, in a context where elusive complexity is the defining

order; and it would go against the grain of the way the words, and the structure of the works as a

whole, consistently work to subvert single-minded clarity. The world of words the Cubists made

in these papiers collés is not merely an edited shorthand for the one that surrounded them.”

Varnedoe observed that one consequence of this lack of a specific message was that the Cubists’

new device could be adapted to many varied purposes: “Cubist works with words, like Cubism

in general, appeared to many contemporaries to provide a language without an ideology, in a

time when there were numerous ideologies in search of a language. If the inner circle who made

this language never said what it meant, others nonetheless quickly saw what they could do with

it.”12

         In Moscow, Kazimir Malevich had already been following the lead of the Cubists from a

distance, and in 1914 he made a series of paintings that transformed the Cubists’ use of language

for his own purposes. In contrast to the subdued palette of Picasso and Braque, the bright colors

of Malevich’s paintings suggest his excitement with the new methods of Cubism, as does the

intricacy of his use of collage, with many more small painted and pasted elements placed against

or upon each other, and with more abrupt transitions than in the more sedate compositions of the

Cubists. So for example Rainer Crone and David Moos described Malevich’s Lady at the Poster

Column of 1914, a large painting with a wide variety of collage elements, as a “sensorial

bombardment of pictorial and ‘verbal’ information that confronts the viewer in a similar fashion

to a passerby absorbing advertisements and announcements.”13 Although the specific words and
                                                   9

phrases resist unambiguous interpretation, both the active compositions of Malevich’s paintings

and the use of fragments from both Russian and French newspapers appear to express

Malevich’s enthusiasm about the cosmopolitanism and dynamism of life in the modern city, and

his approval of the sophistication of life in Moscow in particular.14

       In view of the fact that Marcel Duchamp’s avowed primary goal was to reverse what he

considered the unfortunate tendency of modern painting to create visual products and instead “to

put painting once again at the service of the mind,” it is not surprising that he quickly embraced

the Cubists’ introduction of language into art.15 And since Duchamp’s “mania for change” made

him avoid repetition, it is not surprising that he used language in a series of very different ways

in his art.16 In 1912, Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 shocked both the public and

Duchamp’s fellow artists in part because of its title, which Duchamp inscribed in block capitals

at the bottom of the canvas. Duchamp later recalled that much of the negative reaction to the

painting at the time stemmed from the attitude that “a nude should be respected. It should not

descend a staircase because that is ridiculous.”17 Indeed, when the artist’s two brothers famously

came to break the news to him that the painting had not been accepted by the 1912 Salon des

Indépendants because of its perceived challenge to Cubism, their mission was in fact not to tell

him of a rejection, but to urge him to alter the painting in order to make it acceptable: according

to Duchamp’s account of the meeting, they asked “‘Couldn’t you at least change the title?’ They

thought it was too much a literary title, in a bad sense – in a caricatural way... Even their little

revolutionary temple couldn’t understand that a nude could be descending the stairs. Anyway,

the general idea was to have some changes, something to make it possible to show it, because

they didn’t want to reject it completely.” Duchamp declined, and retrieved the painting.18 He
                                                  10

claimed he did not explain his intransigence to his brothers at the time, but when he referred to

the episode in an interview years later, he indicated that he considered that title and its

appearance on the image a significant conceptual innovation. Thus he noted that the furor over

Nude Descending was “Probably because of the shock value due to its title, which by the way

already predicted the use of words as a means of adding color or, shall we say, as a means of

adding to the number of colors in a work.”19

       Later in 1912, Duchamp painted The Passage from the Virgin to the Bride, and again

wrote the name of the painting at the bottom. Like Nude Descending, The Passage was

concerned with the representation of time. In the later painting, however, Duchamp might have

used typography to communicate a sly message. Thus Duchamp wrote LE PASSAGE in capitals,

and de la vierge à la mariée in lower case. Thierry de Duve suggested that this may stress that

the passage in question in fact occurs at a single moment in time.20

       In 1913 Duchamp created the first of his readymades, which would become one of the

most controversial artistic innovations of the century. In a brief speech he made about that

innovation in 1961, Duchamp commented on the role of language: “One important characteristic

was the short sentence which I occasionally inscribed on the ‘readymade.’ That sentence instead

of describing the object like a title was meant to carry the mind of the spectator towards other

regions more verbal.”21 Perhaps the most celebrated example of this occurred in 1919, when

Duchamp bought a postcard of the Mona Lisa, pencilled on the image a mustache and goatee,

and wrote at the bottom “L.H.O.O.Q.” Read aloud in French, the letters produce a short sentence

that is generally translated as “She’s got a hot ass.”22 The juvenile word puzzle reinforced the

offensive defacement of the portrait’s image to produce what Varnedoe described as “a cynical,
                                                  11

knowing irreverence, and ... sniping use of crudely barbed wit against established shibboleths.”

Varnedoe characterized Duchamp’s presentation of the postcard as a readymade as “arguably the

first modern work to incorporate graffiti into its strategies.”23

       Stuart Davis developed a distinctive early style that combined the flat colored planes of

synthetic Cubism with characteristically American symbols and images. During the 1920s, in

paintings that mimicked collage, Davis paid homage to Lucky Strike and other popular

American cigarette brands, copying their colorful packaging and bold lettering in compositions

that sometimes also included newspapers and comic strips, with legible headlines and titles.

Davis’ jazz age celebrations of popular and commercial images have often been considered an

anticipation of American Pop art of the 1960s.24 In 1921, Davis recorded his belief that he was

bringing to painting an artistic appreciation for a distinctively American modernity that had

previously been expressed only in poetry: “I feel that my tobacco pictures are an original note

without parallel so far as I can see... In poetry we have Lindsay, Masters, Sandburg and

Williams, all in some way direct descendants of Whitman our one big artist. I too feel the thing

Whitman felt and I too will express it in pictures – America – the wonderful place we live in.”25

       Four of the artists listed in Table 1 – Max Ernst, Raoul Hausmann, Francis Picabia, and

Kurt Schwitters – were members of the Dada movement, which originated in 1916 as a protest

against World War I. Both Dada and its successor, Surrealism, were dedicated to making art

from the irrational and the unconscious. Both also began as literary projects before they

expanded into visual art. For this reason, William Rubin observed that “The preoccupation with

the use of words in images, and vice versa, was natural for the poet-painters of Dada and

Surrealism.” He also noted that language played a greater role in Dada’s art than in that of their
                                                 12

predecessors: “The Dadaists went far beyond the Cubists in composing pictures with letters and

words connected syntactically.”26

       Dada was not a style but an attitude, and the four artists of Table 1 illustrate its diversity.

All made art that differed greatly in appearance, and their use of language was equally diverse.

Ernst devised a novel way of making collages, in which random combinations of photographs,

newspaper clippings, and illustrations from advertising catalogues would suggest new and

unexpected forms to him. He would then develop these, by drawing or painting, and often by

adding words: “thus I obtained a faithful fixed image of my hallucination and transformed into

revealing dramas my most secret desires – from what had been before only some banal pages of

advertising.”27 Ernst merged mechanical and biomorphic shapes to create “enigmatic forms and

fantastic beasts,” and while his works are obviously symbolic, they do not yield obvious

messages or clear interpretations.28 The titles of his paintings added to their enigmatic quality, so

Ernst often inscribed them below the images, as he did, for example, in his first major Surrealist

painting in 1921, writing “CELEBES” below the image of a mechanical monster that bore some

resemblance to an elephant. Much of Ernst’s audience would not have been expected to

recognize the painting’s title, The Elephant of Celebes, or its subject as references to an obscene

German schoolboy rhyme.29

       Hausmann was one of a group of Berlin Dada artists who pioneered the use of

photomontage. Together with Hannah Höch and John Heartfield, he used photographic images

from newspapers and magazines, combined with words and sentences cut from newspapers, to

produce biting political satire and angry social commentary. Berlin Dada was the most explicitly

political of the Dada groups, and relied most heavily on photographs and texts drawn from the
                                                 13

mass media for its art, in order to “attack the bourgeoisie with distortions of its own

communications imagery.”30

       Picabia was a close friend of Duchamp, and shared the latter’s taste for a number of

artistic devices, including symbolic mechanical forms and the use of verbal puzzles. Picabia

inscribed the title “UDNIE” on one of his most important paintings, and “EDTAONISL” on

another; numerous attempts to decipher the meanings of those words have been no more

definitive than suggested interpretations of the paintings’ abstract forms. When a journalist asked

him to explain the titles, Picabia compared his work to musical harmonies, and asked: “why not

accept a sign that does not evoke accepted conventions?”31

       Schwitters created a distinctively personal form of Dada that originated in the structure

and materials of Cubist collage. Yet instead of placing a few pieces of newspaper into a painted

composition, Schwitters made compositions by fitting together large numbers of small items

drawn from his preferred materials – discarded tram tickets, receipts, and other small pieces of

waste paper and cloth – so that the collage elements became the primary features of the works,

and retained their original identity to a greater extent than in Cubist paintings or the collages of

Berlin Dada.32 As a result, the words printed on many of the elements in Schwitters’ collages do

not pose puzzles, or ask for symbolic interpretation, but instead contribute to the compositions as

if they were abstract forms.

       Language played a central role in the single most famous painting ever produced by René

Magritte, a leading Surrealist. In 1929 Magritte painted The Treachery of Images, in which the

meticulously painted image of a briar pipe was placed above the inscription “Ceci n’est pas une

pìpe” (this is not a pipe). The painting was one of scores of works that Magritte called “word-
                                                  14

pictures,” that he began making in 1927 and continued to produce throughout the remaining 40

years of his life. The format of the painting recalls traditional grammar-school object lessons, in

which a photograph or careful drawing of a common object is presented above a caption with its

name, and the parallel is reinforced by the schoolroom penmanship that Magritte mimicked for

the inscription.33 The imitation of the familiar and trustworthy object lesson makes the

unexpected and anomalous denial of the inscription all the more jarring, and this is precisely

what has made the painting so successful. For instead of instructing viewers in vocabulary,

Magritte was demonstrating a proposition from an essay titled “Words and Images” that he wrote

in 1929: “Everything tends to suggest that there is little connection between an object and what

represents it.34 This statement was a product of Magritte’s interest in the writings of the

philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, who stressed the arbitrary nature of the relationship between

words and the objects they name. Implications of The Treachery of Images include the facts that

an image of a pipe is not an actual pipe, and that there is no natural relationship between the

word and the object. The painting’s controversion of the way in which we are accustomed to

using language makes it an example of Magritte’s contention that “my paintings are a kind of

defiance of ‘common sense.’”35 The Treachery of Images was the single most famous instance of

what Suzi Gablik described as the mission of Magritte’s life: “to overthrow our sense of the

familiar, to sabotage our habits, to put the real world on trial.”36

        In 1956, the English artist Richard Hamilton made a small collage, Just what is it that

makes today’s homes so different, so appealing?, that embraced popular culture by including

product labels and other commercial imagery carefully cut from magazine advertisements, comic

books, and newspapers. The work was a caricatural but nonetheless enthusiastic British view of
                                                    15

contemporary American consumer culture, and its words, including the logo for Ford

automobiles, the title of Al Jolson’s movie The Jazz Singer, and the label of a Tootsie pop, were

a key element in establishing Hamilton’s belief that mass entertainment and modern technology

could make a positive contribution to fine art.37

       Jasper Johns’ early paintings famously portrayed familiar objects – “things the mind

already knows.”38 In some cases, words appeared on objects he painted or sculpted, including

cans of Savarin Coffee and Ballantine Ale. In other cases Johns stenciled letters or numbers on

his paintings, as part of his search “for subject matter that was recognizable.” Like the flags and

targets he had painted, letters and numbers became common objects in an uncommon setting:

“everyone had an everyday relationship to numbers and letters, but never before had they seen

them in the context of a painting. I wanted to make people see something new.”39 In other

paintings, Johns achieved a different kind of surprise by stenciling the names of colors on his

paintings, often – but not always – in a color different from the color named. He explained that

“I liked it that the meaning of the words either denied or coincided in the colored paintings...

Those paintings to me were an accomplishment in ambiguity that previous paintings had not

matched.”40

       It is not surprising that the two leading painters of the Pop art movement appear in Table

1. The most famous images of both Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein included language, in

Warhol’s case the labels of the Campbell’s soup cans that introduced Pop to a wide audience in

1962, and in Lichtenstein’s the phrases that appear in bubbles to communicate the thoughts or

exclamations of comic strip characters, or the onomatopoetic words that provide the sound

effects for the explosions or collisions in those same enlarged comic strip frames. The language
                                                16

of these paintings is obviously a key element, for the carefully designed labels of popular

products in a supermarket or the bold and simple language of comic strip characters are essential

to their identity, and this is a basic concern of Pop art. Thus the critic Lawrence Alloway

observed that “The communication system of the twentieth century is, in a special sense, Pop

Art’s subject.”41 The selection of familiar images by Warhol, Lichtenstein and their colleagues

allowed “American Pop art of the 1960s[to] become, more swiftly and perhaps more widely than

any other kind of modern art, genuinely popular.”42

Toward Language as Art

       In the work of all the artists surveyed to this point, language appeared as an adjunct to

images: in most cases words played a clearly subordinate role, while in a few cases words were

central, and might even be considered as important as the images. During the 1960s, however,

visual artists began to feature language more prominently: for some artists words became more

important than images, and for others words replaced images altogether, as words effectively

became the images. Four artists who appear in Table 1 – Marcel Broodthaers, Joseph Kosuth, Ed

Ruscha, and Bruce Nauman – represent this new tendency as it appeared in the ’60s, while two

others – Barbara Kruger and Jenny Holzer – illustrate its development beyond that decade.

       Broodthaers was a starving Surrealist poet who publicly declared in 1964 that he had

decided to make visual art in order “to sell something and succeed in life.” Inspired by the

success of Pop art, “The idea of inventing something insincere finally crossed my mind, and I set

to work straightaway.”43 His first sculpture consisted of a package of the remaining copies of a

book of his poetry, half-embedded in plaster. The books remained visible, but they could not be

opened unless they were removed from the plaster. Broodthaers intended the work to pose a
                                                  17

frustrating choice for the viewer: “Here you cannot read the book without destroying its

sculptural aspect.” Yet he observed that viewers did not recognize this problem at all: he was the

only one who saw the irony in the fact that his poems had had no significant audience, but that

an object made entirely of those poems succeeded in attracting a sizeable audience after the

poems were made inaccessible.44 Broodthaers devoted much of his efforts to a critique of the

institutions of the art world, with a series of works that involved what he considered the

contradictory relationship between artistic and commercial values. The most ambitious of these

was a simulated museum, an installation that included a wide variety of objects and displays, as

well as all the kinds of equipment necessary to transport and display art in a museum. Words

played a prominent role in this notional modern art museum, for in addition to signs specifying

hours of admission and other practical information for visitors, every exhibit had a card reading

“This is not a work of art.” The latter stemmed directly from Broodthaers’ fascination with

Magritte’s caption, “This is not a pipe.” Broodthaers’ target was what he considered the arbitrary

ability of museums to confer value on objects by declaring them to be art and displaying them:

since his museum was fictitious, his signs testified to the fact that he lacked this ability.45

        While still a student at New York’s School of Visual Arts, Kosuth made One and Three

Chairs, which would become his single most celebrated work.46 It consists of a wooden folding

chair, a photograph of that chair, and an enlarged photograph of the dictionary definition of the

word “chair.” A different chair would be used in each location where the work was exhibited,

and a new photograph would be taken of that chair. Kosuth liked this procedure because “it

meant you could have an art work which was that idea of an art work, and its formal components

weren’t important.”47 In a subsequent series titled Art as Idea as Idea, Kosuth eliminated two of
                                                 18

the three elements, and these works consisted exclusively of photostats of dictionary definitions

of selected words.

       Early in his career, Kosuth decided that being an artist meant questioning the nature of

art. This couldn’t be done using painting or other traditional means, because to use these

implicitly accepted the nature of art. His solution lay in the use of language: “It seemed to be the

only possibility with the potential for being a neutral non-material.” Making works entirely out

of language avoided “the mystified experience of aesthetic contemplation... Texts are human

marks, language is daily, banal; no magical worlds to enter, no theatrical suspension.” Using

only language allowed him to focus on the essential: “Works of art are analytic propositions.”48

Kosuth has consistently maintained the extreme conceptual position that “art’s viability is not

connected to the presentation of visual...experience,” and his admirers agree; so for example the

philosopher Jean-François Lyotard observed that “Kosuth’s work is a meditation on writing.”49

       Language has played an important role in Ruscha’s paintings throughout his career. He

initially became known for his images of such California icons as Standard gas stations, the

Hollywood sign, and the 20th Century Fox logo, all of which prominently featured words. From

the mid-1960s he increasingly painted single words, often portraying them as three-dimensional

objects. He explained his interest in words as a result of the influence of the printed media: “I

guess I’m a child of communications... I felt newspapers, magazines, books – words – to be more

meaningful than what some damn oil painter was doing.” The words he selected came from

popular culture: “The content was important... I responded to contemporary life, city life; the

words I picked were pulled off the street, for their street power.” Once the words were chosen,

the painting had been conceived: “I don’t know what motivates me, but each of the works is
                                                19

premeditated. I don’t stand in front of a blank canvas waiting for inspiration.” What matters to

him is the effect of the language on him: “It might be the power of the word or words that I’m

glorifying.” His paintings are made from his ideas, but they are not designed to send messages:

“Whether or not the work communicates anything to anyone is not important to me. The work is

my indulgence. I don’t set out to get something across.” In general, Ruscha distrusts art as

communication: “That’s where the trouble begins, when artists try to communicate.”50 But the

words in his paintings take on visual interest as objects from the clever and often elegant designs

Ruscha devises for them: as Peter Schjeldahl put it, “Ruscha makes loaded words and phrases sit

for the their portraits.”51

        Nauman gave up painting while he was in art school because “I couldn’t get enough of

what I was interested in into paintings. For example, language.”52 He has made language into

three-dimensional forms, and presented it in photographs and neon signs. Whatever the medium,

Nauman’s concern is with the properties of words. His use of words was influenced by

Wittgenstein’s discussion of language games. As Arthur Danto observed, Nauman often works

by taking words apart: “Thus he finds the word EAT in DEATH. Or he finds that EROS spelled

backward is SORE. He discovers shapes within the shapes of words or expressions, and presents

them to us as if they mean something beyond the fact that one shape occurs within another. One

genre of his work consists in neon signs, in which, for example, we are to join him in seeking the

connection between VIOLINS and VIOLENCE and SILENCE... Is there a connection? Other,

that is, than at the level of sound?”53 It is unlikely that Nauman would be troubled by Danto’s

skepticism. In a 1987 interview, Nauman was asked whether he really meant the statement

presented by one of his celebrated early neons, which read The True Artist Helps the World by
                                                   20

Revealing Mystic Truths. His response was non-committal: “It’s one of those things you say to

figure out what you think about it yourself.” He explained that his work wasn’t intended to

answer questions: “it’s more that I figure out what those questions are.”54

        Kruger and Holzer both became prominent during the 1980s. Both exemplify a novel

phenomenon of the time, of artists using the technologies of advertising and the mass media to

attempt to reach a public much larger than the usual audience for advanced art. Kruger and

Holzer did this in order to provoke and influence public discourse: both are examples of the artist

as activist, and of the use of art as a political instrument.

        Kruger began her career as an extremely successful graphic designer, as she became the

chief designer of Mademoiselle magazine at the age of 22. Her experience in advertising taught

her the importance of creating a sense of immediacy and urgency, and when she became an artist

she created a distinctive format that used language and photography as a vehicle for social

criticism. Her work aimed to make people aware of how they are unconsciously indoctrinated by

the many forms of propaganda that surround and bombard them in their daily lives. Danto

commented on the intent of one of her most celebrated messages: “‘I shop therefore I am’ was

meant to bring to consciousness what, when one thought it through, was not simply a fairly

innocent distraction but a kind of willing collaboration in a social system. The shopper is an

agent of her own oppression. The work is a piece of consciousness-raising.”55 More generally,

Linda Weintraub concluded that “Kruger subverts established ideological and economic values

by inserting an outsider’s perspective into the information stream. She asserts the female point of

view.” Kruger’s goal has been to transform passive observers into active thinkers: “her work

fortifies the public against the perils of mind control.”56
                                                 21

       Holzer gave up abstract painting while she was an art student, and began to make art

from language: “I wanted to write so that I could be very direct. I could say exactly what I

wanted on any subject, and I could address specific topics. This is impossible to do with abstract

painting. That’s how I came to use language. I had the desire to be explicit and I felt the need to

study dearly held beliefs.”57 Her texts have appeared in a wide range of forms often devoted to

advertising, including posters, t-shirts, magazines, billboards, television, and her signature

medium, LED (light-emitting diode) signs.58 She initially used electronic signs simply in order to

reach a large audience, but she found that “A great feature of the signs is their capacity to move,

which I love because it’s so much like the spoken word: you can emphasize things; you can roll

and pause, which is the kinetic equivalent to inflection in the voice.”59 Her most celebrated work,

a series of several hundred aphorisms called Truisms that she made early in her career, were

intended as political activism, but not as advocacy of any specific position – indeed, the claims

of individual truisms often contradict each other. Holzer has explained that the goal was “to

show that truths as experienced by individuals are valid. I wanted to give each assertion equal

weight in hopes that the whole series would instill some sense of tolerance in the onlooker.”60

She is concerned with the visual presentation of her art, but each work begins with a text:

“Language has been the core because the writing holds most of the subject matter.”61

Conclusion

       Prior to the modern era, when words appeared in paintings for purposes other than to

identify the artist, they usually served conceptual ends – to identify the figures in a religious

painting, to make clear the allegorical content of an image, or to specify the identity and position

of a person shown by a portrait. Words rarely appeared in works by experimental painters, who
                                                  22

were generally concerned with images rather than messages. This pattern continued in modern

art, even as words began to be used for a variety of new purposes. Remarkably, all 20 artists in

Table 1 – those twentieth-century artists who have the most works using language illustrated in

art history textbooks – are conceptual artists.

       Braque and Picasso introduced letters and words into their paintings for formal reasons,

and this motive was a consideration for many of the artists who followed them in the practice.

But the Cubists also used language to refer to popular culture, and this intention ran through

many later artists’ use of language, including Malevich, Davis, Hamilton, Warhol, Lichtenstein,

and Ruscha. Duchamp quickly followed the Cubists in using language, but since his constant

concern was to increase the conceptual orientation of visual art, he consistently used letters and

words to make puns and to pose verbal puzzles. His friend Picabia appears to have done the

same, and his admirer Johns later followed suit. A succession of artists used language to engage

with philosophy and semiotics: prominent figures considered here were Magritte, Broodthaers,

Kosuth, and Nauman. And a number of artists used language for political or social commentary.

The Berlin Dada artists, of whom Hausmann was a leading member, pioneered this practice, and

they were followed in it by many others later in the century, including Kruger and Holzer.

       Language has played a prominent role in the visual art of the past century, and this is one

more way in which the twentieth century differs significantly from all earlier periods. The use of

words in paintings and other genres spread very rapidly after Braque’s initial stencilings of 1911,

and the uses to which visual artists put words quickly proliferated. The twentieth century was a

time of extended conceptual innovation, and language is a powerful and versatile conceptual

tool. Once Braque and Picasso had pioneered its use in painting, many other conceptual visual
                                                23

artists recognized the value of words, and even texts, for their own purposes. The diversity of the

specific uses of language surveyed above is symptomatic of the increasing diversity over time in

the conceptual uses of visual art. Throughout the century, the increasing role of language was an

obvious product of the fact that much of visual art was progressively less something to be looked

at, and increasingly something to be read. One end-point of this tendency occurred at an

exhibition in 1972, as the critic Brian O’Doherty observed of Joseph Kosuth’s installation at Leo

Castelli’s New York gallery that “It is not a looking room; it is a reading room.”62
                                              24



Footnotes

I thank Rob Jensen for suggestions and discussions.

1.     Louisa Matthews, “The Painter’s Presence: Signatures in Venetian Renaissance
       Pictures,” Art Bulletin, Vol. 30, No. 4 (December 1998), pp. 616-48.

2.     Kirk Varnedoe and Adam Gopnik, High and Low (New York: Museum of Modern Art,
       1990), p. 23.

3.     Brassaï, Conversations with Picasso (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), p. 93;
       Alex Danchev, Georges Braque (New York: Arcade Publishing, 2005), p. 113.

4.     David Cottington, Cubism and Its Histories (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
       2004), pp. 122-31.

5.     John Golding, Cubism: A History and an Analysis, 1907-1914, revised edition (Boston:
       Boston Book and Art Shop, 1968), pp. 92-93.

6.     Golding, Cubism, pp. 93-95.

7.     Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, p. 40; John Richardson, A Life of Picasso, Vol. 2
       (New York: Random House, 1996), p. 222.

8.     Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, pp. 27-32.

9.     Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, pp. 23, 39.

10.    Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, The Rise of Cubism (New York: Wittenborn, Schultz, 1949),
       pp. 12-15.

11.    Alfred Barr, Picasso (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1946), p. 270.

12.    Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, pp. 47-49.

13.    Rainer Crone and David Moos, Kazimir Malevich (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       1991), p. 107.

14.    Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, pp. 54-55.

15.    Michel Sanouillet and Elmer Peterson, eds., The Writings of Marcel Duchamp (New
       York: Da Capo Press, 1989), p. 125.
                                            25

16.   Pierre Cabanne, Dialogues with Marcel Duchamp (New York: Da Capo Press, 1987), p.
      37.

17.   Alice Goldfarb Marquis, Marcel Duchamp (Boston: MFA Publications, 2002), p. 99.

18.   Calvin Tomkins, Duchamp (New York: Henry Holt, 1996), pp. 81-83.

19.   Katharine Kuh, The Artist’s Voice (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), p. 83.

20.   Thierry de Duve, Pictorial Nominalism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
      1991), p. 41.

21.   Sanouillet and Peterson, The Writings of Marcel Duchamp, p. 141.

22.   Tomkins, Duchamp, p. 221.

23.   Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, pp. 77-78.

24.   Lowery Sims, ed., Stuart Davis (New York: Metroplitan Museum of Art, 1991), pp. 148-
      51, 174-75; Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, pp. 294-97.

25.   Sims, Stuart Davis, p. 151.

26.   William Rubin, Dada, Surrealism, and Their Heritage (New York: Museum of Modern
      Art, 1968), p. 94.

27.   Max Ernst, Beyond Painting (New York: Wittenborn, Schultz, 1948), p. 14.

28.   Rubin, Dada Surrealism, and Their Heritage, p. 50.

29.   John Russell, Max Ernst (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1967), pp. 64-66; Fiona Bradley,
      Surrealism (London: Tate Gallery Publishing, 1997), p. 28.

30.   Rubin, Dada Surrealism, and Their Heritage, pp. 42-46.

31.   William Camfied, Francis Picabia (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), pp. 59-
      62.

32.   John Elderfield, Kurt Schwitters (London: Thames and Hudson, 1985), p. 85.

33.   Hal Foster, Rosalind Krauss, Yve-Alain Bois, and Benjamin Buchloh, Art Since 1900
      (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2004), p. 214.

34.   David Sylvester, Magritte (Antwerp: Mercatorfonds, 1992), p. 212.

35.   Suzi Gablik, Magritte (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1985), p. 14.
                                             26

36.   Gablik, Magritte, p. 9.

37.   Richard Hamilton, Collected Words, 1953-1982 (London: Thames and Hudson, 1982),
      pp. 42-43.

38.   Jasper Johns, Writings, Sketchbook Notes, Interviews (NY: Museum of Modern Art,
      1996), p. 82.

39.   Johns, Writings, p. 136.

40.   David Sylvester, Interviews with American Artists (New Haven: Yale University Press,
      2001), p. 163.

41.   Steven Madoff, ed., Pop Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), p. 170.

42.   Varnedoe and Gopnik, High and Low, p. 335.

43.   Foster, et. al. Art Since 1900, p. 549; Sam Hunter, John Jacobus, and Daniel Wheeler,
      Modern Art, third ed. (New York: Vendome Press, 2004), p. 364.

44.   Kristine Stiles and Peter Selz, eds., Theories and Documents of Contemporary Art
      (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), p. 871.

45.   Hunter, Jacobus, and Wheeler, Modern Art p. 365.

46.   David Galenson, Artistic Capital (NY: Routledge, 2006), p. 129.

47.   Joseph Kosuth, Art After Philosophy and After (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991), p. 50.

48.   Kosuth, Art After Philosophy and After, pp. 91, 180, 20.

49.   Kosuth, Art After Philosophy and After, pp. 22, xv.

50.   Ed Ruscha, Leave Any Information at the Signal (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002), pp. 150,
      225, 253, 254, 281, 298.

51.   Peter Schjeldahl, The “7 Days” Art Columns, 1988-1990 (Great Barrington, Mass.): The
      Figures, 1990), p. 76.

52.   Robert Morgan, ed., Bruce Nauman (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002),
      p. 166.

53.   Arthur Danto, The Madonna of the Future (Berkeley: University of California Press,
      2001), p. 140.

54.   Morgan, Bruce Nauman, p. 269.
                                             27

55.   Arthur Danto, Unnatural Wonders (New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2005), p. 64.

56.   Linda Weintraub, Art on the Edge and Over (Litchfield, CT: Art Insights, 1996), pp. 194,
      196.

57.   Michael Auping, Jenny Holzer (New York: Universe, 1992), p. 73.

58.   Auping, Jenny Holzer, p. 11.

59.   Jeanne Siegel, ed., Artwords 2: Discourse on the Early 80s (Ann Arbor: UMI Research
      Press, 1988), p. 294.

60.   Siegel, Artwords 2, p. 289.

61.   Auping, Jenny Holzer, p. 95.

62.   Brian O’Doherty, Inside the White Cube (Santa Monica: The Lapis Press, 1986), p. 64.
Table 1: Total Illustrations of Works Including Letters or Words, by Artist

 Artist                                       Illustrations    Year of birth   Year of death
 1.    Marcel Duchamp                              21              1887            1968
 2.    Pablo Picasso                               17              1881            1973
 3.    Georges Braque                              15              1882            1963
 4.    Richard Hamilton                            12              1922             --
 5t.   Max Ernst                                   11              1891            1976
 5t.   Joseph Kosuth                               11              1945             --
 7.    Andy Warhol                                 10              1928            1987
 8t.   Raoul Hausmann                              9               1886            1971
 8t.   Roy Lichtenstein                            9               1923            1997
 8t.   René Magritte                               9               1893            1967
 8t.   Francis Picabia                             9               1879            1953
 8t.   Ed Ruscha                                   9               1937             --
 13t. Marcel Broodthaers                           8               1924            1976
 13t. Stuart Davis                                 8               1894            1964
 13t. Jenny Holzer                                 8               1952             --
 13t. Jasper Johns                                 8               1930             --
 13t. Barbara Kruger                               8               1945             --
 13t. Kazimir Malevich                             8               1878            1935
 13t. Bruce Nauman                                 8               1949             –-
 13t. Kurt Schwitters                              8               1887            1948

Source: see text and appendix.
Appendix. The 13 books surveyed for this study are listed here, ordered alphabetically by
author’s surname.

Adams, Laurie, Art Across Time, third ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 2007).

Arnason, H.H., History of Modern Art, fifth ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004).

Bell, Cory, Modern Art. (New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 2001).

Blistène, Bernard, A History of 20th-Century Art (Paris: Flammarion, 2001).

Cumming, Robert, Art (New York: DK Publishing, 2005).

Davies, Penelope, et. al., Janson’s History of Art, seventh ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
       Prentice Hall, 2007).

Dempsey, Amy, Art in the Modern Era (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002).

Foster, Hal, et. al., Art Since 1900 (New York: Thames & Hudson, 2004).

Honour, Hugh, and John Fleming, The Visual Arts, sixth ed. (New York: Harry N. Abrams,
      2002).

Hunter, Sam; John Jacobus; and Daniel Wheeler, Modern Art, third ed. (New York: Vendome
       Press, 2004).

Kemp, Martin, ed., The Oxford History of Western Art (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).

Parmesani, Loredana, Art of the Twentieth Century (Milan: Skira, 2000).

Richter, Klaus, Art (Munich: Prestel, 2001).
