NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES TEMPORARY HELP WORK PROVIDE A STEPPING STONE TO REGULAR
EMPLOYMENT?
Michael Kvasnicka
Working Paper 13843
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13843

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2008

This paper has benefited from valuable comments by David Autor, Ronald Bachmann, Stefan Bender,
Michael C. Burda, Andrea Ichino, Elke Jahn, Barbara Sianesi, Axel Werwatz and participants of the
2004 EALE conference in Lisbon, the 2004 meeting of the Verein für Socialpolitik in Dresden, a CEPR
workshop on temporary agency work in Berlin in 2005, the 2005 EEA conference in Amsterdam, the
2005 ESPE conference in Paris, and the 2007 NBER Conference on Labor Market Intermediation.
I would like to thank the Institute of Employment Research (IAB of the Federal Employment Agency
who has made the data for this project available. Financial support by the German Research Foundation,
the EU-funded CEPR research network 'A Dynamic Approach to Europe’s Unemployment Problem',
and the Collaborative Research Center 649 on Economic Risk at Humboldt University Berlin is gratefully
acknowledged. All remaining errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Michael Kvasnicka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Does Temporary Help Work Provide a Stepping Stone to Regular Employment?
Michael Kvasnicka
NBER Working Paper No. 13843
March 2008
JEL No. C31,J40,J62,J64
ABSTRACT
Based on administrative data from the federal employment services in Germany, this paper applies
statistical matching techniques to estimate the stepping-stone function to regular employment of temporary
help work for unemployed job seekers. Our results show that workers who enter temporary help work
from registered unemployment do not enjoy subsequent greater chances of employment outside temporary
help work over a four-year period. Neither, however, do they suffer from future greater risks of unemployment.
While our results, therefore, do not lend empirical support to a stepping-stone function of temporary
help employment for the unemployed, they do neither confirm the existence of adverse effects on the
future regular employment and unemployment chances of unemployed job seekers. If anything, temporary
help work seems to provide an access-to-work function for the unemployed.

Michael Kvasnicka
RWI Essen (Berlin Office)
michael.kvasnicka@rwi-essen.de

1

Introduction

Temporary help work has expanded rapidly across Europe over the last decade. While concerns
have been raised about this trend expansion, because of the perceived inferior quality of jobs
created on this submarket, growing attention is being paid to the potential longer-term effects of
temporary help service (THS) employment on the labor market prospects of workers. For labor
turnover in this industry is exceedingly high, and THS employment spells generally constitute
but a short transitory period in the labor market histories of workers. Policy makers throughout
Europe in fact have taken an increasingly active stance over the last years in further promoting
THS work by dismantling existing national regulations on temporary help work that circumscribed
the operation of temporary help agencies and the use of THS workers by client firms.
The German case constitutes a prime example for this trend. Because of the strong employment
record of the THS industry in Germany and the acclaimed stepping-stone function of THS work to
regular employment for the jobless, restrictive provisions of the Law on Placement Activity (LoPA)
that governs the operation of the German THS submarket since 1972 were increasingly relaxed
during the 1990s, a process that culminated in the large-scale labor market reform legislated in late
2002.1 Among other measures, the latter initiated a near complete dismantling of hitherto existing
regulations imposed on temporary help work in Germany (for details, see Burda and Kvasnicka,
2006). With stubbornly high rates of unemployment putting a drain on public resources and
the efficiency of the federal employment service increasingly being questioned, policy makers in
Germany saw THS work as a cost-effective and complementary means to get the unemployed back
into work. Apart from the deregulation of the LoPA, this is evinced by the large-scale creation
following the 2002 reform of subsidized temporary help agencies, or personnel-service-agencies
(PSA), in all of Germany’s 181 employment office districts. These PSA operate as ordinary THS
agencies for the sole purpose of providing unemployed workers ports of entry to the labor market
and above all subsequent springboards to social-security employment (’temp-to-perm’) by way of
temporary work assignments with different firms. What is surprising about these initiatives is
that solid empirical evidence for the existence of such a stepping-stone function of THS work for
unemployed job seekers was in fact lacking for Germany, and internationally sparse at best.
Using statistical matching techniques, this paper investigates the validity of the stepping-stone
hypothesis of THS work in Germany. We confine the empirical analysis to an investigation of
the stepping-stone function of THS employment for unemployed job-seekers only. This restriction
in focus is inspired by the fact that the most recent reform of the law on placement activity
in Germany has been enacted largely for the acclaimed bridging function of THS work for this
1 Details

of the LoPA are provided in Section 5.2.2.

2

particular group of workers. With about every second worker entering THS work in Germany
from unemployment, the population of interest chosen does, however, represent a significant share
of all inflows into THS work. Conditioning the analysis on prior unemployment experience has
the additional advantage of providing some sort of initial condition among the sample chosen,
excluding, for instance, students and pupils who only perform vacation work in a THS agency,
without seeking any steady employment. Focusing on the first unemployment spell of individuals
who register as unemployed in 1994 to 1996, we are able to follow these workers for up to a
minimum of 5 years and hence are in a position to study both the short-term and long-term effects
of THS work experience on their subsequent employment trajectories. The matching approach
employed in this study is based on the methodology applied by Barbara Sianesi in her studies
on the short- and long-term effects of worker participation in Swedish labor market programmes
(Sianesi, 2001/2004).
Our results show that unemployed workers who enter THS employment within twelve months of
unemployment registration benefit from both higher monthly employment (THS or non-THS) and
THS employment chances, as well as from significantly reduced monthly risks of unemployment
throughout the four year period these workers are followed post entry compared to similar workers
that did not join THS work at the same elapsed unemployment duration. THS workers, however, do
not appear to enjoy greater chances of future non-THS employment. While our results, therefore,
do not lend empirical support to the stepping-stone hypothesis of THS work for unemployed jobseekers, they do neither confirm the existence of adverse effects of agency work on the future
chances of workers to find employment outside agency work or to return to unemployment. If
anything, THS work seems to provide an access-to-work function for unemployed workers that
leaves them with a higher probability of employment and a lower probability of unemployment for
the entire four years their subsequent labor market states are followed.
In the remainder of this paper, we will, as is commonly done, refer to social-security employment
outside the THS industry as ’regular employment’. This is understood, at least in part, as a
terminological convention. For apart from the irregular triangular setup of the THS submarket,
workers in the German THS industry do in fact enjoy the same employment protection and worker
rights as other workers under the provisions of general labor and social security law (Klös, 2000).
THS workers are regular employees of their agencies, for which the two bodies of law regulate
and provide minimum standards regarding health and safety in the workplace, worktime, paid
annual leave, sick pay, and periods of notice and dismissal protection more generally. THS workers
are covered by the public pension and unemployment insurance system and must have health
insurance. To all three of these, the agency and THS worker contribute equally. The distinction

3

between regular and THS employment is hence not grounded in a generally inferior legal position
of THS workers. In practice, of course, working conditions encountered may differ, sometimes
considerably so. Until recently, wages and working conditions of most THS workers in Germany
were not determined by collective bargaining to the effect that workers in agency work tended to
be paid less and enjoyed less fringe benefits, such as extra holiday pay or on-the-job training, than
workers employed outside agency work (a large fraction of such wage differences, however, as shown
by Kvasnicka and Werwatz (2002), can be attributed to earnings-related productivity differences
between agency and non-agency workers). Furthermore, employment spells in THS work often
fall short of probabitionary periods granted by law in which layoffs are permitted at significantly
shorter notice.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 surveys arguments for and against the existence
of a stepping-stone function of THS work, Section 3 reviews the existing literature on the subject,
and Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 addresses the evaluation problem encountered in
estimating the stepping-stone function of THS work and proposes an appropriate framework for
empirical evaluation. Section 6 contains the empirical results, and Section 7 concludes.

2

Preliminary Considerations

A number of reasons have been cited in the literature, why THS work may provide a bridge
to regular employment for the unemployed. First, THS workers are frequently recruited among
the un- or nonemployed and are hence given access to paid work or entry-level jobs (see, for
example, Mangum, Mayall, and Nelson, 1985), otherwise potentially denied to them on the general
labor market. Surveys of THS workers show that one of the main reasons for taking up a job
in the THS industry is the inability to find a regular job (see, for example, CIETT (2000) for
Europe, Cohany (1998) for the US, or IWG (1995) for Germany). Second, unemployed workers
may acquire skills and gain work experience in THS jobs that increase their productivity and hence
improve their future labor market prospects (Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 1999; Paoli and Merrlié,
2001; Kvasnicka and Werwatz, 2003), which puts to a halt the depreciation of human capital that
would take place in continued unemployment. Third, the search for regular employment may be
more effective on a THS job than in unemployment, as work assignments with client firms provide
opportunities for workers to get to know different potential employers (Storrie, 2002), and to signal
their ability (Ichino, Mealli, and Nannicini, 2005). Fourth, employers may, in turn, deliberately
utilize temporary help work as a riskless screening device to prospect and recruit workers for
permanent positions (Segal and Sullivan, 1997a; Houseman, 1997; Abraham and Taylor, 1996;
Autor, 2001). As client firms are in no way contractually bound to THS workers during a work

4

assignment, on-the job screening is possible without subjecting oneself to any firing restrictions or
direct monetary firing costs. Finally, THS workers are pre-screened by the agency, both in terms of
general marketable skills when recruiting the worker, and in terms of the specific requirements of
client firms for a particular work assignment (Autor, 2001; Burda and Kvasnicka, 2006). Increased
screening may in turn also lead to better and therefore more stable employment relationships, as
match quality is improved by prior extensive on-the-job screening (Katz and Krueger, 1999).
However, there have also been dissenting voices, pointing out that THS workers often cycle between short employment spells in the industry and extended periods of unemployment (Bronstein,
1991), leading to potential labor market segmentation into low wage, less stable THS jobs with
little opportunities for career advancement and highly paid permanent jobs (Mangum, Mayall, and
Nelson, 1985; Segal and Sullivan, 1997a). In particular, THS agencies are likely to provide less
formal training on the job (Ferber and Waldfogel, 1998), as investment in general and therefore
marketable skills, by definition the only skills traded on this submarket, increase the risk of the
worker being poached before the agency can recoup its outlays through temporary work assignments. THS employment, especially when full time, may also crowd-out productive direct-hire job
search. Finally, THS employment may stigmatize workers in the eyes of potential employers under
incomplete information, as their inability to obtain regular work may be perceived by the latter as
a signal of low productivity.

3

Previous Research

Lack of adequate longitudinal data on the individual employment histories of temporary help
workers has tended to circumscribe empirical research on the stepping-stone function of THS work.
However, a number of studies exist for different countries that have investigated the effect of agency
work on the future labor market prospects of workers. These studies, as will be seen, differ markedly
in their respective methodologies employed, institutional settings investigated, and populations of
workers considered, a heterogeneity that makes it difficult to draw general conclusions. With the
notable exception of the quasi-experimental study by Autor and Houseman (2005), however, work
in this area has tended to find that THS employment improves rather than harms the subsequent
labor market outcomes for workers.
While existing studies for Europe are in the majority descriptive in nature (see Storrie (2002)
for a recent survey), they are exclusively so for Germany. Based on administrative data from the
German federal employment service, Rudolph and Schröder (1997), for instance, calculate that a
third of all THS jobs that were dissolved between 1980 and 1990 in Germany led to subsequent
transitions of workers into non-THS emploment within one month of job termination. Similarly,

5

using retrospectively collected survey data on THS workers who left a major THS company in the
second half of 1986, Brose, Schulze-Böing, and Mayer (1990) find that after their THS employment
spell, more workers are employed outside agency work and less are unemployed than before their
engagement in agency work. Lacking a comparison group of workers in their respective analyses,
however, both studies do not permit any causal interpretation of their findings.2
Different types of flexible employment forms, such as fixed-term contract, casual, THS or parttime employment, have also been frequently subsumed under the ambiguous catch-all term ”temporary employment” to then estimate their impact on the future labor market prospects of those
holding these jobs. Marked differences in their respective contractual arrangements, employment
compositions, and economic roles, however, raise the question to what extent results obtained
from such analyses do in fact apply to each and every of these heterogeneous employment forms
considered. For the UK, for instance, Booth, Francesconi, and Frank (2002), study the effects on
subsequent employment of temporary work, which in their study includes agency and fixed-term
contract work. Similarly, Zijl, Heyma, and van den Berg (2004) subsum workers on fixed-term
employment contracts, in THS work, on on-call contracts, and in subsidised temporary jobs. They
estimate a multi-stage duration model using longitudinal survey data for the Netherlands. Their
findings support a stepping-stone function for these contingent employment forms, as the latter
tend to shorten unemployment durations and significantly increase the future chances of workers
to be in standard employment.
Positive employment effects have also been found in the majority of studies that focus exclusively on the consequences of THS employment. Using Spanish social security administrative data
for 1995-2000, García-Pérez and Muñoz-Bullón (2005) estimate a switching regression model to
control for self-selection into agency work so as to quantify the effects of THS work spells on occupational upgrading and the chances of workers to find permanent employment (defined as holding
an open-ended work contract). The results show that especially high-skilled workers benefit in
their subsequent chances of obtaining such employment from a work spell in THS employment.
Almus, Engeln, Lechner, Pfeiffer, and Spengler (1999), in turn, examined whether workers unemployed in late 1996 in the German state of Rhineland-Palatinate benefitted in terms of their
post-agency-work employment chances from working in non-profit THS firms that received special
subsidies under a programme of the federal German government designed to assist the reintegration of unemployed jobseekers. Using data for three employment office districts, they find former
agency workers to exhibit significantly higher chances of employment outside agency work than the
control group of unemployed workers not previously working in non-profit agency work. Ichino,
2 The same applies to other studies that have documentated transitions out of agency work without any reference
to a suitably chosen control group of workers that did not join agency work. Examples include the studies by
Finegold, Levenson, and van Buren (2003), and Segal and Sullivan (1997b) for the US.

6

Mealli, and Nannicini (2005), also applying propensity score matching, estimate the effect of a THS
work assignment with Manpower in two regions of Italy in early 2001 on the probability to find a
permanent job after 18 months. They find THS work to increase the chances of permanent employment for workers by as much as 19 percentage points in Tuscany and by 11 percentage points
in Sicily, compared to baseline probabilities of matched controls of 31 and 23 percent, respectively.
This estimated treatment effect, however, is barely significant for Sicily. Furthermore, it is highly
heterogeneous with respect to observable characteristics such as age, education and firm’s sector.
Finally, Autor and Houseman (2005) exploit the random assignment of welfare-to-work clients in
1999-2003 (Work First program) across several welfare service providers with substantially different
placement rates at temporary help jobs in a major metropolitan area in the US state of Michigan
to study the effect of holding a THS job on the labor market advancement for low-skilled workers.
They find THS jobs to boost the short-term earnings of welfare clients, but to reduce their earnings
and employment chances one to two years later, and to increase their welfare recidivism over this
period. THS jobs, the authors conclude, appear overall no more effective than providing no job
placements at all for low-skilled workers.
As this literature review illustrates, there is great heterogeneity in the methodologies used by
different studies (e.g. mere descriptive statistics, statistical matching, quasi-experiments), their
respective settings investigated (e.g. entire countries, regions, or sub-populations such as welfare
clients), and definitions of treatment used (e.g. THS work, or contingent work more generally,
such as fixed-term contract employment and agency work). While the majority of studies tends to
find positive effects of THS employment on the subsequent labor market outcomes of workers, the
only quasi-experimental that exists does not, which makes it hard to draw any general conclusions
regarding the existence and quantitative importance of the stepping-stone function of THS work.
With this study on the German THS submarket, we hope to contribute to this actively researched
area.

4

The Data

The analysis is based on an extended version of the public-use IAB Employment Sample (IABS)
of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) at the German Federal Employment Agency, a
2% random sample of all employees registered in the period 1975 to 2001 by the social security
system in Germany (data on East German workers is included from 1992 onwards). Employment
information in the IABS is based on statutory notifications of employers on their workforces to
the institutions of the social security system. Containing a host of worker, firm, and job-specific
attributes, and with information on unemployment periods involving benefit payments added from

7

the federal unemployment register, the IABS provides exact daily information on the employment
and unemployment trajectories of more than one million individuals in the 27 years sampled. Large
sample sizes and detailed flow information are indispensable for analyses of the THS industry,
as the latter still accounts for only a small employment share in the German economy and is
characterized by very high rates of labor turnover. As administrative data, typical problems
besetting longitudinal survey data, such as panel mortality due to non-responses, or memory gaps
in restrospective questions, are not encountered in the IABS (Bender, Haas, and Klose, 2000).
However, the IABS also has a number of potential shortcomings for the present analysis. First,
as THS employment is identified by the industry affiliation of an employer in the IABS, THS
workers cannot be differentiated from the administrative staffing personnel of THS firms in the
dataset. This shortcoming, encountered also in other datasets that have been used for analyses of
THS employment, such as the US Current Population Survey, is however unlikely to be of major
practical importance for our analysis, as the workforce share of staffing personnel is generally
very small. Second, as the THS firm alone issues the statutory employment notifications, the
IABS neither contains information on client firms, nor on work assignments of THS workers (this
shortcoming is also shared with all public-use administrative data sources, which by design are
tailored to the standard bilateral employment relationship). Lack of information on client firms
implies that we are unable to tell whether a successful transition to regular employment occurred
to a former client firm or not. As a consequence, we may not directly test the relative importance
of the screening and signalling hypotheses for the stepping-stone function of THS work. Our
analysis, by necessity, will hence be reduced form in kind, seeking to uncover a causal effect of
THS work without explicitly analyzing its potential causal pathways (see Section 5.1.2 for further
discussion of this point). Complementary future research could fruitfully analyze these pathways
and assess their respective quantitative importance for any stepping stone function of THS work.
Finally, covering only employment relationships that are subject to social security contributions,
civil servants, the self-employed, and those in marginal dependent employment (until 1999) are not
included in the IABS. We may therefore only investigate the employment trajectories of workers
in such dependent employment.
In the next Section, we discuss in detail the peculiar features of the present evaluation problem of the stepping stone function of THS employment for the unemployed in comparison to an
archetypical administered social experiment. In doing so, we define key terms, such as treatment
(THS employment) and non-treatment status (the counterfactual for the treated), as well as various outcome measures that describe workers’ future employment prospects, so as to formulate
testable causal questions about the stepping-stone function of THS work, subject to the restric-

8

tions imposed by the nature of the phenomenon under investigation and the data available. Sample
selection issues will be addressed in the course of this discussion, so that a presentation of summary
statistics on major variables recorded in the data is deferred until then.

5

The Evaluation Problem

5.1

Evaluating the Stepping-Stone Function of THS Work

The archetypical administered social experiment is conducted only once, with a specific starting and
ending date, clearly circumscribed in the nature and scope of the treatment provided therein (e.g.
a particular one-time training programme), and linked to specific formal eligibility requirements
for participation (e.g. a certain skill level of workers, or a minimum elapsed unemployment duration). None of these features, however, applies to the present evaluation problem of the stepping
stone function of THS employment for the unemployed. As an on-going programme, unemployed
workers may join THS work both at different calendar dates and at different individual elapsed
unemployment durations. In addition, employment spells in the THS industry vary endogenously
in length. THS workers may also be assigned to different numbers of client firms for different durations and for different tasks, rendering THS employment heterogeneous across workers in several
respects that are endogenously determined but post entry. An unemployed worker may furthermore hold a THS job more than once, and thus be subject to multiple treatments with interspersed
repeated spells of unemployment or regular employment. One and the same worker may therefore
be counted as treated at one point in time (when in THS work) and as non-treated at another.
Finally, formal requirements for participation are absent. General ’profitable employability’, a
function of both individual characteristics of the unemployed job-seeker and general labor market
conditions encountered, is alone decisive for temporary help agencies in the recruitment process.
Likewise, unemployed workers decide on whether or not to seek employment in THS work based on
factors that determine job search behavior in general, such as the likelihood of finding alternative
employment opportunities, reservation wages, and the like.
The definition of outcomes is equally beset with difficulties. Above all, the question to be
addressed is when one should start to measure outcomes, both for those treated and for those not
treated. For the former, the more obvious choice is between the start of a THS employment spell
and its end, depending on how THS employment is valued relative to regular employment or the
specific causal question asked. For those workers not treated, the case is even more ambiguous, as
neither entry date to nor exit date from THS work are observed. These specific features inevitably
require choices to be made with respect to the timing, as well as the definition of potential treatment
and control groups. This we do in the remainder of this section, beginning with the units (workers)

9

to be analyzed, i.e. the sample selected.
5.1.1

Sample Selection

For the ensuing analysis, we select all individuals who in 1994 to 1996 register as unemployed
and consider only their first unemployment spell in this period.3 This allows us to observe the
subsequent employment histories of those workers for an extended period of time in the IABS (up
to a minimum total of 5 years). Entries into unemployment are sampled over a three year period
to increase the absolute number of subsequent transitions to THS work observed in the data. The
years of entry chosen have the advantage to sufficiently predate the 1997 reform of the LoPA,
which, among other things, introduced a one-time exemption to the general rehiring ban in the
THS industry. We further restrict this inflow sample to individuals who are between 18 and 55
years of age at the time of unemployment registration. The upper age limit is imposed to reduce the
likelihood of sampling older workers who may be entitled to some form of early retirement scheme
that permits them to exit unemployment straight into inactivity without having to search for a
job or accept job offers by the public employment service while drawing benefits. Furthermore, we
exclude workers that lack some prior employment experience. This measure is imperative given the
data collection process, for important worker attributes, in particular the educational-vocational
qualifications obtained, are recorded in employment notifications issued by employers, but not in
the information collected in and contributed to the IABS from the federal unemployment register.
These restrictions leave us with a raw total of 106,383 workers in the sample selected that
enter unemployment between 1994 and 1996. Summary statistics on major variables for this
sample recorded at the time of inflow into unemployment are provided in Appendix Table 1. As
documented in Table 1 below, 0.4% of these unemployment spells are right-censored at the end of
2001, and 7.1% end with no subsequent transition recorded within the sampling period 1994 to
2001. 68.1% of all unemployed workers enter a regular job (non-THS employment), almost eight
out of ten within one month of exiting unemployment. Another 2.3% of the unemployed leave for
a THS job, the great majority (80.8%) again within one month.
It is noteworthy that a much larger fraction, or 8.0% of all entries into unemployment at some
point until December 2001 do in fact take up a job in the THS sector. With close to one in
ten unemployed workers joining THS work over this period, THS employment appears to be more
dispersed in the working population than its still small employment share in the economy suggests.
In addition, but not shown in the Table 1, 85.5% of all direct entries into THS work (those who
enter within one month of exiting from unemployment), do eventually find regular employment
3 An unemployment spell is defined as consecutive unemployment notifications for an individual in which the
time between these notifications does not exceed one week.

10

Table 1: Transitions to THS and regular employment of unemployment inflows in 1994 - 1996
Group of workers

Absolute number

Share (%)

106,383
429
7,531

100
0.4
7.1

... who subsequently enter THS work:
within < 1 month of exiting unemployment
after ≥ 1 month of exiting unemployment
at some point within sampling period

2,006
477
8,529

1.9
0.4
8.0

... who subsequently enter regular work:
within < 1 month of exiting unemployment
after ≥ 1 month of exiting unemployment

59,070
13,441

55.5
12.6

Total entries into unemployment:
with right-censored unemployment spells in 2001
with no subsequent record in sampling period

Source: IABS.

within the sampling period. The latter statistic is especially important in the present context, for
a high ”frequency of transitions from temporary to permanent employment suggests that the size
of any permanent ”underclass” of temporary workers must be small” (Segal and Sullivan, 1997a, p.
123). No subsequent transitions out of THS work are observed for only 2.2% of direct entries into
THS employment. Moreover, only four out of ten of these 2.2% are accounted for by right-censored
THS employment spells at the end of the sampling period. The median duration of THS job spells
is four months (124 days). 60% of them last less than half a year, 79% less than one year, and
92% end within two years.
However, past work experience in the THS sector seems to affect the probability of renewed
entry into THS work. As Table 2 shows, 13.2% of workers with some prior THS work experience
exit unemployment for a THS job, compared to only 1.7% of workers who never worked in the
THS sector. An even larger fraction (24.0%) of workers that enter unemployment directly from
THS work again take up a THS job within one month of exiting from unemployment, but only
one in eight of these return to their previous THS agency. Thus a sizeable fraction of THS
workers, at least in the short to medium run, indeed appears to cycle between unemployment and
temporary help service work spells before eventually finding regular employment. The vast majority
of THS workers, however, does not. Additional explorations, not shown in Table 2, underscore
the importance of the THS submarket for labor market flows, and of past THS work experience
for the likelihood of unemployed workers to enter THS employment. Workers with prior THS
work experience and workers who enter unemployment directly from a THS agency respectively
account for 5.1% and 1.5% of all entries into unemployment and for 29.0% and 11.5% of all
observed subsequent direct transitions from unemployment to temporary help work. Rehirings

11

within the THS industry, however, occur far less frequently than on the general labor market.
6.0% of all workers last employed at a THS agency in fact return to the same agency when leaving
unemployment. In contrast, 11.8% of workers entering unemployment from a regular job again
return to the same employer when leaving unemployment. The rehiring ban imposed by the LoPA
at the time is likely to be in the main accountable for this discrepancy, for a significant share of
former THS workers, as we have seen, does in fact return to THS work, albeit not to the same
employer. An additional reason is that THS workers are likely to accumulate less firm-specific
human capital when in temporary help work, which reduces their attachment to former THS
employers.

Table 2: Subsequent transitions to THS and regular employment of unemployment inflows in 1994
- 1996 by prior THS work experience
THS work experience
prior to entry into
unemployment

Subsequent direct transition to:
Regular
THS work
work
any agency same as before

No subsequent
transition observed
in the data

Anytime in the past

56.2%

13.2%

—

4.9%

Entered unemployment
from THS work

47.6%

24.0%

3.2%

4.4%

None

68.8%

1.7%

—

7.6%

Note: A direct transition is defined as the taking up of employment within 30 days of
exiting from unemployment. Deviations of row totals from 100% are comprised of
transitions to employment occuring later than this threshold period and of workers
that re-enter unemployment.
Source: IABS.

In the following, we restrict the analysis to transitions of individual workers to other labor
market states (regular or non-THS employment, and THS work) that occur within one month of
leaving unemployment (direct transitions). Apart from workers with some prior unemployment
experience, we also retain workers in the analysis that have been employed in the THS sector,
i.e. "treated", before entering unemployment in 1994 to 1996, because of the scale of reentry
into THS work documented above. Exclusion of either of these two groups of workers from the
analysis would likely result in above-average productivity individuals being sampled. It would
also restrict the treatment effect investigated to a significantly reduced subsample of THS inflows
from unemployment, which, at least from a policy perspective, does not represent the group of
unemployed workers mostly concerned with in the context of the stepping-stone function of THS
work. For completeness, however, we consider the case of unemployed workers with no prior work
experience in THS employment in Section 6.2, where we investigate potential heterogeneities in
12

the treatment effects of THS work on the future regular employment chances of individuals for
different subgroups of workers.
5.1.2

Treatment and Non-Treatment Status

With respect to the definition and the timing of the treatment, we consider the first entry of workers
into THS employment after having registered as unemployed in 1994 to 1996. Any subsequent
treatments are therefore viewed as outcomes of the initial treatment. More specifically, we define
treatment as entry into THS employment. Assuming the causal effects of THS work to set in upon
entry into the sector, we disregard differences in THS employment experience across workers (e.g.
in terms of employment duration, number of work assignments, etc.), and focus on the overall
or average effects of joining THS work on the subsequent labor market prospects of workers. As
noted, practical restrictions imposed by the data, in particular the complete lack of information
on client assignments, in part dictate this approach. However, one may argue for the definition
of treatment adopted also on purely methodological grounds. For, in contrast to the archetypical
programme discussed above, virtually all aspects of individual THS employment relationships
formed are ultimately determined endogenously, depending on the post-entry decisions of both the
temporary help agency and the THS worker. Moreover, the available, albeit limited evidence for
Germany on the distribution of client assignments across THS workers and on the transitions of
THS workers to regular employment suggests that the ability of THS workers to sample many
potential employers during temporary work assignments and the ability of client firms to screen
THS workers during such work assignments for permanent positions may not in fact be of primary
importance for the acclaimed stepping-stone function of THS work. As the case study by Kvasnicka
(2003) has shown, most THS workers have but a singular client assignment, while first evidence on
the recently created PSA in Germany reveals that in fact less than a fourth of all transitions out
of THS work into regular employment occurred to a former client firm (Jahn and Windsheimer,
2004).
Outcomes, yet to be defined, are consequently measured from the month of entry into THS
work for those actually receiving treatment. This raises the question, as to when one should start
to measure outcomes for those not observed to enter THS work. Theory suggests that unemployed
workers conduct their job search sequentially, accepting or declining a particular job offer depending
on the respective net payoffs associated with either decision. There is in addition ample evidence
that THS workers in the majority prefer regular employment to holding a job in the THS industry,4
largely because of the higher pay and superior working conditions expected to accrue in the former.
4 See, for example, Storrie (2002) for the European evidence, Finegold, Levenson, and van Buren (2003) for the
US, Hegewish (2002) for the UK, or IWG (1995) for Germany.

13

Moreover, surveys reveal that unemployed workers frequently enter THS work after a period of
unsuccessful search for a regular job, and because they hope to thereby improve their chances to
find regular employment (see, for example, IWG, 1995; CIETT, 2000; Cohany, 1998). In other
words, unemployed workers are likely to decide sequentially, whether or not to enter THS work
in a given month of unemployment. This implies that for the construction of an adequate control
group for those actually observed to enter THS work in a given month of elapsed unemployment
duration (u1 ), only those unemployed workers should be chosen as potential controls that have
been unemployed for at least u0 and are not treated in u0 , where u0 ≥ u1 . Note that these workers
may well enter THS work and therefore be treated at a later month of elapsed unemployment
duration. Thus while potential controls can be treated themselves at a later stage, treated workers
may never subsequently become controls for workers that enter THS work at longer unemployment
durations.
As individual months of entry into THS work (treatment) differ across workers, we adopt a
relative time scale in measuring subsequent outcomes (the effects of the treatment) for the treated.
For a matched control person, outcomes are measured from the observed u1 of the treated worker.
However, as u1 , i.e. elapsed unemployment duration before entry into THS work, is an unobserved
counterfactual for non-treated unemployed workers, it cannot be included as a regressor in the
estimation of the propensity score. We nevertheless condition the construction of matches on
elapsed unemployment duration, by estimating separate propensity scores for every month (u),
where each estimation is based on those treated in a particular u and those not treated in the same
u. This approach is equivalent to estimating a discrete hazard rate model, where all estimated
parameters are allowed to be duration-specific (Sianesi, 2004, p.140).
Choosing potential controls from such a duration-based flow sample has an inherent advantage
in the present context over the primary alternative comparison group design employed in the evaluation literature, i.e. the exclusive selection of potential controls from among those workers never
observed to enter the particular programme investigated. For in the latter case, the construction of
a comparison group is in fact conditioning on the future and hence the outcome when programme
starts are not restricted to a particular period (see on this point, for example, Fredriksson and
Johansson, 2003). In the current application, such as restriction would in all likelihood introduce a
downward bias in the estimated treatment effects of THS work on the future regular employment
probabilities of individuals, as unemployed workers that act as controls are likely to be never observed to enter THS work simply because they have instead made a successful transition to regular
employment.
We next formalize these ideas in the form of the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT)

14

to be estimated in the present context, deferring a discussion of the different outcome measures
employed in this study to the subsequent subsection.
5.1.3

Formal Specification of the Evaluation Problem

We formalize the evaluation problem based on Sianesi’s (2001/2004) exposition in her application
of statistical matching techniques to the evaluation of the effectiveness of active labor market
programmes in Sweden. The outcomes of interest are various labor market states of individuals

T
(u)
over time, i.e. Yjt
, where j denotes the type of outcome, i.e. the particular labor market
t=u+1

status considered, and t = u + 1, .., T are the months these outcomes are measured post elapsed
unemployment duration of at least u months. At time u, the population of interest comprises
workers with elapsed unemployment duration of at least u months. Treatment assignment is
denoted by Du = {1, 0}, with Du = 1 for unemployed workers who join THS work in u, and
Du = 0 for those unemployed job seekers who have elapsed unemployment duration of at least
u and do not join THS work in u. We further denote the potential labor market states of an
individual at time t, where t > u, that joins THS work in her u’th month of unemployment with
1(u)

Yjt

0(u)

, and with Yjt

if an individual has not joined THS work up to that month, respectively.

The average treatment effects on the treated (ATTs), ∆ujt , in the present application then
correspond to the average effects of joining THS work in month u of elapsed unemployment duration




1(u)
0(u)
Yjt
compared to not joining THS work in that month Yjt
for those unemployed workers
who actually take up a THS job in that same month (Du = 1), i.e.:
∆ujt




1(u)
0(u) 
≡ E Yjt − Yjt  Du = 1






1(u) 
0(u) 
= E Yjt  Du = 1 − E Yjt  Du = 1

f or t = u + 1, ..., T.

(1)

To identify the second term in equation (1), i.e. the unobserved counterfactual, we have to
assume stable unit treatment value and conditional independence. The conditional independence
assumpton (CIA), in formal terms requires that:
0(u)

Yjt



⊥ Du  X = x for t = u + 1, ..., T,

(2)

i.e. for observably similar individuals (X = x) having reached the same elapsed unemployment
0(u)

duration (u), the distribution of potential non-participation outcomes (Yjt

) is the same for

unemployed workers entering THS work (Du = 1) and unemployed workers not entering THS


work D(u) = 0 in month u. Common support in the present context amounts to the condition
that:
0 < Pr(Du = 1|X) < 1.

15

(3)

In other words, conditional on elapsed unemployment duration and individual worker characteristics of interest, a potential control has to exist for each treated individual. In the empirical
analysis, we set U = 12, i.e. we investigate the effect of taking up a THS job within one year of
registering as unemployed in the period 1994 to 1996. The period workers are followed while still
in unemployment is restricted for two reasons. First, to have a sufficiently long period at one’s
disposal in which the subsequent labor market outcomes of these workers can be studied in the
IABS: with data until December 2001, this restriction provides us with at least 48 months for each
individual worker, irrespective of the particular calendar months she entered and exited her unemployment spell. Second, as shown in Figure 1, the total number of transitions from unemployment
to THS work declines rapidly with elapsed months of unemployment duration. More than eight out
of ten (82.1%), or 1647 out of the 2006 transitions to THS employment recorded in the sampling
period 1994 to 2001 take place within the first year of unemployment.

Figure 1: Treated unemployed workers by month of entry into THS work
350

300

Entries per month

250

200

150

100

50

0
1

12

23

34

45

56

67

78

Unemployment month of entry into THS job

Note: Sample comprises inflows to unemployment in 1994-1996.
Source: IABS.

5.1.4

Outcomes

To gain a comprehensive view of how the future labor market prospects of unemployed workers in
Germany are affected by taking up a job in the THS industry, we employ a set of four different


(u)
outcomes measures Yjt , described in Table 3 below. These respectively forty-eight monthly
16

post-treatment probabilities of regular employment (non-THS employment), THS employment,
any type of employment (regular or THS), and unemployment allow us to study the dynamics of
the effects that taking up THS employment exerts on the individual likelihoods of observing these
states over time.

Table 3: Definition of outcome measures used in the empirical analysis
Outcomes for each month up to 4 years post treatment:
Outcome 1

Monthly probability of regular employment

Outcome 2

Monthly probability of THS employment

Outcome 3

Monthly probability of employment (regular or THS)

Outcome 4

Monthly probability of unemployment

It is important to note that these monthly outcome measures refer to the respective probabilities
of observing workers in a particular labor market state at any point in time during a particular
month. As workers may naturally spend time in more than one of these labor market states in a
given month, Outcomes 1, 2, and 4 are not mutually exclusive, and therefore do not necessarily
add up to one for a particular group of workers. Moreover, workers that return to education, or
general inactivity, i.e. states which are not recorded in the IABS, are retained in the respective
monthly base groups from which the four outcome measures are calculated. For by virtue of the
data generation process, we have complete information on the employment (regular and THS) and
unemployment trajectories of workers over time that comprise our individual outcome measures of
interest, i.e. employment subject to social security contributions and unemployment periods that
involve some kind of entitlement to financial support from the public authorities.
While Outcome 1 is of primary interest for the empirical assessment of the stepping-stone
function of THS work, the remainder does provide important supportive evidence in this context.
Outcome 2 provides information on the degree to which workers remain or tend to get stuck in the
THS sector over time, whereas Outcome 3 conveys information on overall employment probabilities.
The latter is of interest in its own right, for even if treated workers turn out not to benefit in their
likelihood of obtaining regular work, or to suffer from increased risk of future unemployment
(Outcome 4), they might still prove to enjoy relatively higher chances of employment in general.

17

5.2

Implementation of Propensity Score Matching

5.2.1

Nearest-Neighbor Matching

We apply nearest-neighbor propensity score matching without replacement, but within caliper
(Cochran and Rubin, 1973).5 In other words, conditional on elapsed unemployment duration
u, each treated individual i in month u is matched to that non-treated individual z with the
closest estimated propensity score p(X) and used as a control Ci for individual i, subject to the
condition that the absolute difference in the two estimated propensity scores, i.e. the degree of
residual mismatch, does not exceed a certain maximum Ψ, or caliper (see, for example, Heckman,
LaLonde, and Smith, 1999, p. 1954):

Ci = z| Ψ >

min

zǫ{1,...,N 0 }

pi (X) − pz (X) .

(4)

In the empirical analysis, we set the caliper to Ψ = 0.03. From these pairs of treated and
control individuals, the nearest-neighbor matching estimator estimates the j times t ATTs (∆ujt )
for each entry month into THS work, i.e. u, as the difference in mean outcomes between between
the treated and their matched controls:

∆ujt

N u1

1   1(u)
0(u)
= u1
yjt − yjt
,
N i=1

(5)

where N u1 is the number of matched treated workers with completed unemployment duration
u. Assuming independent observations, homoskedasticity of the outcome variables within the
treatment and control groups, and non-dependence of the variance of the outcome on the propensity
score (Lechner, 2001), the variances of the ATTs, ∆ujt can then be calculated as (see Sianesi, 2001,
p. 28):6



V ar ∆ujt =

N u0






ω 2z
1
1(u)  u
0(u)  u
z=1
V
ar
Y
D
=
1
+
V
ar
Y
D
=
0
,


jt
jt
N u1
(N u1 )2

(6)

where Du = 1 and Du = 0 denote matched treated and non-treated workers at time u, respectively,
N u0
and ω z is the number of times individual z is being used as a control, with
ω z = N u1 . As
z=1

matching is conducted without replacement to reduce the standard errors of the estimated effects,
N u0
however, ω z = 1 for all controls, so that
ω 2z = N u1 , too. As the true propensity score is
z=1

5 The

matching estimator ’psmatch2’ by Leuven and Sianesi (2003) for STATA is used and adapted to the specific
features of the present evaluation problem.
6 Note, however, that unlike Sianesi (2001), we do not have to condition on treated workers being observed at
individual outcome months, as we do not have any measurement error in the labor market states of interest that
underylie our outcome measures (see Section 5.1.4).

18

unknown, its estimate has to be used, which leads to reduced estimated variances of the ATTs.
Standard errors may be obtained by bootstrapping, which, however, is not pursued here for the
amount of computing time required.
5.2.2

Estimating the Propensity Score

The plausibility of the CIA in equation (2) depends on the richness of the available data with
respect to the underlying mechanism that determines treatment assignment and future outcomes,
i.e. the ability to control for all factors that both determine selection into THS work and affect
potential outcomes in the two participation states. We discuss these factors in relation to the two
principal actors involved, i.e. the THS and the unemployed job-seeker, the potential restrictions
imposed on their conduct by the LoPA, as well as the general labour market conditions they are
confronted with.
The Temporary help agency: As pointed out before, few formal requirements besides general ’profitable employability’, a function of both individual characteristics of the unemployed
job-seeker and general labor market conditions, are relevant for temporary help agencies in the
recruitment process. Deferring a discussion of the latter for the time being, the former necessitates
the consideration of attributes related to the productivity of individuals in the estimation of the
propensity score. Besides personal characteristics, i.e. age, sex, foreign nationality, marital status,
presence of children, as well as the highest educational and vocational attainment recorded for the
worker, we control for the previous (recent and more distant) labor market history of individuals in the estimation of the propensity score. With respect to the last employment relationship,
we control for employment tenure, real earnings, real average earnings in the last establishment,
type of occupation held, part-time status, industrial sector, and whether the last job was a THS
job. The latter in particular appeared quite significant in the descriptive explorations of observed
transitions from unemployment to THS work in Section 5.1.1. Information on the last sector the
worker was employed, in turn, is likely to capture human capital and work experience that might
be of use in the mainly manual, industrial tasks THS workers are usually assigned to at client
firms. In addition, and by virtue of the dataset, key summary statistics with respect to individuals’ more distant labor market history are constructed. Attributes that are controlled for include
whether the individual has ever worked in the THS sector before and whether the worker has
ever been unemployed before. The latter acts as a proxy for past instability of employment, and
possibly for the degree of labor market attachment of the worker, which itself may be related to
unobserved individual characteristics related to worker productivity. Furthermore, a dummy for
unemployment registration in the new German Lander is included, where THS agencies have only

19

been able to operate from 1990 onwards, and annual as well as seasonal indicators are used to
capture cyclical and seasonal variations in the demand of THS agencies for manpower. By virtue
of conditioning on elapsed unemployment durations in the estimation of the propensity score, we
also implicitly control for unobservables correlated with the duration of unemployment, such as
average time-invariant and time-variant differences in individual worker productivity not captured
by our other covariates measured only at entry into unemployment.
The unemployed job-seeker: The aforementioned factors are also likely to affect the participation decision and future labor market outcomes of unemployed job-seekers at a given time.
Elapsed unemployment duration is of primary importance in this context. First, surveys, as noted,
regularly find unsuccessful search for a regular job to be one of the most important motives for
taking up work in the THS sector, thereby lending support to the notion of sequential decision
taking on the part of unemployed job-seekers of whether or not to join THS work. Second, benefit
entitlement levels, and thus the reservation wage, decline with elapsed unemployed duration. As
remuneration in the THS sector generally falls short of levels attainable in other industries, workers
with prolonged unemployment spells, and hence a lower reservation wage, should be more likely
to take up a THS job than workers who have just entered unemployment. Third, elapsed unemployment duration is likely to be correlated with individual unobserved ability, as more productive
workers are on average more likely to exit unemployment quickly. And finally, job search activity
and more generally ’drive’ are likely to decline with prolonged unemployment, as workers become
discouraged. The latter raises the attractiveness of turning to THS agencies who each manage
a whole portfolio of potential job opportunities. Registering in the new German Lander and the
local unemployment rate at entry are likely to have an effect on the employment opportunities of
individual job-seekers, both in the THS sector and in other industries. We also control for the real
gross daily earnings workers received at their last employer before entering into unemployment.
These proxy individual worker productivity, and affect benefit entitlement levels as well as potential aspiration wages when searching for a new job in unemployment. As Kvasnicka and Werwatz
(2002) have shown, relative earnings of workers that enter THS employment in Germany on average
fall short of those of otherwise comparable workers even two to three years before actually entering
temporary work. We in addition control for the type of entitlements received by a worker in a
particular month of elapsed unemployment duration, i.e. unemployment benefits, unemployment
assistance, or unemployment support. The first is limited in duration and generally exceeds the
latter two in financial terms. Eligibility for benefit entitlements is conditional on past employment,
and its level depends on the last income earned.

20

Restrictions imposed by the Law on Placement Activity (LoPA): Before its large-scale
deregulation in 2002, the LoPA contained a number of provisions that circumscribed the terms
and conditions under which agencies could employ workers and place them with client firms for
temporary work assignments (a detailed discussion of the LoPA is provided in Jahn and Rudolph
(2002) and Burda and Kvasnicka (2006)). The most important of these provisions limited the
maximum permissible duration of work assignments with client firms, banned the use of fixedterm employment contracts between agency and worker (special ban on fixed-term contracts),
prohibited agencies to confine the term of an employment contract with a THS worker to the
duration of her first client assignment (synchronization ban), and disallowed agencies to rehire a
previously laid-off worker within three months of employment termination (rehiring ban).7 All
of these restrictive provisions served the same purpose of ensuring that agencies indeed assumed
employer responsibilities for their workforces. They prevented agencies from simply adjusting their
stock of THS workers in line with the often volatile demand for staffing services by client firms.
Initially set to three months, the maximum permissible duration of work assignments was raised by
quarter of a year in 1985, 1994, and 1997, and was further extended to 24 months in 2002 before it
was dropped altogether in the latest reform that took effect in 2004. As to the three bans, agencies
were permitted a respective one-time exemption for each worker from April 1997, before they too
were dropped altogether in 2004. In case of the rehiring ban, i.e. the only restriction imposed by
the LoPA in the observation period on the conduct of THS agencies in the recruitment process,
this exemption implied that agencies were henceforth allowed to once dismiss a worker and rehire
him again with three months. By virtue of sampling only inflows into unemployment between 1994
and 1996, however, the April 1997 reform of the rehiring ban is in fact immaterial for subsequent
transitions of workers out of their spell of unemployment.
In our empirical analysis, we cannot directly account for the rehiring ban in its effect on the
recruitment behavior of THS agencies in the estimation of the propensity scores by way of a dummy
variable that takes the value one if less than three months have elapsed since a worker has been laid
off by a THS, and zero otherwise. For we run separate probit regressions for each elapsed month of
unemployment. As a consequence, in months of unemployment greater than three, this indicator
will always take the value zero, i.e. we will have no variation in the data, as the rehiring ban ceases
to be binding for all workers still unemployed after three months. In the context of our matching
algorithm, however, we would expect immediately preceding employment in the THS sector to
have less of a positive effect on the probability to reenter THS work in the first three months of
unemployment than in the fourth, if the rehiring ban does indeed exert a material influence. We
7 As we have seen in Section 5.1.1, rehirings among our unemployment inflow sample in 1994-1996 indeed occured
much less frequently in the THS sector than in the economy at large.

21

do, in fact, find such evidence (see Appendix Table 2).
General Labor Market Conditions: General labor market conditions influence both the
search behavior and potential employment chances of unemployed job-seekers, as well as the recruitment decisions of THS agencies. Labor demand of THS firms is known to be both highly
procyclical and subject to strong seasonal variations. We control for general labor market conditions along three dimensions: cyclical, seasonal, and regional. Cyclical and seasonal factors are
controlled for by annual and quarterly indicator variables, measured at entry into unemployment.
These indicator variables also account for differences in the inflow composition of workers into
unemployment. The average annual unemployment rate in the employment office district where
the worker registers as unemployed, in turn, is used to capture differences in local labor market
imbalances. Finally, recorded unemployment registration in the new German Lander proxies for
persistent structural differences between East and West Germany.

A note is in order on a problem, which is commonly encountered in evaluation studies, i.e.
the presence of anticipatory effects of future treatment on the pre-treatment behavior of workers
and its likely pervasiveness in the current application. Anticipatory effects of unemployed jobseekers, leading to reduced job search prior to entry into THS work (akin to Ashenfelter’s dip), are
unlikely to be a major problem in the present evaluation problem of the stepping-stone function of
THS work. For THS agencies in Germany tend to hire workers predominantly on-call in line with
current realizations of client demand (see Kvasnicka, 2003), which is unlikely to be predictable with
certainty even one or two weeks in advance. In addition, as already discussed, worker rehirings
on the THS submarket at the time were prohibited within three months of prior employment
termination, which effectively circumscribes.the problem of anticipatory effects related to potential
rehiring among workers who entered unemployment from THS work.
5.2.3

Matching Quality

The regression output of the probit estimations of the propensity scores for a number of treatment
months are provided in Appendix Table 2. All covariates except current entitlement status are
measured at entry into unemployment. In particular, previous THS work experience and direct
entry into unemployment from a THS job have a sizeable and statistically significant positive effect
on the probability of transition to a THS job. Previous real earnings and the local unemployment
rate, in contrast, surprisingly never exert any statistically significant effect on the likelihood of
treatment assignment. The latter finding may be the product of two countervailing effects of
local labor market conditions on the probability of treatment. While unemployed job-seekers may

22

be more willing to accept a THS job, when other employment opportunities are scarce, THS
agencies may only be inclined to recruit more workers when client demand for their services is
high, i.e. local labor market conditions are tight. Workers who spent less than one year in their
last job, which proxies for past instability of employment, turn out to be at times more likely
to enter THS work, potentially for the otherwise reduced chances to find employment and lack
of sufficient occupation-specific skills acquired in their last job. Workers entering unemployment
from training also appear to be more inclined to take up a THS job in the first months of their
unemployment spells. THS work thus indeed appears to provide an access-to-work function for
recent labor market entrants. It is important to keep in mind that all estimated probit regressions
are conditional on treated and non-treated workers in the respective subsamples to have reached
the same elapsed duration of unemployment. As the latter is likely to be correlated both with
observable and unobservable worker characteristics, the respective monthly subsamples should
already be more homogeneous than the full groups of treated and non-treated workers sampled for
the entire first twelve months of elapsed unemployment duration. As a consequence, the estimated
coefficients of the observable attributes controlled for in the individual probit regressions measure
only the impact of these covariates on the probability of treatment assignment conditional on
elapsed unemployment duration. Following Sianesi (2004), Table 4 provides various summary
statistics on covariate balancing and hence matching quality for all 12 probit regressions.
Given the very large groups of potential controls available for each unemployment month (column 3), finding a suitable match partner for treated individual is not a problem. Only 1 out of
the 1647 workers leaving unemployment for a THS job, as shown in column 10, are excluded for
lack of common support. The pseudo-R2 from the individual probit regressions before matching
(column 4) indicate the extent to which the covariates explain the probability of treatment in a
particular month of unemployment. The respective pseudo-R2 from monthly probit regressions after matching (column 5) show that on average over the twelve probits run, the covariates continue
to explain only 8% of the variance in treatment assignment across the matched subsamples, and
thus only about half the average respective figure obtained from the original samples of treated
and non-treated workers. Associated probability values of likelihood ratio tests before and after
matching are reported in columns 6 and 7. Whereas before matching, the null hypothesis of joint
insignificance of the covariates is always rejected for any of our twelve probit regressions, it is
always accepted after matching. Matching on the estimated propensity scores leads to significant
improvements in the balancing of attributes between treated and (potential) control workers in the
matched subsamples for each unemployment month u, as shown by the respective median absolute
standardized biases before and after matching (columns 8 and 9).8
8 The

median is taken over all regressors and calculated for each unemployment month u following Rosenbaum

23

Table 4: Indicators of covariate balancing, before and after matching, by month
Treated

Nontreated

workers

workers

Probit
2

Probit
2

M edian

M edian

Treated workers

2
Pr>χ

2
Pr>χ

bias

bias

M onth (u)

b efore

b efore

b efore

after

lost to CS

b efore

after

before

after

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

after

(7)

(8)

(9)

1

208

95,265

0.113

0.029

(10)

0.000

0.991

14.3

3.9

2

326

80,905

0.138

0

0.015

0.000

0.999

16.5

3.7

3

249

69,270

0

0.124

0.017

0.000

1.000

16.3

3.6

4

203

1

59,768

0.166

0.030

0.000

0.995

18.8

2.9

5

0

174

52,997

0.159

0.023

0.000

1.000

16.4

4.5

0

6

127

47,184

0.125

0.055

0.000

0.973

14.4

6.5

0

7

99

42,280

0.153

0.065

0.000

0.986

21.7

6.5

0

8

69

38,302

0.127

0.093

0.000

0.973

21.0

6.5

0

9

51

35,008

0.149

0.177

0.000

0.805

16.6

8.1

0

10

52

31,897

0.171

0.138

0.000

0.957

16.8

8.7

0

11

52

29,250

0.152

0.123

0.000

0.975

27.1

7.2

0

12

37

25,674

0.193

0.192

0.000

0.943

28.1

11.6

0

ps.-R

ps.-R

(6)

Note: before = b efore matching, after = after matching; CS = common supp ort.
(1): Elapsed month u in unemployment.
(2): Numb er of treated (i.e. joining THS work in month u of unemployment).
(3): Numb er of potential controls (i.e. still unemployed in month u and not joining in u).
2
(4), (5): Pseudo-R from probit regressions for the monthly conditional treatm ent probability.
(6), (7): P-value of likelihood ratio tests for the joint significance of regressors.
(8), (9): M edian absolute standardized biases taken over all regressors.
(10): Number of treated workers outside the common support (using a caliper of 3%).
Source: IABS.

6

Empirical Findings

6.1

Summarizing Outcomes Over Time

We begin with a graphical summary of the average time pattern of the different treatment effects,
before presenting the results for the respective ∆ujt by month of entry into THS work in Section
6.2, i.e. the causal effects identified under the CIA in equation (2). Following Sianesi (2004, p.
140), an average effect on each outcome measure j in outcome month t may be derived for the
entire group of workers treated in their first twelve months of unemployment as:
=12





 U
1(u)
0(u) 
EU ∆ujt  D = 1 =
E Yjt − Yjt  Du = 1 P ( Du = 1| D = 1) ,

(7)

u=1




1(u)
0(u) 
where E Yjt − Yjt  Du = 1 = ∆ujt , which are weighted in the summation by the monthly
X̄1 −X̄0
[(V1 (X)+V1 (X))/2]

and Rubin (1985) as: BiasBefore (X) = √
√

M
X̄1M −X̄0

[(V1 (X)+V1 (X))/2]

× 100 before matching and as BiasAf ter (X) =

×100 after matching, where X̄1 and X̄0 are the respective sample means in the entire subsamples

of treated and nontreated workers, V1 (X) and V1 (X) their associated variances, and X̄1M and X̄0M the respective
sample means in the group of matched treated individuals within the common support and nontreated individuals,
i.e. controls (see Sianesi, 2004, p. 154).

24

entry distribution into THS work for those actually leaving unemployment for THS work, i.e.
P ( Du = 1| D = 1). The following subsections graph estimates of these average monthly effects
on our four outcome measures together with 95% confidence intervals calculated on the basis
of equation (6) for the entire population of individuals treated in their first twelve months of
unemployment. These graphs summarize how unemployed job-seekers who take up THS work
on average fared in their subsequent employment and unemployment trajectories by joining THS
work relative to the counterfactual situation in which they would have continued their job search
in registered unemployment.
6.1.1

Outcome 1: Probability of Regular Employment

Figure 2 shows that entering a THS job has no statistically significant effect for most of our fouryear period that outcomes are measured on the monthly probabilities of regular employment. In
other words, for the majority of months post treatment, neither a stepping-stone effect of THS
employment, nor an adverse effect on the future probabilities of regular employment is discernable.

Figure 2: Treatment effects over time on the probability of regular employment
20

Effects on probability (percentage points)

15

10

5

0
1

12

23

34

45

-5

-10

-15

-20
Months since treatment

Source: IABS. - - - denote 95% confidence intervals.

In the first months, however, THS work appears to reduce the relative chances of being in a
regular job, a differential effect that subsequently turns slightly positive, and then seems to increase
in the fourth year post treatment. The estimated reduced probabilities of regular employment are
in all likelihood the result of a lock-in-effect of programme participation, as THS employment spells
of treated workers have a median duration of fourth months (and a mean duration of eight and a

25

half months), as pointed out before. The positive differentials observable in the fourth year post
treatment, in turn, suggest that the potential advantages in terms of regular employment chances
of taking up a THS job from unemployment tend to materialize rather late than early. It remains
to be seen, whether or not these positive differentials in our descriptive graphical analysis for all
workers who enter within their first twelve months of unemployment registration remain when we
explore the causal effects of THS work for each entry month into unemployment, i.e. the treatment
effects identifed under the conditional independence assumption (equation 2).
Some unemployed workers entering THS work might still be employed in their job at later
outcome months, while others may also cycle between different THS jobs. While inspection of
Figure 2 provides little support for a stepping stone function of THS work for most of the fouryear post-treatment period, it does not give an answer as to whether, and if so, to what extent,
unemployed workers benefit in their overall future probability of employment, be it regular or
temporary help work employment, from entering a THS job from unemployment. Having explored
the former constituent part of this outcome measure in Figure 2, we next turn to the latter
component (Outcome 2), before considering both parts in combination, i.e. Outcome 3.
6.1.2

Outcome 2: Probability of THS Employment

As is evident from Figure 3, individuals that leave unemployment for THS work are significantly
more likely throughout the four year period after entering agency work to be employed in the THS
sector.
Figure 3: Treatment effects over time on the probability of THS employment
100

Effects on probability (percentage points)

80

60

40

20

0
1

12

23

-20
Months since treatment

Source: IABS. - - - denote 95% confidence intervals.

26

34

45

While the positive probability differential declines rapidly over the first eight to nine months,
its declines become subsequently less marked and the differential roughly stabilizes at around 11%
towards the end of the observation period. Prolonged program duration and repeated program
participation may in general be a matter of concern if it keeps workers from obtaining regular work.
This does not seem, however, to be the case in the present context. For as we have seen in Figure
2, unemployed workers entering THS work on average do not exhibit statistically significant lower
monthly probabilities of regular employment than unemployed workers who chose not to join THS
work as yet.
6.1.3

Outcome 3: Overall Probability of Employment

With respect to any social-security employment (THS or regular), Figure 4 reveals that unemployed
workers who take up a THS job exhibit a higher employment probability than those unemployed
workers who do not join THS work in the same month of elapsed individual unemployment duration
in each month following entry into the THS sector for the entire 4 year period under investigation.

Figure 4: Treatment effects over time on the probability of employment
100

Effects on probability (percentage points)

80

60

40

20

0
1

12

23

34

45

-20
Months since treatment

Source: IABS. - - - denote 95% confidence intervals.

With Outcome 3 being a composite of Outcomes 1 and 2, and the general time pattern of
treatment effects discernable in Figures 3 and 4, it is clear that the overall monthly employment
probabilities quite closely resemble the levels and the trend of the increased likelihoods of THS
employment for workers treated upon exit from unemployment. It remains to be seen, how entry
into THS work affects the risks of future unemployment over time. As noted, our outcome measures

27

are neither mutually exclusive nor all inclusive (e.g. inactivity is not considered as an outcome), so
that we cannot infer the treatment effects of THS work on a particular outcome from the treatment
effects estimated for the other outcomes.
6.1.4

Outcome 4: Probability of Unemployment

Figure 5 documents that monthly probabilities of unemployment are significantly reduced for
treated workers throughout the four observation period post entry into THS work, but tend to
converge to those experienced by workers that were not treated as of yet towards the end of the
four-year observation period. Summarizing the four figures considered, it appears that unemployed
worker seem to substantially improve (reduce) their overall future employment chances (risks of
unemployment), while only benefitting potentially in terms of their future regular employment
probabilities from their engagement in THS work towards the latter quarter of the four year
period that their subsequent labor market states are followed.

Figure 5: Treatment effects over time on the probability of unemployment
20
15
10
Effects on probability (percentage points)

5
0
-5

1

12

23

34

45

-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
-40
-45
-50
-55
-60
Months since treatment

Source: IABS. - - - denote 95% confidence intervals.

6.2

Treatment Effects by Month of Entry into THS Work

Having so far explored the average dynamics of the different treatment effects, Table 5 reports the
respective causal effects averaged over the forty-eight outcome months for different entry months
into THS work, as well as for the entire population of workers entering THS work within their first
twelve months of unemployment. The former only correspond to the causal effects identified under
the CIA, equation (2), whereas the latter summarize Figures 2 to 5, i.e. relates to the entire group
28

of workers treated within their first year of unemployment and thus represent a benchmark against
which to discuss the variations in ATTs by month of entry into THS work. Estimated baseline
outcome probabilities for the respective control groups corresponding to the different groups of
treated workers in Table 5 are provided in Appendix Table 3. As is evident, the averaged ATTs
for the probability of regular employment are never significantly different from zero, whereas those
for the probabilities to be employed in the THS sector, or in either THS or regular work (any
employment) are always strong positively and statistically significantly affected if unemployment
is left for a THS job. Future risks of unemployment, in turn, are in general significantly reduced
for workers who take up a job in the THS sector. Although a marked systematic pattern by entry
month into THS work is not observable for our four outcome measures, it appears that unemployed
workers who join THS work very late in their unemployment spells (in the twelve month) tend to
fare worse on average than those workers who join earlier, with respect to both THS employment,
any employment, and unemployment.

Table 5: Average treatment effects of THS work by unemployment month of entry into THS work
Outcomes:

Reg. Empl.
THS Empl.
Any Empl.
Unemployment

Effect (percentage points) *:
u = 1-12
u=1

2.0

(−1.3;5.3)

24.0

(21.6;26.3)

25.4

(22.1;28.7)

−17.0

(−20.1;−14.0)

5.3

(−4.1;14.7)

24.7

(18.1;31.4)

29.3

(20.2;38.4)

−20.6

(−28.7;−12.5)

u=3

3.2

(−5.3;11.8)

25.1

(19.0;31.1)

28.0

(19.6;36.4)

−20.4

(−27.9;−12.8)

u=6

0.7

(−7.8;9.2)

26.6

(18.4;34.8)

26.8

(14.9;38.6)

−12.5

(−23.9;−1.2)

u=9

7.4

(−11.0;25.7)

27.8

(13.9;41.6)

33.6

(15.3;51.9)

−20.3

(−38.1;−2.5)

u = 12

3.2

(−19.0;25.4)

20.1

(5.9;34.4)

22.9

(0.7;45.0)

−12.6

(−33.4;8.2)

Note: 95% confidence intervals in parentheses, u = unemployment month of entry into THS work.
* Averaged over 48 months post entry into THS work.
Source: IABS.

Overall, we may summarize the findings in Table 5 to suggest that unemployed workers benefit
in their overall future employment chances in the four-year observation period from entering THS
work, because of the increased likelihood of future THS employment, but are neither on average
more likely to obtain regular employment, nor to suffer from increased risks of future unemployment
in the outcome period. Quite to the contrary, they appear to benefit substantially from reduced
risks unemployment over the four-year post treatment period considered. Sample sizes, however,
are fairly small, which leads to large standard errors in the estimates of our ATTs obtained,
as is evident from Table 5. This is particularly a problem for our outcome measure of regular
employment, for which all tabulated ATTs are insignificant, yet throughout positive. The estimated
29

treatment effects on regular employment are, however, quite small for entries into THS work at the
various months of unemployment duration considered in Table 5 when compared to the baseline
probabilities of regular employment for the respective matched control groups (see Appendix Table
3).
The effects of THS employment on the future regular employment chances of unemployed
workers, i.e. our outcome of primary interest, may differ between subgroups of workers. In the
following, a number of such groups are considered. Given the small sample size of unemployed
workers that leave for a THS job, and their rapidly declining numbers at longer elapsed unemployment durations, however, we have to restrict the analysis to transitions to THS work that occur
within the first six months of unemployment registration. Table 6 tabulates the causal effects for
each subgroup on the probability of regular employment averaged over the forty-eight outcome
months for different entry months into THS work, as well as, as a benchmark, for the entire group
of workers entering THS work within their first six months of unemployment together with the
estimated baseline probability of regular employment of their matched controls.

Table 6: Average treatment effects of THS work on probability of regular employment by unemployment month of entry into THS work for different subgroups of workers
Groups of workers:

Baseline
Probablity*

All workers (N=1286)

35.8

Aged 18-40 at entry into u. (N=1059)

36.9

No prior THS experience (N=864)

38.9

Unempl. in W. Germany (N=874)

34.9

Men (N=1038)

Effect (percentage points)*:
u = 1-6
u=1
u=3

1.3

(−2.5;5.0)

2.0

(−2.1;6.2)

2.3

(−2.3;6.9)

3.7

(−0.8;8.2)

37.8

−2.4

(−6.6;1.7)

5.3

(−4.1;14.7)

3.7

(−7.0;14.3)

6.3

(−5.6;18.1)

2.8

(−9.0;14.6)

1.2

(−9.5;11.9)

3.2

(−5.3;11.8)

4.1

(−5.3;13.4)

1.1

(−9.1;11.4)

−3.0

(−13.5;7.5)

−4.0

(−13.5;5.5)

u=6

0.7

(−7.8;9.2)

1.5

(−11.6;14.6)

1.7

(−12.1;15.4)

5.2

(−8.8;19.3)

−1.7

(−14.1;10.8)

Note: 95% confidence intervals are reported in parentheses, N = No. of treated in unemployment
month of entry into THS work u = 1-6.
* Averaged over 48 months post entry into THS work.
Source: IABS.

As is evident, average treatment effects over the four-year outcome period are in the majority positive, though at several instances also negative, never statistically significant for all entries
months into THS work, and mostly modest in absolute value if compared to the baseline probabilities of matched controls for the entire entry period considered. It is noteable that the reduction
in the upper age limit of workers considered to 40 years, and the sample restriction to workers
30

without some prior THS experience do not result for each entry month into THS work in generally
higher average treatment effects for regular employment probabilities than for all workers who enter
THS work within the first six months of their unemployment spell. Furthermore, it appears that
later entries into THS work (u = 6) once again appear to benefit less in their overall future regular
employment chances than workers who enter THS employment earlier in their unemployment spell.
Table 7: Average treatment effects of THS work on probability of regular employment in the fourth
year post treatment by unemployment month of entry into THS work for different subgroups of
workers
Groups of workers:

All workers (N=1286)
Aged 18-40 at entry into u. (N=1059)
No prior THS experience (N=864)
Unempl. in W. Germany (N=874)
Men (N=1038)

Effect (percentage points)*:
u=1
u=3

6.6

(−3.0;16,2)

7.9

(−2.8;18.6)

7.2

(−4.7;19.0)

4.3

(−7.6;16.2)

3.2

(−7.6;14.1)

6.8

(−2.0;15.5)

8.3

(−1.2;17.9)

2.2

(−8.2;12.5)

−2.3

(−13.0;8.4)

0.9

(−8.8;10.6)

u=6

0.09

(−11.0;12.9)

−5.2

(−18.9;8.5)

6.3

(−7.9;20.5)

−2.0

(−16.6;12.7)

−1.8

(−14.9;11.4)

Note: 95% confidence intervals are reported in parentheses, N = No. of treated in unemployment month of entry into THS work u = 1-6.
* Averaged over the fourth year post entry into THS work.
Source: IABS.

Finally, we want to look at the average treatment effects on the probability of regular employment for only the fourth year post entry into THS work. For as we have seen in Figure 2, for the
entire group of workers entering THS work within twelve months of unemployment registration, a
positive differential in their monthly regular employment probabilities was discernable only in this
fourth year of our observation period that outcomes are measured. Plotting the outcomes averaged
over all entries into THS work within twelve months of their unemployment registration, this figure
(like the other figures) did not have a causal interpretation, for the CIA, as noted, pertains only to
treated workers and their matched controls who have identical elapsed unemployment durations at
entry of the former into THS work. Considering only the averaged monthly regular employment
differentials between treated and controls in the fourth year of our observation period, Table 7
shows that neither for all workers that enter THS work within six months of their unemployment
registration, nor for any of the four subgroups already considered, are estimates statistically different from zero. Standard errors are, of course, once more very large due to the small sample sizes.

31

Nevertheless, in the majority of cases, positive estimates are again small in magnitude, and in a
quarter even negative, suggesting that workers do not benefit significantly in quantitative terms
from generally higher chances of regular employment four years post entry in THS work. Summing
up the various analyses in this section, there is little evidence that suggests the existence of a general and significant stepping stone function of THS work to regular employment for unemployed
job seekers in Germany in the time period considered.

7

Conclusion

Applying statistical matching techniques, this paper has investigated the average effects of entering
THS work on the future labor market outcomes over a four-year period of workers who registered
as unemployed in 1994 to 1996 relative to the counterfactual in which these workers would have
continued their job-search in registered unemployment.
Unemployed workers who entered THS employment within twelve months of unemployment
registration turned out to benefit from both higher monthly chances of THS and overall employment
(THS or regular employment) throughout the four year period these workers were followed post
treatment. Workers who took up a job in the THS sector also appeared to enjoy significantly
reduced future risks of unemployment. They did not, however, seem to enjoy generally greater
chances of future regular employment. While our results, therefore, do not lend empirical support
to the stepping-stone hypothesis of THS work for unemployed job-seekers in Germany, they do
neither confirm concerns about potential adverse effects on the future regular employment and
unemployment probabilities of THS workers. If anything, THS work appears to provide an accessto-work function for unemployed workers that leaves them with a higher probability of (THS)
employment for the entire four years their subsequent labor market states have been analyzed
than workers who did not join THS work as of yet in their unemployment spell.

32

References
[1] Abraham, K. G, and Taylor, S. K. (1996), "Firms’ Use of Outside Contractors: Theory and
Evidence", Journal of Labor Economics, 14 (3), 394 - 424.
[2] Almus, M., Engeln, J., Lechner, M., Pfeiffer, F., and Spengler, H. (1999), "Wirkungen
gemeinnütziger Arbeitnehmerüberlassung in Rheinland-Pfalz", Beiträge zur Arbeitsmarkt- und
Berufsforschung, No. 225.
[3] Autor, D. H. (2001), "Why do temporary help firms provide free general skills training?",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1409 - 1448.
[4] Autor, D. H., and Houseman, S. N. (2005), "Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor Market
Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from Random Assignments", MIT, October
2005, mimeo.
[5] Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. (1999), Skills Training in the Temporary Help
Sector: Employer Motivations and Worker Impacts, Report to the U.S. Department of Labor
Employment and Training Administration, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
Massachusetts.
[6] Bender, S., Haas, A., and Klose, C. (2000), "IAB Employment Subsample 1975-1995. Opportunities For Analysis Provided by the Anonymised Subsample", IZA Discussion Paper, No.
117.
[7] Booth, A. L., Francesconi, M., and Frank, J. (2002), "Temporary Jobs: Stepping Stones or
Dead Ends?", The Economic Journal, 112(127), 189 - 213.
[8] Bronstein, A. S. (1991), "Temporary Work in Western Europe - Threat or Complement to
Permanent Employment?", International Labour Review, 130(3), 29 - 35.
[9] Brose, H. G., Schulze-Böing, M., and Meyer, W. (1990), Arbeit auf Zeit — Zur Karriere eines
"neuen" Beschäftigungsverhältnisses, Leske & Budrich, Opladen.
[10] Burda, M. C., and Kvasnicka, M. (2006), "Zeitarbeit in Deutschland: Trends und Perspektiven", Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik, 7(2), 195 - 225.
[11] CIETT (2000), Orchestrating the evolution of Private Employment Agencies towards a
stronger society, International Confederation of Private Employment Agencies, Brussels.

33

[12] Cochran, W., and Rubin, D. B. (1973), "Controlling Bias in Observational Studies: A Review",
Sankyha, No. 35, 417 - 446.
[13] Cohany, S. R. (1998) "Workers in alternative employment arrangements: a second look",
Monthly Labor Review, 121(11), 3 - 21.
[14] Ferber, M. A., and Waldfogel, J. (1998), "The long-term consequences of non-traditional
employment", Monthly Labor Review, 121(5), 3 - 12.
[15] Finegold, D., Levenson, A., and van Buren, M. (2003), "A Temporary Route to Advancement? The Career Opportunities for Low-Skilled Workers in Temporary Employment", in
Appelbaum, E., Bernhardt, A. D., and Murnane, R. J. (eds.), Low-wage America: how employers are reshaping opportunity in the workplace, Russel Sage, New York, 317 - 367.
[16] Fredriksson, P., and Johansson, P. (2003), "Program Evaluation and Random Program
Starts", IFAU Working Paper, 2003:1, Institute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation, Uppsala.
[17] García-Pérez, J. I., and Muñoz-Bullón, F. (2005), "Temporary Help Agencies and Occupational Mobility", Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 67(2), 163 - 180.
[18] Heckman, J. J., Lalonde, R., and Smith, J. (1999), "The Economics and Econometrics of
Active Labor Market Programs", in Ashenfelter, O., and Card, D. (eds.), Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. III, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
[19] Hegewish, A. (2002), Temporary agency work: national reports. United Kingdom, European
Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, Dublin.
[20] Houseman, S. N. (1997), Temporary, Part-Time and Contract Employment in the United
States: New Evidence from an Employer Survey, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
[21] Ichino, A., Mealli, F., and Nannicini, T. (2005), "Temporary Work Agencies in Italy: A
Springboard Toward Permanent Employment?", Giornale degli Economisti, 64(1), 1-27.
[22] IWG (1995), Die wirtschafts- und arbeitsmarktpolitische Bedeutung der Zeitarbeit in Deutschland, Eppa, Bonn.
[23] Jahn, E. J., and Rudolph, H. (2002), "Zeitarbeit — Teil I. Auch für Arbeitslose ein Weg mit
Perspektive", IAB Kurzbericht, No. 20/28.8.2002.

34

[24] Jahn, E. J., and Windsheimer, A. (2004), "Personal-Service-Agenturen - Teil II. Erste Erfolge
zeichnen sich ab", IAB Kurzbericht, No. 2/15.1.2004.
[25] Katz, L., and Krueger, A. (1999), "The High-Pressure U.S. Labor Market of the 1990s",
Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, 1999/1, 1 - 87.
[26] Klös, H.-P. (2000), "Zeitarbeit - Entwicklungstrends und arbeitsmarktpolitische Bedeutung",
iw-trends, 1/2000, 5 - 20.
[27] Kvasnicka, M. (2003), "Inside the Black Box of Temporary Help Agencies", SFB373 Discussion
Paper 43/2003, Humboldt University Berlin.
[28] Kvasnicka, M., and Werwatz, A. (2002), "On the Wages of Temporary Help Service Workers
in Germany", SFB 373 Discussion Paper, 70/2002, Humboldt University Berlin.
[29] Kvasnicka, M., and Werwatz, A. (2003), "Arbeitsbedingungen und Perspektiven von Zeitarbeitern", DIW Wochenbericht, No.. 46/2003, 717 - 725.
[30] Lechner, M. (2001), "Identification and Estimation of Causal Effects of Multiple Treatments
under the Conditional Independence Assumption", in Lechner, M., and Pfeiffer, F. (eds.),
Econometric Evaluation of Labour Market Policies, Physica/Springer, Heidelberg, 43 - 58.
[31] Leuven, E., and Sianesi, B. (2003), "PSMATCH2: Stata module to perform full Mahalanobis
and propensity score matching, common support graphing, and covariate imbalance testing",
at: http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html. Version 3.0.0.
[32] Mangum, G., Mayall, D., and Nelson, K. (1985), "The Temporary Help Industry:A Reponse
to the Dual Internal Labor Market", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 38(4), 599 - 611.
[33] Paoli, P., and Merllié, D. (2001), Third European survey on working conditions 2000, European
Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, Dublin.
[34] Rosenbaum, P.R., and Rubin, D.B. (1985), "Constructing a Control Group Using Multivariate
Matched Sampling Methods That Incorporate the Propensity Score", The American Statistician, 39(1), 33 - 38.
[35] Rudolph, H., and Schröder, E. (1997), "Arbeitnehmerüberlassung: Trends und Einsatzlogik,"
Mitteilungen aus der Arbeitsmarkt und Berufsforschung, 1/97, 102 - 126.
[36] Segal, L. M., and Sullivan, D. G. (1997a), "The Growth of Temporary Services Work", Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 11(2), 117 - 136.

35

[37] Segal, L. M., and Sullivan, D. G. (1997b), "Temporary Services Employment Durations: Evidence from Administrative Data", Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper, WP-9723.
[38] Sianesi, B. (2001), "An evaluation of active labour market programmes in Sweden", IFAU
working paper, 2001:5, Institute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation, Uppsala.
[39] Sianesi, B. (2004), "An Evaluation of the Swedish System of Active Labor Market Programs
in the 1990s", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 133 - 155.
[40] Storrie, D. (2002), "Temporary agency work in the European Union", European Foundation
for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, Dublin.
[41] Zijl, M., Heyma, A., and van den Berg, G. (2004), "Stepping Stones for the Unemployed?
The Effect of Temporary Jobs on the Duration until Regular Work", IZA Discussion Paper,
No. 1241.

36

Appendix
Appendix Table 1: Summary statistics of the sample at entry into unemployment
Worker Characteristics:
Previous real daily gross wage (C
=)
49.5
Female
43.2
∅ real daily gross wage at employer (C
=) 54.9
Foreign
9.4
Duration of last job less than 1 year
48.7
Age (years)
34.5
Ever before in THS work
5.1
Married
48.6
Immediately before in THS work
1.5
Kids
38.2
Unemployment Spell:
Educational/vocational degree:
First time unemployed
50.4
secondary
28.9
Registered in new German Lander
32.5
secondary with vocational
66.3
Local unemployment rate
11.7
polytechnic or university
4.8
Registration in:
Previous Employment History:
1994
38.7
Sector:
1995
31.5
Farming and energy
2.7
1996
29.9
Manufacturing
26.8
1st quarter
32.1
Construction
15.9
2nd quarter
20.4
Trade
13.8
3rd quarter
24.2
Transport
5.0
4th quarter
23.2
Services
28.9
Entitlements:
State
6.0
Unemployment benefits
90.3
Other
0.8
Unemployment assistance
7.6
Type of last occupation:
Unemployment support
2.1
In training
9.9
Unskilled blue-collar
24.3
Skilled blue-collar
28.6
White-collar
26.7
Part-time
10.6
Note: Number of workers = 106,383. All entries are in percent, unless stated otherwise.
Source: IABS.

37

Appendix Table 2: Estimation of propensity scores by month of entry into THS work
u = 1

u = 4

u = 8

u = 12

Personal characteristics:
∗∗∗

Foreign

.0544 (.0762)

.0477 (.0778)

.0518 (.1151)

.2354 (.1656)

Age

.0084 (.0222)

-.0369 (.0241)

-.0183 (.0374)

-.0901 (.0546)

Age

-.3076 (.1121)

∗∗∗

-.2582 (.0658)

2

-.2038 (.0680)

∗∗∗

Female

-.1689 (.1542)

-.0003 (.0003)

.0002 (.0003)

-.0000 (.0005)

.0008 (.0007)

M arried

-.0218 (.0647)

.0296 (.0735)

-.0244 (.1108)

-.1095 (.1675)

Kids

-.0249 (.0660)

-.0961 (0.752)

-.1194 (.1136)

.0090 (.1665)

.0690 (.0801)

-.0128 (.1237)

.2611 (.1810)

∗

Education:
(ref.: secondary degree)
Vocational degree
University

.2328 (.0776)

∗∗∗

-.2668 (.2410)

-.4419 (.2972)

–

.6767 (.3159)

∗∗

Last employment spell:
Job tenure less than 1 year

.0896 (.0524)

∗

.0721 (.0588)

.2423 (.0949)

∗∗

.0987 (.1274)

Occupation:
(ref.: unskilled blue collar)
Training

.2229 (.1051)

Skilled blue collar

.0156 (.0737)

∗∗

.3906 (.1024)

∗∗∗

.0521 (.0833)

.2356 (.1811)
.2479 (.1283)

.2981 (.2314)
∗

.0602 (.1802)

W hite collar

.0664 (.0879)

.0668 (.0976)

.0752 (.1556)

-.3035 (.2312)

Part time

.0495 (.1223)

-.2019 (.1632)

-.0161 (.2066)

-.0566 (.2817)

-.0006 (.0010)
∗
.0031 (0.73)

-.0012 (.0016)

.0015 (.0018)

.0020 (.0026)

.0019 (.0034)

Real gross daily income
Of worker
Average at employer

-.0016 (.0010)
.0026 (.0015)

∗

Sector:
(ref.: manufacturing)
Agriculture / Energy
Construction

∗

.0854 (.1369)

.2471 (.1420)

-.0463 (.0738)

.0645 (.0833)

.1128 (.1289)

–

–
.1517 (.1764)

Trade

-.1020 (.0881)

-.0270 (.0953)

-.0429 (.1622)

-.0189 (.2084)

Transport

-.0595 (.1159)

-.1660 (.1510)

.1829 (.1775)

-.2767 (.3723)

Services

-.1413 (.0776)

-.0351 (.1794)

State

-.4917 (.2116)

Other

-.1465 (.3168)

∗
∗∗

-.0984 (.0863)

.1042 (.1281)

-.1126 (.1481)

-.3059 (.2996)

–

.2503 (.2638)

.3850 (.3773)

–

Previous THS work:
At some p oint in past
Last job was in THS sector

.6053 (.0776)
.6075 (.1134)

∗∗∗
∗∗∗

.5850 (.0903)
.7466 (.1263)

∗∗∗
∗∗∗

.4674 (.1306)

∗∗∗

.2443 (.2019)

.4801 (.1907)

∗∗

.3823 (.3015)

Unemployment characteristics:
First-time unemployed

.0657 (.0555)

.0055 (.0621)

-.0555 (.0973)

.0481 (.1405)

Registered in new Lander

.1188 (.0862)

.0742 (.0921)

.0479 (.1513)

-.4497 (.2256)

Local unemployment rate

.0041 (.0099)

.0132 (.0106)

-.0107 (.0171)

.0244 (.0234)

∗∗

Entitlements (ref.: benefits):
Assistance payments
Living supp orts

-.2045 (.0978)

∗

–

-.0884 (.0903)
-.4684 (.1665)

-.0811 (.1125)
∗∗∗

-.3018 (.1548)

-.0027 (.1482)
∗∗

-.1329 (.1699)

Registration:
(ref.: 1994, 1st quarter)
1995

.0625 (.0594)

1996

.1008 (.0591)

2nd quarter

.2172 (.0676)

3rd quarter

.2460 (.0656)

4th quarter

.0658 (.0178)

∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗

-.0629 (.0648)

.0013 (.0982)

-.3129 (.1956)

-.0311 (.0634)

-.0916 (.1060)

.2421 (.1360)

-.1184 (.1330)

.4184 (.1806)

-.0896 (.0670)
-.2669 (.0735)
-.4032 (.0796)

∗∗∗
∗∗∗

-.0651 (.1214)

.3729 (.1798)

.1751 (.1069)

.1331 (.2085)

Note: ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Standard errors in parantheses,
u = unemployment month of entry into THS work.
Source: IABS.

38

∗
∗∗
∗∗

Appendix Table 3: Average probabilities of different labor market states for control workers by
elapsed unemployment duration of their matched treated workers
Outcomes:

Regular Employment
THS Employment
Any Employment
Unemployment

Average probability (percent)*:
u = 1-12
u=1
u=3

34.8

(32.6;37.0)

3.9

(3.0;4.8)

38.6

(36.4;40.9)

37.6

(35.4;39.9)

37.7

36.2

(31.1;44.3)

(30.3;42.1)

3.8

3.5

(1.2;6.4)

(1.2;5.7)

41.5

39.5

(34.8;48.2)

(33.5;45.5)

35.6

36.9

(29.1;42.1)

(30.1;42.8)

u=6

31.6

(24.0;39.3)

2.0

(−0.3;4.4)

33.6

(25.8;41.4)

37.9

(29.9;45.9)

u=9

30.6

(19.1;42.0)

4.0

(−0.9;9.0)

34.5

(22.7;46.4)

43.1

(30.7;55.4)

u = 12

37.3

(24.3;50.3)

2.2

(−1.7;6.1)

39.4

(26.3;52.6)

36.8

(23.8;49.8)

Note: 95% confidence intervals are reported in parantheses, u = unemployment month of
entry into THS work of corresponding matched treated.
* Averaged over 48 months post entry into THS work of corresponding matched treated.
Source: IABS.

39

