NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HEIGHTS OF AMERICANS IN THREE CENTURIES:
SOME ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC IMPLICATIONS

Kenneth

L. Sokoloff

Working Paper No. 138)4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 198)4

This paper was originally prepared for presentation at the 1982
meeting of the Social Science History Association. The author
wishes to thank Georgia Villaflor for her care in assembling the
data on U.S. Army recruits from 1850 to 1855, and to acknowledge
many helpful discussions with her, Robert Fogel, and Robert Margo.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #l38
June 198i

The Heights of Americans in Three Centuries:
Some Evidence and Demographic Implications
ABSTRACT

This paper discusses the potential usefulness of anthropometric
measurements in exploring the contributions of nutrition to American economic

growth and demographic change. It argues that although the value of height—
by—age data to economic historians will ultimately be resolved in the context of investigating specific issues, the early results of the NBER Project
on Long—term Trends in Nutrition, Labor Productivity, and Labor Welfare have

been encouraging. Among the most significant findings to date are: (1)
that by the time of the Revolution, Americans had attained a mean final
height (and net nutritional status) that was very high, one that European
populations did not generally reach until the twentieth century; (2) that
the variation in stature across occupational classes was much less in the
U.S. than in Europe; (3) that natives of the South have been taller than
those from other regions of the U.S. since the middle of the eighteenth
century, and that their absolute height increased during the antebellum

period while mortality was declining there; and (4) that natives of large
antebellum cities were much shorter than their countrymen born in rural

areas or in small cities. The paper also examines, in a preliminary
fashion, how a newly available data set bears on the hypothesis that a cycle

in U.S. final heights began during the antebellum period. The theory might
continue to be sustained, but a sample of U.S. Army recruits from 1850 to
1855

does

not seem to provide much support for it.

Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics
405 Hilgrad Avenue
University of California
Los Angeles CA 90021k

(213) 25_149

Over the last few years, the NBER Program in the Development of the American

Economy has been pursuing an exploratory study of the usefulness of anthro—
pometric measurements for the estimation and analysis of levels of nutrition,
labor productivity, and labor welfare in historical populations.

The Nutri-

tion Project, whose principal goal is to investigate the contribution of

nutrition (as a component of human capital) to mortality decline and economic
growth in the U.S., has in its initial stages devoted the bulk of its resources
to the retrieval of large bodies of anthropometric data and the linkage of them

to other sources of socioeconomic information. However, a set of papers based
on preliminary analysis of the data collected through 1981 has appeared
in a special issue of Social Science History)- This paper is intended to review
the methods and goals of the project, and to critically evaluate its major

findings to date. It will conclude with a discussion of how a newly available
body of evidence bears on some of the issues raised by the papers in the special
issue.
II.

The Project's reliance on height—by—age data as the principal means of
estimating levels of nutrition seems to have a solid basis in the physiological

literature. Many biologists, anthropologists, and physiologists have studied
the effects of nutritional deficiencies, disease, and other environmental conditions on physical development through observational studies of human popula-

tions and laboratory experiments.2 Their work has led to the conclusion that
anthropometric measures provide reliable indexes of the extent of malnutrition
among sub—groups of particular populations that 'ref1ect accurately the state of
a nation's public health and the average nutritional status of its citizens."3

—2—

The construction of indexes of nutritional status from height—by—age data
rests on intensive study of the pattern of human growth between infancy and

maturity. Three statistics are particularly useful: the age at which the
adolescent growth spurt peaks, the age at which full height is attained, and

the final height achieved. Short periods of malnutrition or prolonged spells
of moderate malnutrition, during childhood, merely delay the onset of the ado-

lescent growth spurt. Severe, prolonged malnutrition may completely erode the
typical growth—spurt pattern and cause permanent stunting. If malnutrition
is sustained over an extended period, growth will continue beyond the age at

which it normally ceases in well—fed adolescents. Hence, the age at which growth
terminates can also be a valuable indicator of nutritional status. There is
a clear pattern of "catching—up't after periods of malnutrition; but the longer

the periods and the more severe the malnutrition, the more likely the terminal
height of an individual will fall below what it would have been under conditions of good nutrition.4

Nutritional conditions are not the only influences affecting height—by—age

profiles. The actual record of growth observed for any individual or population
reflects the interaction of genetic and environmental factors. On the level
of individuals, differences in genetic endowment account for most of the Variation in
stature across them (after allowing for age)-. Among most contemporary, well—fed

populations, however, there is no significant variation in mean final heights

that physiologists consider attributable to genetic factors. Although there
are a few ethnic groups whose genetic potential for final height seems to differ
significantly from the West European standard, they have historically represented an extremely small proportion of the U.S. population.

—3—

Other environmental conditions, besides nutrition, also play a role in

determining the pattern and record of physical growth. It is important, in
this regard, to emphasize that anthropometric measures of nutrition resemble

net rather than gross measures of nutrition. Height is influenced not only
by the gross intake of nutrients, but also by the claims of other metabolic
processes that compete with those of physical development for those nutrients

and the efficiency with which that gross intake is utilized. The amount of
nutrients that a body allocates to growth and development, from a given intake,
may vary with such conditions as climate, clothing and shelter, the
level of physical activity (i.e., work), and the incidence of

disease. How the body allocates nutrients among the competing
claims is complex and not well understood. Thus, while height—by—age data
might provide accurate indexes of the amount of nutrients made available for
sustaining or promoting physical growth, they do not alone indicate whether varia—
tion in net nutritional status is due to differences in the consumption of
food, in the claims on the food intake, or in the efficiency with which food
is converted into outputs.

The general issue of whether indexes of net nutritional status are useful
for studies of the development of the American economy is a question that will
ultimately be resolved in the context of grappling with specific problems.

Granted that the opinion may be premature, however, there seem to be good rea—
Sons to be optimistic about the value of anthropometric measurements to economic

historians. Nutrition has figured prominently in many hypotheses concerning the
development of the American economy. It has been treated both as a component
of human capital, which generates increases in labor income through greater

—4—
strength or vitality, better health and lower mortality, and as a component

of material welfare (or the standard of living). Despite the recognized un—
portance of nutrition as a variable, study of it has been hampered by the
difficulty of obtaining accurate measures.
With anthropometric measurements providing indexes of nutritional status,
there are a number of ways in which the return to better nutrition can be

estimated. One approach is to estimate the relationships between height and
wage rates, height and slave prices, and height and income over cross—sectional

data. Bodies of evidence that contain the information necessary for this ap-

proach have been located and begun to be retrieved. Another method of estimating the return is to link several sources of information on individuals, at
different points in their lives, making it possible to examine the relationship
between height and occupational mobility or height and accumulation of wealth,

after controlling for the other characteristics of the individuals. Still
another method of evaluating the return would involve estimating the relationship between height and mortality or life expectancy.6

Height—by—age data might also prove useful as indicators of standard of
living, particularly in underdeveloped economies for which per capita income

or real wage series are not available. In such economies, food consumption
and health are likely to be major components of the standard of living.7
Even for those historical populations where per capita income or real wage

series exist, the data are frequently not sufficiently rich to distinguish
the standard of living of one sub—group of the population from those of

others. Because military records that include height—by—age data and various
socioeconomic information typically encompass a significant proportion of a
society's population of young males, and extend back over several centuries
are available for a large number of countries, there would seem to be great
potential for employing anthropometric measurements as indicators of material
welfare.

—5—

The measure of nutritional status provided by height—by—age is not one
of gross food intake (which is presumably what economic historians have pre-

viously had in mind). It might be argued, however, that such a net index of
nutrition should be preferred to a gross index in some cases because a popu-

lation's requirements for nutrients and energy (a diet that would be nutritionally adequate) cannot be defined without reference to the population's

level of physical activity, disease environment, etc.8 In general, neither
type of index seems likely to dominate the other, and they will often supply

complementary information. How valuable one is relative to the other will
vary with the problem and context being addressed. When comparing levels of
nutrition between two populations that have vast differences in disease environment, for example, net measures (which reflect the nutrients devoted to growth
after some have been consumed in fighting disease) might provide a better indicator of the difference between populations in the amounts of human capital in

nutrition than gross measures. On the other hand, if one is studying the importance of improvements in nutrition on the decline in some population's
mortality rate, a gross measure might be more useful than an index of net

nutrition. In any case, the use of indexes of net nutritional status based on
height—by—age data may lead to measures of the gross that are more accurate than
the conventionally employed alternatives .

III.
The initial stages of the Project have been devoted to the identification and collection of bodies of evidence that bear on the issues of concern,

and the development of appropriate statistical procedures)0 Thirteen
samples of data containing information on height—by—age and various socioeconomic variables which cover the period from 1750 through 1937 for the
United States and several other countries have been located and retrieved (or

begun to be). Six of the samples are drawn from U.S. military records between

—6—

1750 and 1910, and some of these are in the process of being linked to additional sources which contain information on the mortality experience, wealth
holdings, etc. of individual recruits (or their families) at other points.in

their lives. Investigation of many of the central aspects of the relationship
between height and economic behavior await the completion of this task. Nevertheless, preliminary analysis of the data in hand has already yielded striking
findings regarding secular trends and cross—sectional variation in heights,
and in the economic and demographic implications of these patterns.

Perhaps the most interesting results to date concern the vast differences
between the patterns of variation in heights of native—born U.S. whites prior to

1910 and that of most European populations. Whereas the records of Britain and
other European countries seem to conform to the expectation of a positive secular
trend in stature, with possibly some cycles, extending back to the eighteenth

century, the heights of Americans exhibit virtually no trend between the American

Revolution and World War II. The lack of a secular trend in the stature of U.S.
whites is due to their early achievement of nearly modern heights (a mean of

68.1 inches) by the end of the colonial period. The Revolutionary War level
of 68.1 inches roughly approximates the 68.5 inch figure estimated for U.S.
whites at the Civil War and the 68.2 figure during World War II.

11

It is also

one to four inches greater than the mean final height of males reported for

several European countries during the eighteenth century. Most of the European
countries seem not to have achieved the heights observed in the U.S. until the
twentieth century.

The major differences in stature between the U.S. and European populations
give compelling testimony to the gap in net nutritional status of the average

man that existed between the two 'egions. These differences in stature presumably reflect disparities in income levels, but may also stem partially from

—7—

discrepancies in relative prices, tastes, disease environment, the

level of energy—utilizing activities, and other factors. From a human capital
perspective, it is clear that Americans, on average, were able to accumulate

much higher levels of nutrition than were the Europeans. The contrast is
dramatized when one finds that the heights of the European working classes
of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were roughly equal to,
or lower than, the levels prevailing in many developing countries today.'2

Our analysis of the height—by—age data is supported by data on food consumption in Massachusetts discovered by McMahon.3 Wills deposited in Middlesex
County between 1654 and 1830 indicate a sharp rise in the average amount of meat

annually allotted to widows for their personal consumption. Between 1675
and

1750, the average allotment increased from approximately 80 to approxi-

mately 165 pounds per annum. Such a level of average meat consumption (especially
important to nutrition because of it being rich in protein) appears not to have been
achieved in Europe until well into the twefltieth century.14

One of the limitations of utilizing anthropometric measures as indicators
of standard of living is illustrated by the trend over time in U.S. heights.
As mentioned above, there was virtually no secular trend in mean final heights between
the Revolution and WW II, although there is some evidence of cycles in stature during
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and during the early nine—
15

teenth century (perhaps confined to urban areas). If there were no genetically
imposed constraints (or plateaus) on the human potential for growth and physical
development, meaning that increases in the consumption of protein, calories,
vitamins, etc. would perpetually yield additional increments in stature, then
this result would yield the peculiar implication that there was no improvement in

the American standard of living over more than one and a half centuries. We

—8—

know, however, that there are limits to how well nourished an individual can

be, and there may also be substantial plateaus over which additional gains in

nutritional status do not yield increases in physical stature. Such considerations seem relevant to a consideration of the record over time of the heights

of U.S. native—born white, and imply that anthropometric measures will perform
better as indicators of standard of living in underdeveloped economies with
low per capita incomes or poor disease environments, in economies in which
protein and food in general is relatively costly, or in economies where income is distributed in a very unequal fashion.
None of this discussion is meant to suggest that further investigation
of the height—by—age data available for the U.S. would be uninformative about

variation in the standard of living. On the contrary, we have uncovered evidence of a number of cases in which anthropometric measures may shed light on
issues concerned with the physical welfare of various segments of the U.S.

population. Included among these are instances of secular trends in the stature
of certain groups, of cycles in stature during this period of no long—term change
in U.S. mean final heights, and of significant variation over time in how sta-

ture was related to variables like occupational status and urbanization. The
possibility of cycles is particularly intriguing since the circumstances that

generated them would have had to have been quite severe. But the study of the
changing pattern of variation in height over socioeconomic variables is also of
great interest because it may contribute to our understanding of the environmental
costs associated with industrialization and urbanization, or of shifts in the
distribution of income and wealth.

The increase in the gap between the heights of rural— and urban—born observed in the first half of the nineteenth century is an example of such a change

over time in the relationship between height and socioeconomic variables. It
appears to have resulted primarily from a decline in the stature of natives of

—9—

major urban centers, one that was of a substantial magnitude. During the
colonial period, natives of the relatively small cities that existed then were

marginally, if any, shorter than their rural—born countrymen.16 By the middle
of the nineteenth century, natives born in cities with populations of over 25,000
were 0.6 to 1.8 inches shorter than those born in rural areas (see Table 2 below).
The emergence of this discrepancy between rural and large urban centers is consistent with the claims of some scholars that many antebellum cities suffered
from deteriorating environmental conditions (i.e., sanitation, housing, disease
pool) and rising mortality as they experienced rapid growth (or simply achieved
large city size).17 But the decline in urban heights may also reflect the influx

of foreign—born immigrants into those areas or the spread of a more energy—

intensive work regime associated with the factory system of production. Further
investigation of this very low level of stature (by U.S. standards) in large
cities may help to identify the chief sources of environmental stress.

There

have also been significant shifts over time in the relationship be-

tween occupational status and stature. What had been minor differences in final
heights

between farmers and other occupational groups during the colonial period

widened to sizable disparities by the time of the Civil War)8 Utilizing a
sample of recruits from that conflict, Nargo and Steckel have recently estimated
that blue collar recruits were 0.5 to 1 inch shorter than farmers or white collar

workers, after adjusting for urban/rural status and region of birth)9 These
occupational differences in stature seem impressive when compared to those pre—
vailing in the colonial period, but are dwarfed by the 2 to 3 inch height differentials that existed between the British white collar and manual classes during

the nineteenth century.2° This relative equality in American stature across occupational classes, as opposed to the European experience, may reflect

—10--

both greater equality in the standards of living enjoyed by the lower and upper
classes in the U.S., as well as one of the conditions that worked to maintain

that relative equality. To the extent that occupational differences in stature represent disparities in human capital accumulation across classes, the

narrower American differentials would imply, if all other conditions were
equal, that greater income equality and social mobility would be observed in

the U.S. than in Britain (or Europe). Further investigation of the economic returns to increments in height should help us to better understand the consequences
of the U.S. having a relatively equal distribution of the components of human

capital reflected in anthropometric measurements (as well as of the taller stature of Americans generally).

Analysis of the variation in stature across place and time may also yield
substantial implications for the study of the secular and geographic patterns in

U.S. mortality rates. Nutrition has often been identified as a potentially important variable in accounting for eighteenth and nineteenth century declines in
death rates, and the evidently high level of nutrition in America may well provide a partial explanation of the low mortality rates which characterized the

U.S. during this period relative to Europe. However, nutrition may not play as
significant a role in accounting for the regional pattern of U.S. mortality during

the period, or the pre—1850 decline in national mortality rates. The late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were marked by the narrowing of interregional
differences in mortality rates between New England and the South, with the initially higher crude mortality rates in the latter region declining from about 50
per thousand to 25 per thousand, while the New England rate was roughly stable in

the 15 to 25 per thousand range.21 Southern stature has been found to have exceeded that of northerners throughout this period, suggesting that the higher
mortality rates in the South were not due to poorer levels of nutrition in that

—11—

region. Instead, southerners appear to have enjoyed superior nutritional conditions, which may have operated to close the gap between regional death rates by
counteracting factors that served to increase mortality in the South (climate,
disease pool, etc.).
Iv.

During the early stages of the Nutrition Project, investigators detected
evidence of several cycles in American final heights.

The first of these was

estimated to have occurred during the first half of the nineteenth century, by
examining the heights of the different birth cohorts represented among Civil

War recruits. This apparent rise through the early 1820s and the subsequent decline in mean terminal height have been interpreted as perhaps indicating that a
decline in net nutritional status (or health) accompanied the rapid industrializa-

tion and urbanization of the second quarter of the century. The existence of the
cycle remains open to question, however. Questions have been raised as to whether
older recruits were likely to be representative, in regard to their physical condition, of their birth cohorts, and whether the socioeconomic composition of the
Union Army deteriorated over the course of the Civil War, leading to an unrepresentative (shorter) set of men serving near the end of that conflict.22
A newly available, randomly—drawn sample of U.S. Army recruits who enlisted
between 1850 and 1855 makes it possible to independently test for the existence
of a cycle in mean final heights affecting the birth cohorts of the 1820s and
1830s.

23

As shown in Table 1, the computation of a mean final height for white,

native—born males from the 1850—1855 data yields a figure of 68.3 inches, which
slightly exceeds the 68.1 inch estimates calculated for both the Revolutionary

War period and the years 1815—1820. The 1850—1855 figure suggests that Americans,
on average, experienced modest growth during the first half of the nineteenth

century. This view receives further support from the data on Civil War recruits
reported by Gould; regional mean final height estimates based on his information,

—12—

Table 1

Mean Final Heights of Native—Born American Males
1755—1945
As Estimated from Military Recruits

RE CI ON OF B I RTH
Middle
Atlantic

French and Indian War
Aged 24—35

(636)

American Revolution
Aged 24—35

(275)

U.S. Army, 1815—1820
Aged 24—35

67.9
(1,018)

U.S. Army, 1850—1855
Aged 24—35

67.6
(1,421)

Civil War
Aged 24—34

World War II

New
England

67.7 in.

68.0

68.0
(86,928)

South

Middle West!
West

U.S.

67.9 in.
(131)

67.8 in.

68.3

68.1 in.
(968)

(301)

(392)

68.0

68.3

(668)

(477)

67.8

68.9

(455)

(517)

(273)

68.2
(47,003)

68.9
(31,005)

68.8
(82,382)

68.1
(2,163)
68.7 in.

68.3
(2,666)
68.5
(247,318)
68.2
(119,443)

Note:

The estimates for the period 1850—1855 and for the Civil War have been computed from the information contained in the samples of the muster rolls of the U.S.
Army for 1850—1855, and in Benjamin Apthorp Gould, Investigations in the Military
and Anthropological Statistics of American Soldiers (Cambridge, MA, 1869), p. 104.
The other estimates are drawn from Kenneth L. Sokoloff and Georgia C. Villaflor,
"The Early Achievement of Modern Stature in America," Social Science History 6
(Fall 1982), and Robert W. Fogel, et al., "Changes in American and British Stature
Since the Mid—Eighteenth Century: A Preliminary Report on the Usefulness of Data
on Height for the Analysis of Secular Trends in Nutrition, Labor Productivity, and
Labor Welfare," NBER Working Paper No. 890 (1982). The regional mean final height
estimates, for the first four periods, have been computed by the Quantile Bend
method to adjust for shortfall on the left tails of the distributions. For a
discussion of the Quantile Bend method, and alternative procedures for correcting
for shortfall on the left tails of distributions, see Kenneth W. Wachter and James
Trussell, "Estimating Historical Heights," Journal of the American Statistical
Association 77 (June 1982), pp. 279—293. The U.S. mean final height estimates for
the American Revolution, 1815—1820, 1850—1855, and the Civil War were calculated
by weighting the regional means by the shares of the white population residing in
the respective regions at the time of the most recent census. This procedure tends
to bias the estimates upward slightly, since the net migration of native—born was
from the regions with shorter stature to regions with taller stature. The numbers
of observations on which estimates are based appear with parentheses.

—13—

after weighting them by population shares so as to adjust for the underrepre—
sentation of southerners in the Union Army, yield a national estimate of 68.5

inches. The hypothesis of a cycle marked by declining heights during the late 1820s
and the 1830s seems contradicted by these estimates that the mean final height in
1861-1865 exceeded that prevailing in 1850_1855.24
Of course, not all sub—groups of the American population had records over

time that conformed to the national average. The regional mean final height
estimates presented in Table 1, for example, reveal significant variation around

the U.S. trend. Southerners are a regional group whose record of growth seems
to correspond well with the national average. While the U.S. final height rose
from 68.1 inches at 1815—1820 (and at the Revolution) to 68.3 at 1850—1855, and
to 68.5 at the Civil War, the southerners grew at a slightly more rapid rate from
68.3 inches at 1815—1820 (and at the Revolution) to 68.9 at 1850—1855 (and main-

tained to the later date). New England also appears to have experienced net
growth in stature during the antebellum period, but the magnitude of the estimated

increase depends on the selection of the beginning year. Mean final height in
that region seems to have fluctuated in the 67.8 to 68.0 range between the Revolu-

tion and 1850—1855, before advancing to 68.2 inches at the Civil War. Registering
the same mean final height at the Revolution and the Civil War (68.0), the Middle
Atlantic appears to be the only major region that realized no increase in stature.
With the 67.6 mean final height estimate for 1850—1855, it is also the region that
seems most likely to have experienced a prolonged cycle in stature prior to the
Civil War, but one in which a decline in heights was followed by a recovery rather
than the reverse.25 The regions of the Middle West and the West, which have been

grouped together here, exhibit mean final heights nearly equal to those of the
South, but data for them do not extend back long enough to adequately assess their
record over the entire antebellum period.

—14—
One of the most interesting findings to emerge from Table 1 is that the
regional differential in height observed for the Revolutionary period, with
southerners being significantly taller than either natives of the Middle

Atlantic or New England, widened during the antebellum period. The difference
in stature thus moved in the opposite direction from that of the regional per
capita income differential between the Revolutionary and Civil Wars.26

the increase in the regional differential resulted from the more rapid growth
in southern heights, one plausible theory is that improvements in the southern
environment (whether man-made or otherwise) led to a decreased incidence of

disease and hence taller stature. This view is consistent with the
initial conditions of higher mortality and greater heights in the South than in

the Northeast, and with the evidence of a significant absolute decrease in mortality in the former region during the period.

Another pos-

sible explanation is that Southern heights continued to increase with per capita
income (and associated gains in food intake and health), while the effects of

deterioration in in their physical environment, or of increases in the energy
intensity of their, daily activities worked to prevent the stature of natives of the

Northeast from rising much with per capita income. Such unfavorable developments
might have accompanied the rapid progress of industrialization and urbanization

in the Northeast during the period. This hypothesis receives support from the
finding that mean final heights in the Middle West/West were approximately equal

to those in the South at 1850—1855 and the Civil War. A third possibility is
that the estimated mean heights for the Middle Atlantic and New England were
depressed relative to those of other regions because a disproportionate number
of the children of foreign immigrants were born in those areas.27
One way of further examining these theories of why the height differential
between the South and the Northeast widened during the early nineteenth century

—15—

is to compute estimates for more narrowly—defined socioeconomic classes within

regions. Each of the hypotheses contains implications for the relative movements in the mean final heights of these finer sub—groups. If,

for

example,

the increase in the southern—northeastern differential was due solely to exogenous improvements in the South's disease environment, then (if all else were
equal) one would expect to observe virtually no change in the mean final heights

of groups in other regions. On the other hand, to the extent that the failure
of stature to increase as much as in the Northeast as it did in the South was
attributable to the adverse effects of industrialization, one should find that
the heights of northeasterners born in rural areas or of non—industrial occupations rose significantly during the period (both absolutely and relative to those
of the urban—born or of industrial workers).

Estimates of mean final heights for various socioeconomic classes within

regions in 1850—1855 are presented in Table 2. They suggest that the differences
in stature across occupational or urban—rural class, within regions, were gen-

erally larger than had been the case during the colonial period.28 However, these
discrepancies must be considered small when compared to the gap between the

Northeast and the rest of the country. That farmers and professionals in the
South are estimated to have been 1.6 inches taller than their counterparts in
the Middle Atlantic dramatizes how the regional differences in mean final height
cannot be accounted for by regional variation in occupational mix or urbanization.

Perhaps it is no surprise that the estimates in Table 2 provide some support to each of the leading theories of the increase in the Northeast—South height

differential. The principal evidence suggesting the unfavorable conditions associated with industrial development and urbanization were contributory factors
consists of the extremely low final heights (by American standards) of natives
of cities with populations greater than 25,000 (67.1 inches for such cities in

—16—

Table 2
Mean Final Heights of Native—Born White Recruits
in the U.S. Army, 1850—55: Aged 24—35
By Place of Birth and Occupational Class

REGION OF B IRTH
Middle
Occupational Class.

Atlantic

Farmers and
Professionals

(158)

Artisans, Factory—
Workers, and Laborers

67.5
(1,223)

New
England

67.9 in.

South

Middle West!
West

69.5 in.
(146)

67.7 in.
(360)

68.5
(365)

68.6 in.
(214)

Place of Birth
Rural Area

67.7 in.
(657)

Small Urban Area
(2500<Pop<25,000)

Large Urban Area
(Pop

25,000)

67.7
(252)

68.0 in.
(206)

68.9 in.
(438)

68.6 in.
(220)

67.5*
(249)

67.1
(512)

*

This

estimate is based on recruits from all urban areas, rather than small
urban areas.

Note: All of the mean final height estimates have been computed from the 1850—55
U.S. Army sample using the Quantile Bend method to adjust for shortfall on the
left tails of the distributions.

—17—

the Middle Atlantic), a slight widening of the height differential between farmers

and non—farmers, and the near equivalence of heights in the largely non—agricultural Middle West/West with those in the South. This hypothesis, however, does
not seem consistent with the implication of the 1850—1855 data that the mean
terminal height of farmers in the Middle Atlantic had not increased since the

Revolutionary War. Since this group presumably experienced gains in per capita
income and was not substantially affected by environmental deterioration due to
industrialization or urbanization, the theory would have predicted the stature
of such farmers to have increased.

29

The findings that neither the heights of farmers in the Northeast nor the
occupational differentials increased much during the antebellum period seem to

correspond with the hypothesis that the principal source of the widening of the
gap between southern and northeastern mean final heights was whatever change led

to the substantial advance in Southern stature. Such a region—specific alteration
in conditions is made plausible by the dramatic decline in absolute and relative
levels of mortality in the South (which seems to have had higher mortality and
net nutritional status at the beginning of the period) during the first half of

the nineteenth century. Those conditions that initially accounted for the higher
mortality in the South, despite the region's evidently superior level of net nutritional status, could have been alleviated, leading to decreases in the incidence

of disease and growth in heights. tn this view, stature may have remained roughly
stable in the Northeast because at the standard of living its population enjoyed,

heights might not have been sensitive to further increases in variables directy
related to per capita income. Not that industrial development and urbanization
can be rejected as contributors tc the increase in the height differential between

the Northeast and the South. If the relatively tall stature of southerners was
entirely due to southern—specific factors, why were recruits from the Middle West

—18—

and West nearly as tall? Moreover, the very short stature of natives of large
cities, the emergence of which was closely related to the above—mentioned
processes, indicates that these developments did play some role.

Although they may not play a major role in accounting for the regional differences in stature, the low heights observed among natives of large cities are
nevertheless of interest.

Economic historians have long speculated about the

types and magnitude of environmental deterioration associated with rapid

industrial development and urbanization in nineteenth—century America, and the
small stature of the urban—born may be reflecting such non—pecuniary factors.

One possible explanation of this small stature in large cities is that the great
influx of both foreign and native migrants into these urban centers led to overcrowding, significant declines in sanitary conditions, and a worsening of the
disease pool ——

environmental decay in general. This view posits that the phy-

sical growth of the urban population was stunted by an increased incidence of
disease, and is consistent with evidence that mortality in large urban areas rose

during the period.30 Another hypothesis concerns the inter—generational effects
of malnutrition. Although the magnitude of such effects may not be large, researchers have determined that the malnutrition of mothers can adversely affect

the physical development of their future offspring. If a large fraction of
those born in the large American cities were children of foreign immigrants,
then the existence of such an effect could partially account for the short

stature observed. This biological mechanism could have been reinform
foreign immigrants earned low incomes and found it difficult to provide for

their native—born children. A third possibility is that males born in large
urban areas were more likely to enter the labor force at tender ages

than their peers born elsewhere. Hence, their short stature might reflect a higher level of energy—utilizing activities that they engaged in prior
to their reaching full maturity.

—19—

Although the short stature of the natives of large urban areas may not

indicate low levels of per capita food consumption, this possibility cannot

yet be ruled out. These rapidly growing cities may have attracted members of
the poorer classes who sought opportunities for advancement there, yet continued
to earn low incomes and provide their families with meager levels of food con-

sumption. The swift growth of these cities between 1820 and 1860 may have led
to severe shortages in urban housing, and accordingly to .a sharp rise in the cost

of shelter. It is thus conceivable that an index of consumer prices that in—
cluded the cost of shelter would show that the real wages of urban laborers in

these cities declined over part of the antebellum period. Moreover, if the
income and price elasticities of the demand for shelter by urban laborers were
sufficiently low, sharp rises in the cost of shelter could have led to decreases
in the amount of food consumed, particularly in the consumption of relatively
expensive and protein—rich foods such as meat.

The mean final height estimates reported for various groups in Table 2
were computed in such a way as to adjust for a form of sample selection bias that
is frequently evident in military organizations (and particularly in peacetime

armies), and is so among the 1850—55 recruits. This sample selection bias is
primarily a result of a minimum height requirement being applied to potential

recruits. Thus, the distributions of the heights of the fully grown men who
32

enter armies typically resemble truncated normal distributions.

This sort of

sample selection bias, if unadjusted for, leads to the mean heights calculated

from military data being upward—biased estimates of the true means of the under-

lying populations. For example, those recruits who were farmers will have a
higher mean height than that of farmers in general.

The problem also

tends to produce underestimates of the differences in mean final heights between
groups, since the bias associated with the sample means is greater for the

—20—

shorter groups (because larger proportions of their distributions are subject

to truncation). In the context of regression analysis, coefficients will tend
to be biased toward zero. Alternative multivariate analysis procedures that
correct for this type of sample selection bias and are of low cost are in the

process of being developed for the Project, but are not yet available. Hence,
the multivariate procedures utilized in the remainder of this paper are confined
to regression analysis.

In Tables 3 and 4, regressions estimated over the native—born white re—

cruits from 1850—1855 are reported. Although their usefulness is reduced by their
coefficients being biased toward zero, they do provide estimates of the differences in height between occupational classes, places of birth, etc. when all

other variables are controlled for (in contrast to the Table 2 estimates, which

control for only one additional variable). It is particularly desirable to utilize such a multivariate approach with the 1850—1855 data because of the substantial overrepresentation of the lower occupational classes and the urban—born
in the recruits from those years and the high correlations between some of the
independent variables.

Notice that while the differences in height between groups implied by the
regression coefficients in Table 3 are generally somewhat smaller than those
suggested by the estimates presented in Table 2, the qualitative results are quite

similar. Holding all other variables constant, the final heights of recruits
who were artisans, factory workers, and laborers are estimated to have been be-

tween 0.34 and 0.46 inches shorter, on average, than those of farmers. The
stature of professionals does not differ significantly from that of farmers,

and thus the difference in mean final height between the two groups of occupational classes estimated here is roughly equal to the 0.4 inches estimated in

Table 2 for the Middle Atlantic. Similarly, the regression results concerning

—21--

Table 3

Regressions with Final Height as Dependent Variable:
Native—Born Recruits from U.S. Army, 1850—1855

HE I GHT IN INCS
Independent Variables

Coefficient

Intercept
Years of Age

t—statistic

67.848
0.021

167.05
1.55

Artisan
Factory Worker
Laborer
Professional
Seaman
Unknown Occupation

—0.442
—0.459
—0.339
—0.021
—0.517
—0.936

—3.32
—2.81
—2.54
—0.08
—1.91
—1.15

Born in Small Urban Area
Born in Large Urban Area
Enlisted in Urban Area

—0.103
—0.289
—0.085

—0.89
—2.69
—0.95

Born
Born
Born
Born

—0.249
0.654
0.544
—0.464

—1.99
4.30
3.11
—2.11

0.074

1.41

—0.013

—0.10

Migrated from Northeast to
Middle West

0.263

1.69

Migrated from Northeast to
South or West

0.330

1.99

Dummy Variables:

in
in
in
in

Middle Atlantic
South
Middle West or West
Canada or At Sea

Migrated Out of State of
Birth but Not Out of
Geographical Region
Migrated Out of Geographical
Region

N = 2823

R2 =

0.049

Note: The regression was estimated over those recruits aged 24 to 35. The intercept reflects the height of a farmer who was born, and resided, in a rural area
of a New England state.

—22—

the difference in final height associated with birth in small cities, as com-

pared to that in rural areas, correspond well with the figures in Table 2 suggesting that there was no significant disparity (at least in the Middle Atlantic).

Although the regression in Table 3 yields remarkably similar implications
about the effects of the above—mentioned variables, its coefficients lead to

much lower estimates of the differences in final height across regions of birth
or between natives of rural areas and those of large cities than those reported

in Table 2. The regression estimate that those born in large cities were 0.29
inches shorter than the rural—born, after controlling for the other variables,
is only one—half of the estimate appearing in Table 2 for the Middle Atlantic.

Part of the discrepancy is undoubtedly attributable to the regression controlling
for variation in the occupational composition across the two groups, and part may
be due to the large—city—rural discrepancy being smaller in regions other than
the Middle Atlantic, but much of it seems likely to be accounted for by the sample

selection bias afflicting the regression coefficients. Not only were the natives
of large cities particularly subject to shortfall on the left tail (because of
their shorter stature), but because the proportion of recruits who were farmers
or professionals did not vary much between the rural—born and the urban—born,
and because height did not vary substantially across occupational classes,

differences in occupational composition seem unlikely to explain much of the
discrepancy between the two estimates.

There are also significant divergences between the estimates of the differences in height associated with birth in the South, or in the Middle West/West,

as compared to that in one of the northeastern regions. The regional rankings
implied by the regression results are the same as in Table 2, with southerners
being tallest, natives of the Middle Atlantic shortest, etc.; but the estimates
of some of the differences in stature between the tall—stature regions and the

—23--

others are lower. Again, the discrepancies between the two sets of estimates
are partially due to the regression holding all other variables constant while
the approach employed in Table 2 adjusts for only one other variable besides region of birth, and partially attributable to the regression coefficients being

biased toward zero. In any case, these discrepancies between the estimates of
the regional differentials are small, roughly on the order of 0.2 inches.

The regression also includes a set of independent dummy variables de-

noting types of migratory status. The estimated coefficients on them indicate
that neither inter—state nor inter—regional migrants were generally taller than
non—migrants, although northeastern—born recruits who had migrated out of that

region seem to have been slightly taller than those who remained behind. This
pattern is quite different from that observed in the samples from the colonial
period, when inter—state migrants were of significantly greater stature than their

more sedentary neighbors. Among the many possible explanations of this apparent
shift in migratory patterns is a decrease in the cost of migrating or, more
generally, an increase in the return to long—distance migration by lower—class
individuals relative to that for individuals from more prosperous backgrounds.
Several regressions that were estimated over data on recruits aged 21 are

reported in Table 4. The first of these was estimated with the specification
utilized by the regression appearing in Table 3, except that years of age was

omitted as an independent variable. The second regression excludes the dummy
variable for large urban areas, but includes four additional interaction variables
that were given values of zero for recruits whose cities of birth had populations

of under 15,000 in 1850. Recruits whose cities of birth had populations greater
than 15,000 had the variables set equal to the log of the population of the city
in 1850, the ratio of the city's population in 1850 to that in 1830, the proportion of the city's population that was foreign—born in 1830, and the 1850 rate of
mortality in the county of birth.

—24—

Table 4

Regressions with Height as Dependent Variable:
Recruits Aged 21

HE I GHT IN INCHES
Independent Variables
68.127 (380.23)

Intercept

68.092 (375.85)

Interaction Variables:
Non—Zero if
population if city

of birth

15,000

Log (Population in 1850)
Growth of City Population
Mortality
Percent. Foreign—Born

—0.048
—0.045
0.008
0.000

(—1.64)
(—1.07)
(0.59)
(0.02)

(—2.23)
(—3.06)
(—1.71)
(—1.25)

Dummy Variables:
Artisan
Factory Worker
Laborer
Seaman

—0.291
—0.492
—0.239
—0.278

(—2.26)
(—3.08)
(—1.77)
(—1.24)

—0.289
—0.490
—0.231
—0.282

Born in Small Urban Area
Born in Large Urban Area
Enlisted in Urban Area
Born in Middle Atlantic
Born in South
Born in Middle West or West
Born in Canada or At Sea

—0.281
—0.565
—0.171
—0.068
0.600
0.033
—0.071

(—2.21)
(—4.63)
(—1.69)
(—0.49)
(3.49)
(0.19)
(—0.30)

-0.173 (—1.38)

N =

—0.176 (—1.74)
—0.053 (—0.36)
0.617) (3.55)
0.081 (0.46)
—0.043 (—0.18)

2190

2190

0.049

0.050

Note:

The intercept represents the height of a farmer who was born, and remained, in a
rural area of a New England state. A number of statistically insignificant dummy
variables have been omitted from the table due to space constraints. These omitted
variables include a set referring to migratory status, all members of which proved
insignificant when tested separately or jointly. The "Growth of City Population"
interaction variable was defined as the ratio of the city's population in 1850 to
that of 1830. The mortality variable was defined as the ratio of one thousand times
the number of deaths in the county of birth during the year 1849—1850 (as contained
in the 1850 Census) to the population of the county in 1850. The "Percent. Foreign—
Born" variable was defined as the proportion of the city of birth's population that
was foreign—born in 1830 (as computed from information contained in the 1830 Census).
The t—statistics appear within parentheses after the respective coefficients.

—25—

These variables were constructed in an attempt to identify which of the features
of the large cities was most closely associated with the stature of recruits

born in them. It was thought that such an approach might yield clues as to
the basis for the short stature of natives of such cities.
Replacing the dummy variable for large urban areas with a continuous

measure of city population increases marginally the explanatory significance
of the regression, but the other three variables, as apparent, fail to provide

any additional explanatory power. Why these latter variables perform so poorly
is not clear. It may be that stature was not systematically related to any of
these variables, after. controlling for city size, but the results could also

stem from the suspect quality of the information from which the variables were
constructed or from there being insufficient variation in the variables over

those cities for which non—zero values were computed. The four additional
variables were also included in regressions estimated over recruits aged 24 to
35, as well as over soliders of other ages, but these efforts yielded the same
qualitative findings.

The estimates of occupational and regional differentials in height among
recruits aged 21 are generally consistent with those for the older age category

reported above. Recruits from the South continue to be taller than those from
either New England or the Middle Atlantic. The results contrast sharply from
the previous ones, however, in that there are no statistically significant differences apparent between the heights of New Englanders and those of natives of

either the Middle Atlantic or the Middle West/West. The lack of a statistically
significant coefficient on the variable for birth in the latter region is particularly surprising since the coefficient was large and highly significant for
recruits aged 24 to 35.

There is also a slight discrepancy between the two sets of recruits in the

results concerning occupational differentials. The factory workers among the

—26—

younger recruits again emerge as the shortest of the occupational groups other
than seamen; however, the differences between their heights and those of artisans

or of laborers are now statistically significant. In the earlier regression,
the final heights of these three groups were estimated to have been roughly the

same, all significantly lower than that of farmers. The disparity in qualitative
results is puzzling, even if it is no surprise that factory workers were the

shortest group. One would expect that factory workers would have entered the
labor force at younger ages, and consequently had their physical development
stunted, either because children were more effectively utilized under the more
regimented organization of work typical of factories, or because, on average,

they came from less well—to—do families. Factory workers might also have been
shorter because labor in factories placed greater demands on the energy of workers
than did other sorts of manual work, or because they came from poorer households
and consumed less nutritious diets during their years of growth.
V.

This paper has discussed the potential usefulness of anthropometric measurements in exploring the contributions of nutrition (or changes thereof) to

American economic growth and demographic change. It has been argued that although the value of height—by—age data to economic historians will ultimately be
resolved in the context of investigating specific issues, the early results of

the NBER Nutrition Project have been very encouraging. Among the most signifi—
cant findings to date are:

(1) that by the time of the Revolution, Americans

had attained a mean final height (and net nutritional status) for males that was
very high, one that most European populations did not reach until the twentieth
century; (2) that the variation in stature across occupational classes was much
less in the U.S. than in Europe; (3) that natives of the South have been taller
than those from other regions of the U.S. since the middle of the eighteenth century,

—27—

and that their absolute height and their advantage in stature over northeasterners
grew during the antebellum period while mortality was declining there; and (4)
that natives of large antebellum cities were much shorter than their countrymen
born in rural areas or in small cities.

The paper also began, in a preliminary fashion, to evaluate how a newly
available data set bears on the hypothesis that a cycle in U.S. final heights oc-

curred during the antebellum period. The theory can continue to be sustained,
but samples of U.S. Army recruits from 1850 to 1855 do not seem to provide much

support for it. A comparison of regional mean final heights for recruits aged 24
to 35 between the 1850—1855 period and 1861—1865 seems to indicate that if any
change occurred during the decade, it was in the direction of further growth.

There are not enough recruits in the 1850—1855 sample from birth cohorts in the
late l830s or early 1840s, however, to examine whether heights began to turn down

with those cohorts. The only evidence yet uncovered from this new source of in—
formation that might seem to bolster the idea of an antebellum cycle is the

low stature associated with birth in large cities. As the process of

urbaniza-

tion advanced, more and more Americans were born in such cities and
exposed to conditions that could retard their growth; at some point, there may
have been a large enough increase in their numbers to pull down the national mean
heights.

Footnotes

1. For an early description of the Project and some of the initial results,
see Robert W. Fogel, Stanley L. Engerman, Roderick Floud, Richard H. Steckel,
T. James Trussell, Kenneth W. Wachter, Kenneth L. Sokoloff, Georgia C.
Villaflor, Robert A. Margo, and Gerald Friedman, "Changes in American and
British Stature Since the Mid—Eighteenth Century: A Preliminary Report
on the Usefulness of Data on Height for the Analysis of Secular Trends in
Nutrition, Labor Productivity, and Labor Welfare," NEER Working Paper No.
890 (Cambridge, MA 1982). The papers include Robert W. Fogel, Stanley L.
Engerman, and James Trussell, "Exploring the Uses of Data on Height: The
Analysis of Long—Term Trends in Nutrition, Labor Welfare, and Labor Productivity"; Roderick Floud and Kenneth W. Wachter, "Poverty and Physical
Stature: Evidence on the Standard of Living of London Boys 1770—1870";
Kenneth L. Sokoloff and Georgia C. Villaflor, "The Early Achievement of
Modern Stature in America"; Gerald C. Friedman, "The Heights of Slaves in
Trinidad"; and Robert A. Margo and Richard H. Steckel, "The Heights of
American Slaves: New Evidence on Slave Nutrition and Health'. They
appear in Social Science History 6 (Fall 1982).

2. See, for example, Phyllis Eveleth and James Tanner, Worldwide Variation in
Human Growth (London, 1976); J.M. Tanner, A History of the Study of Human
Growth (Cambridge, ENG., 1981); James Tanner, Foetus Into Man: Physical
Growth from Conception to Maturity (Cambridge, MA, 1978); J.G. Fleagle, K.W.
Samonds, and D.M. Hegsted, "Physical Growth of Cebus Monkeys, Debus Albifrons,
During Protein and Calorie Malnutrition," American Journal of Clinical
trition 28 (1978), pp. 246—253; M.F. Elias and K.W. Samonds, "Protein and
Calorie Malnutrition in Infant Cebus Monkeys: Growth and Behavioral Development During Deprivation and Rehabilitation," American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 30 (1977), pp. 355—366.
3. Eveleth and Tanner, Worldwide Variation in Human Growth, p. 1.
4. Physiologists have not yet worked out a complete accounting of all the effects and their magnitudes. The various effects are difficult to study,
as well as to report, because of the interactions between the age of the
insult, the severity of the malnutrition, the health of the subject, etc.
5. Among the bodies of evidence that have been located are cost of living
surveys from 1934—1937, which contain information on height, age, occupation,
wages, wealth, etc. for all members of families, and slave appraisal for
Mississippi—born recruits in the Civil War, which contain information on
height, age, weight, and value as a slave.

6. Friedman has already done this with his data on Trinidad slaves. See
Friedman, "The Heights of Slaves in Trinidad."
7. The usefulness of height—by—age data as an indicator of standard of living
should decline with the absolute level of the standard of living, both because of the declining share of income devoted to food as income rises
(Engel's Law) and because of the limited genetic potential for height.

8. The basic argument here is that the contribution of a given food intake to
an individual's health should be judged in the context of his total energy
requirements. Thus, a worker performing arduous physical labor who receives the same food intake as an ordinary cliotnetrician should be judged
less well nourished.
9. There exist modern data sets with precise information on the kinds and
amounts of food consumed, but scholars who study historical populations
have often had to turn to crude proxies for food consumption such as the
price of a particular grain or food. See Andrew Appleby, "Nutrition and
Disease: The Case of London, 1550—1750," Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 8 (Summer 1975), pp. 1—22.
10. See Fogel, et al., "Changes in American and British Stature Since the Mid—
Eighteenth Century. ..".

11.

The Revolutionary War figure is computed in Sokoloff and Villaflor, "The
Early Achievement of Modern Stature in America." The World War II figure
is computed in Fogel, et al., "Changes in American and British Stature Since
the Mid—Eighteenth Century...". This latter source also reports estimates
of the mean final height at the Civil War of 68.2 inches. The 68.5 figure
for the Civil War reported below seems to differ from the previous estimates, because it is computed over a different age group (more comparable
to the age groups referred to in other years) and an adjustment was made
for the overrepresentation or underrepresentation of various regions. This
latter procedure consisted of weighting the regional mean final height estimates by population shares in 1860.

12. See Floud and Wachter, "Poverty and Physical Stature...," and J.M. Tanner,
A History of the Study of Human Growth, for estimates for the heights of
boys and men from the European working classes. See Eveleth and Tanner,
Worldwide Variation in Human Growth, for estimates of heights in contemporary
developing societies.

13. Sarah F. McMahon, "Provisions Laid Up for the Family': Toward a History
of Diet in New England, 1650—1850," Historical Methods 14 (Winter 1981),
pp. 4—21.

14. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Meat Supply and Surplus, George K. Holmes
(ed.), Bureau of Statistics, Bulletin No. 55 (Washington, D.C., 1907).
15. The antebellum cycle was first estimated to have included a period of increasing final heights up to birth cohorts of the early 1820s, followed by
a period of declining stature through cohorts born in the late 1830s. The
discussion of the cycle in Fogel et al., "Changes in American and British
Stature Since the Mid—Eighteenth Century... ," was based on this chronology.
This paper also presents the evidence for the existence of a cycle in the
late nineteenth and early twcrtieth centuries. More recent work has suggested that there was no significant decline in mean final heights until the

birth cohorts of the late 1830s. Thus, the discussions in the Robert A.
Margo and Richard H. Steckel, "Heights of Native—Born Northern Whites
During the Antebellum Period," and Fogel, Engerman, and Trussell, "Exploring the Uses of Data on Height... ," refer to this new dating of the
cycle.
16.

Sokoloff and Villaflor, "The Early Achievement of Modern Stature in
America...," find no statistically significant evidence that the urban—
born were shorter than the rural—born during the colonial period. However, they observe a significant differential by the second decade of
the nineteenth century. See Margo and Steckel, "Heights of Native—Born
Northern Whites During the Antebellum Period," for further discussion of
the urban—rural differential estimated from data on Civil War recruits.

17.

For evidence (as well as discussion) of increases in urban mortality
during the antebellum period, see Yasukichi Yasuba, Birth Rate of the
White Population in the United States, 1800—1860: An Economic Study
(Baltimore, 1962).

18.

Although there were some small occupational differences among recruits
serving during the French and Indian War, no statistically significant
differentials were found among Revolutionary soldiers. See Sokoloff and
Villaflor, "The Early Achievement of Modern Stature in America."

19.

Margo and Steckel, "Heights of Native—Born Northern Whites During the
Antebellum Period."

20.

See Floud and Wachter, "Poverty and Physical Stature: Evidence on the
Standard of Living of London Boys 1770—1780," and Tanner, A History of
the Study of Human Growth, p. 179.

21.

Robert W. Fogel et al., "The Economics of Mortality in North America, 1650—
1910: A Description of a Research Project," Historical Methods 11 (Spring
1978), pp. 75—108; and Mans A. Vinovskis, "Mortality Rates and Trends in
Massachusetts Before 1860," Journal of Economic History 32 (March 1972),
pp. 184—213.

22.

As discussed in footnote 15, the most recent study of the antebellum cycle
in final heights (Margo and Steckel, "Heights of Native—Born Northern Whites
During the Antebellum Period") found that a significant drop in stature did
not begin until the birth cohorts of the late 1830s. As Margo and Steckel
note, this finding might be an artifact due to a form of sample selection
bias. Some contemporaries argued that during the final stages of the Civil
War, the ranks of the Union Army were being filled by a lower class of recruit. Even after adjusting for occupational status, these recruits may
have been shorter on average than earlier enlistees (who were from earlier
birth cohorts).

23.

This new data set, collected by Georgia Villaflor, does not allow for a
direct test of whether the birth cohorts from the late 1830s and early
1840s were shorter than the preceding ones, because it does not contain
information on many recruits from those birth cohorts. However, it does
so indirectly, because it provides data on recruits from slightly earlier
birth cohorts, and thus a reference group with which Civil War recruits
of the same age, etc. can be compared.

24.

The word "contradicted" may be a bit strong here, as a record of increases
over time (i.e., birth cohorts) in stature, followed by a period of decreases beginning about 1840 could be consistent with the evidence presented here. This point is strengthened when one considers that socioeconomic classes with shorter heights were overrepresented among the 18501855 recruits, as compared to the soliders who served during the Civil War.

25.

This apparent cycle in Middle Atlantic heights might also be partially
attributable to the overrepresentation of individuals born in large cities,
or of non—agricultural occupations, among the 1850—1855 recruits.

26.

This claim is based on the implication of Alice Hanson Jones' work that
southern per capita income at 1774 was equal to or greater than per capita
income in the northern colonies. See her Wealth of a Nation to Be: The
American Colonies on the Eve of the Revolution (New York, 1980). For comparisons of regional per capita income during the late antebellum period,
see Richard A. Easterlin, "Regional Income Trends, 1840—1950," in Robert
W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman (eds.), The Reinterpretation of American
Economic History (New York, 1971).

27.

Laboratory experiments with rats have suggested that offspring of poorly
nourished parents might be smaller than offspring of well—nourished parents,
even if both groups of offspring are raised under identical conditions. See
R.K. Chandra, "Antibody Formation in First and Second Generation Offspring
of nutritionally Deprived Rats," Science 190 (1975), pp. 289—290.

28.

Sokoloff and Villaflor, "The Early Achievement of Modern Stature in
America."

29.

Slightly less than 25% of the native—born farmers among the 1850—1855 recruits were born in urban areas.

30.

Yasuba, Birth Rates of the White Population in the United State, 1800—1860.

31.

See footnote 27.

32.

Because enforcement of height restrictions seems to have seldom been enforced strictly, the distribtions of the heights of recruits are characterized by "shortfall" at the lower heights, or fewer recruits than one
would observe if the distribution of the heights of recruits were normal,
rather than complete truncation at all heights below the intended minimum
height.

