                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE EFFECT OF MERGERS ON CONSUMER PRICES:
                    EVIDENCE FROM FIVE SELECTED CASE STUDIES

                                         Orley Ashenfelter
                                          Daniel Hosken

                                       Working Paper 13859
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13859


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the Federal
Trade Commission, its Commissioners, its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We
are indebted to Sara Senatore, Van Brantner, and Joe Remy for providing excellent research assistance;
to Aviv Nevo, Paul Pautler, David Reiffen, John Simpson, Steven Tenn, and Mike Vita for comments;
and to Robert E. Hall for suggesting our data source. All remaining errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Orley Ashenfelter and Daniel Hosken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Mergers on Consumer Prices: Evidence from Five Selected Case Studies
Orley Ashenfelter and Daniel Hosken
NBER Working Paper No. 13859
March 2008
JEL No. L1,L41,L66,L71,L73

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper we propose a method to evaluate the effectiveness of U.S. horizontal merger policy and
apply it to the study of five recent consumer product mergers. We selected the mergers from those
that, from the public record, seemed to be most problematic for the antitrust agencies. Thus we estimate
an upper bound on the likely price effect of completed mergers. Our study employs retail scanner data
and uses familiar panel data program evaluation procedures to measure price changes. Our results
indicate that four of the five mergers resulted in some increases in consumer prices, while the fifth
merger had little effect.


Orley Ashenfelter
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
c6789@princeton.edu

Daniel Hosken
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20580
dhosken@ftc.gov
I. Introduction

        In the last three decades federal review of proposed mergers has become the
primary form of U.S. competition policy. Although it is not widely appreciated,
thousands of merger requests are filed and allowed to proceed annually and a small
number are blocked because they might result in higher, anticompetitive consumer prices.
In this paper we propose a method to evaluate the effectiveness of the government policy
to block mergers and apply it to the study of five recent consumer product mergers. The
basic idea is to study the effect on consumer prices of those consummated mergers that
would be most expected to result in anticompetitive price increases. The price increases
from these mergers provide an upper bound on the price increases that other permitted
mergers may have produced and a lower bound on the price increases that might
otherwise have occurred in mergers that were blocked. We thus provide an indication of
whether government merger policy may have been too hostile or too acquiescent.
        Although very significant public and private resources are devoted to the
administrative review of the potential anticompetitive effects of mergers before they are
approved, there has been surprisingly little evaluation of whether the mergers that have
been permitted are actually anticompetitive.1 Absent this information it is impossible to
determine whether government policies are either too stringent or too restrained, or to
make rational adjustments to these policies. The Antitrust Modernization Committee’s
Final Report to the U.S. President and Congress specifically recommends more
retrospective analysis of government merger enforcement.2 More generally, the value
and effectiveness of antitrust policy itself is the subject of intense debate that must rely
on very little factual information. Crandall and Winston (2003), for example, argue that
antitrust policy has not been beneficial for consumers, while Baker (2003) argues to the
contrary.




1
  See Pautler (2003) and Whinston (2006) for reviews of merger studies and the concern they express
regarding this issue.
2
  See the discussion of Recommendation 10 of the report, pages 61-63.
                                                   3
        Our study employs retail scanner data and uses familiar panel data program
evaluation estimation procedures to measure price increases following five mergers.3 We
selected the mergers to study from those that, based on the public record, appeared to be
the most problematic from the antitrust agencies’ point of view. Our empirical results
indicate that four of the five mergers we study resulted in some increases in some
consumer prices, while the fifth merger had little effect on prices. The estimated price
increases might be considered relatively modest, as they are typically between 3% and
7%. However, given the large amount of commerce in these industries, the implied
transfer from consumers to manufacturers is substantial. While the magnitude of some
price effects varies with our empirical specification, the conclusion that consumer prices
did not decrease, and most likely increased, was not altered when we changed the way we
measured consumer prices or the control group, or when we changed the choice of the
window of time surrounding the merger during which price changes might be
implemented.
        Our results have several limitations, and thus it would be premature to conclude
either that the mergers we studied were, on net, harmful to consumers or that our
evaluation is comprehensive. First, we do not measure the effects of the mergers on
prices in the longer run when the effects of some efficiency in the operation of the
merged firms may emerge. Second, some mergers resulted in the elimination of existing
products and the creation of new products. We do not attempt to measure the benefits or
costs to consumers of changes in product selection.4 Third, we have restricted our
analysis to consumer products mergers, which, although they attract much attention,
constituted a small fraction of mergers in the period we study. A more complete analysis
would require a more comprehensive sampling of mergers.
        The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II provides a brief review of the
merger review process and the evaluation studies that do exist; Section III sets out the
selection method for the mergers studied and provides a discussion of the nature of each
specific merger; Sections IV and V provided detailed descriptions of the scanner price

3
 The mergers are Pennzoil’s purchase of Quaker State, Proctor and Gamble’s purchase of Tambrands,
General Mills purchase of Chex cereal brands, the combination of liquor giants Guiness and Grand
Metropolitan, and Aurora’s (Mrs. Butterworth) purchase of Log Cabin.


                                                  4
data we purchased for this study and the econometric model and control groups used for
the evaluation; while Section VI reports the main empirical results, and Section VII
provides some concluding comments.


II. Government Review of Mergers and Evidence on Its Effectiveness
         As Table 1 indicates, from 1991 through 2004 37,201 mergers or acquisitions
were filed with the U.S. government. As a result of the Hart-Scott-Rodino (HSR) Act,
these mergers must be reviewed by either the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) or the
Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice (DOJ). Approximately 97% of these
mergers were reviewed and allowed to proceed without a full investigation by either of
the antitrust agencies. Presumably the agencies decided that in these cases the likely
effects of these mergers on consumer prices would be small. Still, 3% of mergers were
investigated more carefully, and roughly 65% of these mergers were modified to satisfy
government concerns, abandoned, or blocked.5
         The legislative premise for the passage of the HSR Act in 1976 has been carefully
articulated by Baer (1997). In effect, the government had little ability to analyze mergers
prior to their consummation since the merging parties were under no obligation to
announce their intent to merge or to delay consummation in time for a government
investigation. The result was that anticompetitive mergers that did take place led to
extremely costly government efforts to sue to restore competition. The “poster child” in
the debate leading up to the passage of the HSR Act was apparently the case of the
“United States vs. El Paso Natural Gas,” which required 7 years to litigate and an
additional 10 years to accomplish the divestiture that the Supreme Court had ordered.
The costs of litigation thus include both those required to establish the anticompetitive
effects of the merger and, because a merged company reconstructs itself as a single
entity, the difficulty the government encounters in reconstituting two viable companies
after a court ordered breakup.6 The HSR Act was expected to remedy these problems by


4
  For empirical evidence that these issues can be important see Focarelli and Panetta (2003) on the first, and
Hausman and Leonard (2002) and Berry and Waldfogel (2001) on the second.
5
  The ratio of enforcement actions to second requests can be larger than 100% in a fiscal year (as is the case
in 2003) because investigations can extend across fiscal years.
6
  In the lexicon of antitrust law this is often called the problem of “unscrambling the eggs.”
                                                      5
forcing the merging parties to announce their intention to merge to the government, and
by requiring the parties to delay their transaction to allow time for investigation.
        All mergers of significant asset size are governed by the HSR Act, which requires
the merging parties to file certain basic information describing the transaction with the
two antitrust agencies splitting jurisdiction in enforcing the antitrust laws: the FTC and
the Antitrust Division of the DOJ.7 After the merging parties file their proposed merger,
the government has thirty days to decide whether to require the parties to submit
additional information about the merger. During this time period the government decides
which agency will investigate the merger, and that agency conducts a preliminary
investigation to determine if there is a reasonable chance that the merger would violate
the antitrust laws. If the merger appears to be problematic, the government issues a
“second request” to the parties. This second request is essentially a detailed subpoena
asking for all documentary information the parties have that may be relevant to
determining the effects of the merger on the marketplace.8 The second request would
typically ask for all documents describing: competition between market participants, the
cost and requirements to enter the market, information about the products the merging
parties view as substitutes, and any claims that a merged company would operate more
efficiently. The full investigation typically also consists of an extensive review of
company documents, depositions of company executives, and interviews with
competitors, customers, and other third parties whose opinions the government solicits.
During the investigation the merging parties may also make presentations demonstrating
why the merger is unlikely to have anticompetitive effects. After the parties have
complied with the second request (typically within two or three months, but sometimes
six months or more), the government has thirty days to decide whether to block the
transaction, accept some type of remedy (typically a divestiture of assets or modification
of the transaction), or allow the merger to proceed.9

7
  Following the passage of the HSR act all mergers valued at more than 15 million dollars in assets were
required to file with the FTC and DOJ. In February of 2001, the filing threshold was increased
substantially to transactions valued at more than 50 million dollars, and the threshold was indexed to
changes in GDP growth. The change in the filing threshold is responsible for much of the decrease in
merger filings after 2001.
8
  The FTC’s web site provides an example of a second request on its web site, www.ftc.gov.
9
  In most cases there is a thirty day waiting period in which the government can make its decision to
challenge the transaction. However, in cash tender offers or bankruptcy cases the waiting periods are
                                                     6
        The DOJ’s and FTC’s 1992 Horizontal Merger Guidelines10 provide the analytic
framework used by economists and lawyers to determine if mergers are likely to be
anticompetitive. The Guidelines set out five tasks for agency staff to conduct as part of
the investigation. The staff must define a product market (the set of close substitutes to
the merging parties’ products), define a geographic market (the narrowest area in which
anticompetitive effects could occur, for the nationally distributed branded consumer
products mergers like those studied here this is typically the entire U.S.), analyze likely
competitive effects, analyze claims that the merged firms will operate more efficiently
leading to lower prices, and determine if entry into the market would be likely and
sufficient to maintain competition. While agency economists play a role in all parts of
the investigation, their primary role is in defining product and geographic markets and
analyzing the potential competitive effects of a merger.11
        The Guidelines discuss two types of anticompetitive effects: coordinated effects
and unilateral effects.12 The investigation of possible coordinated anticompetitive effects
focuses on how a specific transaction will increase the likelihood of collusion, either tacit
or explicit, following the merger. Stigler’s (1964) early article describing market
characteristics that facilitate collusion still highlights the key issues.13
        The investigation of possible unilateral anticompetitive effects focuses on how a
merger changes the merged firm's incentives to price its products. If the merging firms'
products are close substitutes, then the merged firm will have an incentive to increase the
price of its products above pre-merger levels because it internalizes some of the
substitution following the price increase. The workhorse model used in antitrust analysis
assumes that the firms sell differentiated products and engage in Bertrand oligopoly price
competition.14 Assuming the economist knows the parameters of the demand system,
information sufficient to calculate own- and cross-price elasticities, it is straightforward

considerably shorter. The government has fifteen days for the preliminary investigation and ten days
following the parties complying with the second request.
10
   The Merger Guidelines can be found at www.ftc.gov.
11
   See, e.g., Froeb et al. (2004) for a discussion of the type of work economists do.
12
   These phrases are used to describe concepts that are similar to cooperative and non-cooperative games.
13
   There has been considerable subsequent theoretical work, such as Green and Porter (1994), as well as
empirical work that is formal, Porter and Zona (1999), and descriptive, Ashenfelter and Graddy (2005).
Block et al. (1981), Newmark (1988), and Sproul (1993) each have examined a number of collusion cases
to more generally evaluate the effectiveness of U.S. prosecution of cartels.
14
   See, for example, Deneckere and Davidson (1985).
                                                    7
to simulate the price effects of a merger, or to determine what level of efficiencies
(decreases in marginal cost due to the increased efficiency of the merged firms) are
required to maintain pre-merger prices.15 Since the simulation approach focuses entirely
on price competition and ignores issues of product repositioning and advertising, which
can be very important in branded consumer products markets, it is our impression that
many antitrust practitioners take the predictions from merger simulations as upper bounds
on the likely price effects of a merger.
           While estimating demand systems and using estimated elasticities to simulate the
price effects of consumer products mergers has been a common component of merger
analysis for the last decade, there is little direct evidence on how successful these models
are in predicting price effects. Nevo (2000) uses demand parameter estimates to study
the price effects of two mergers in the Ready to Eat (RTE) cereal industry, including the
General Mills/Ralcorp merger studied here. Using highly aggregated data and
assumptions about post-merger efficiency gains, Nevo concludes that his model does a
good job predicting the price effects of the merger.16 Pinske and Slade (2004) estimate
the demand for beer sold on premise in Britain, and then simulate the price effects for
two mergers (one consummated, one proposed). While Pinske and Slade find evidence
supporting their assumption of Bertrand pricing, they do not have the data to determine
how successful their model is in predicting post-merger pricing.
           Hausman and Leonard (2002) study how the introduction of a new product (a
novel toilet paper) affected equilibrium prices, and how the observed change in prices
compared to the simulated price changes generated by different assumed forms of
competitive behavior. They find that the observed changes in price following the entry of
a new product are reasonably close to those predicted by Nash-Bertrand differentiated
price competition. While the equilibrium response of firms to a merger may be different



15
   Many useful analyses of these models are the subject of confidentiality orders because they were
produced as a part of on-going litigation. Published examples that show how these models work include
Hausman, Leonard, and Zona (1994) and Nevo (2000). A standard approach is to estimate demand using a
linear, constant-elasticity model, or a variation of the AIDS model. Alternatively, an increasingly popular
method of estimating demand uses the discrete choice model suggested by Berry (1994) and Berry,
Levinson, and Pakes (1995), which has been applied by Nevo (2000) to a merger simulation.
16
     Our results are significantly different from Nevo’s predictions. See Section VI.
                                                        8
than the response to the introduction of a new product, these results provide some of the
very limited evidence to support the demand estimation/simulation technique.
         Despite being the major component of antitrust enforcement in the U.S., relatively
few studies directly estimate the price effects of mergers. Most existing studies are in
three historically regulated industries where pricing data are publicly available: airlines,
banking, and hospitals.17 The merger evaluation studies most similar to ours in these
industries include Borenstein’s (1990), Kim and Singal’s (1993), Joskow, Werden, and
Johnson’s (1994), and Peter’s (2006) studies of airline mergers, Vita and Sacher’s (2001)
study of a California hospital merger, and Prager and Hannan’s (1998), Focarelli and
Panetta’s (2003), and Sapienza’s (2002) studies of banking mergers.18 The other major
industry where the price effects of mergers have been examined is the petroleum
industry, see Hastings and Gilbert (2005), Hastings (2004), Taylor and Hosken (2007),
and Simpson and Taylor (forthcoming). Finally, Barton and Sherman (1984) studied two
consummated mergers in the microfilm industry that were subsequently challenged by
the FTC and McCabe (2002) studied mergers among publishes of academic journals. All
but one of these studies finds some evidence of price increases following the mergers
they study.19 Focarelli and Panetta also conclude that the anticompetitive effects of the
mergers they examined were dissipated after three years by large cost savings resulting in
lower consumer prices.
         An obvious problem with using any of the previous studies to assess government
merger policy is that they are case studies selected primarily because of data availability.
As a result it is impossible to generalize from these studies to determine in what way their
results reflect the universe of potential mergers. Our goal has been to select mergers that
provide at least a minimal basis for generalization. This is why we selected a group of
mergers to analyze from (a) the set of branded products mergers that would (b) be
considered problematic by an outsider observing the market structure of the industries the

17
   See Pautler (2003) for an extensive review of this literature.
18
   Prager and Hannan and Focarelli and Panneta study the interest rate consumers earn on deposits. Thus,
other things equal, a higher interest rate benefits consumers. To parallel the discussion of other studies of
how mergers affect consumer prices, we refer to an interest rate falling as a price increase.
19
   Simpson and Taylor do not find a price increase in their study. Taylor and Hosken find an increase in
wholesale gasoline prices that is not passed-thru as an increase in retail prices. Sapienza finds prices fall in
regions with small changes in market concentration (suggesting efficiencies dominate), but that large
changes in concentration are associated with increased prices.
                                                       9
merging firms participated in. We chose branded products to study because of the now
general availability of scanner price data for these products. Thus data limitations are no
longer a primary consideration for selection. And we chose those mergers most likely to
be anticompetitive to provide a known contact point with the universe of merging firms
in the period we study.


III. Mergers Selected for Analysis
         Our goal was to identify mergers that posed a significant risk of anticompetitive
harm (so there was a reasonable probability of observing a post-merger price increase)
but where the risk was not large enough to cause the antitrust agencies to block or
substantially modify the transaction. Further, in order to purchase the price and quantity
data needed to examine the post-acquisition effects of the merger, it was necessary to
restrict our attention to mergers that occurred between 1997 and 1999.20 All of the
mergers we study involve products with significant “brand equity,” which is the phrase
used to describe the character of products that are imperfect substitutes because of their
branding.21
         We are limited to using public sources in identifying the mergers we study.
While the antitrust authorities have access to a great deal of private information in
reviewing mergers (e.g., documents from the merging parties, interviews with market
participants), this material (and the government’s interpretation of this material) is treated
as highly confidential and does not typically leave the agencies. The major exception is
when the government challenges a merger and a trial takes place in open court. If the
government accepts a merger subject to modification (such as the divestiture of some
assets), then it will publish a very limited description of the competitive issues being

20
   The firm that provided our data, Information Resources Incorporated (IRI), only maintains the required
data in a form readily accessible to be provided at reasonable cost for 5 years. Because we wanted to have
at least one year of data pre- and post-merger to analyze the price effects of the merger, given the date at
which we started this project, it was necessary to restrict our sample to mergers occurring between 1997
and 1999.
21
   Each of the branded products in our sample sells at a substantial premium to its unbranded competition.
General Mills Cheerios is, on average, 58% more expensive than its generically similar product. More
generally, the branded cereals we study sell for more than 67% than the comparable unbranded cereals.
The price premiums of the branded products in the other industries we study are similarly large. Branded
scotches, vodkas, and gins are roughly 114% more expensive than their unbranded counterparts. Branded



                                                     10
addressed by the government’s action.22 Alternatively, if the merger is not challenged by
the government, there is typically no public statement from the government describing
the transaction.23 Thus, in general, it is not possible to use information from the
government’s internal decision making process to determine what mergers it viewed as
marginal. Instead researchers are required to use public information, typically press
reports describing a transaction and measures of market concentration, to determine
which mergers are likely to be problematic. In what follows, we describe the method we
used to identify problematic consummated mergers in consumer products industries.
         To identify potential mergers we first searched the Merger Yearbook, which
reports mergers by the SIC codes of the merging parties. We then examined mergers in
the SIC codes that corresponded to consumer products and identified five consummated
mergers where the merging parties produced products that were substitutes in markets
that appeared from press accounts to be somewhat concentrated. Three of these mergers
were apparently allowed to be consummated with no government action, Proctor and
Gamble’s purchase of Tambrands (feminine hygiene products), Aurora Food’s (Mrs.
Butterworth) purchase of Kraft’s Log Cabin breakfast syrup business, and Pennzoil’s
purchase of Quaker State motor oil. Two of the mergers we selected were modified by
the FTC, but even with the modifications there still appeared to be a possibility of
competitive harm from the transaction. These were General Mills’ purchase of the
branded cereal business of Ralcorp, and the merger of the distilled spirits businesses of
Guinness and Grand Metropolitan. The market shares of the merging parties and
measures of the level and change in market concentration (HHI and change in HHI) are
presented in Table 2.24 The five transactions we study all resulted in highly concentrated



motor oil, breakfast syrups, and feminine hygiene products are 35%, 74%, and 54% more costly,
respectively, than their corresponding generic products.
22
   This document is typically referred to as an “Aid to Public Comment.”
23
   Recently the agencies have provided some public description of major antitrust investigations reviewed
by the agencies where no action was taken, e.g., the FTC’s 2002 investigation of mergers in the cruise ship
industry in or the DOJ’s review of the Whirlpool/Maytag merger in 2006.
24
   The antitrust agencies measure market concentration using the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) which
is defined as the sum of the squared market shares of the market participants. Appendix Table 1 contains a
list of the market participants and their corresponding market shares used to calculate the HHI’s in Table 2.
In calculating the HHI, we treat the aggregate private label share as if it were a market participant. This
assumption implies that within each store the retailer (who plays the role of the manufacturer in marketing
a product under its name) is a market participant. We do not include products listed as “other” in
                                                     11
markets (HHI greater than 1800) with changes in market concentration greater than 100
points.25
        The level and change in concentration associated with the mergers we examine
appear to be near the median of mergers examined by the antitrust authorities and less
than the median of mergers modified by the antitrust authorities. According to the FTC’s
report, “Horizontal Merger Investigation Data, Fiscal Years 1996-2003,” 46% of the
markets investigated by the FTC had a post-merger level of concentration (HHI) that was
less than 3000 and 51% of markets had a change in concentration less than 800.26 As
shown in Table 2, the mergers we study all have a post-merger HHI less than 3000, and a
change in HHI between 200 and 1000. The FTC, however, only took action to modify a
merger in 25% of the markets it investigated that had a post-merger HHI of less than
2500 (4 of the 5 transactions we study have a post-merger HHI less than 2500).
Similarly, the FTC took an enforcement action in 44% of markets that had a change in
HHI less than 800 and 60% of markets that had a change in HHI of 1200. While market
concentration only provides a crude measure of the competitive significance of a
transaction, on net, this evidence suggests that the transactions we study were similar to
the marginal mergers examined by the FTC and less competitively significant than the
typical merger challenged or modified by the FTC. The remainder of this section
provides some background information about each of the mergers.


Proctor and Gamble/Tambrands
        The purchase of Tambrands for 1.85 billion dollars in July, 1997 by Proctor and
Gamble (P&G) gave P&G the leading brand of tampons (Tampax) and sanitary pads
(Always) in the U.S. At first glance, this merger did not appear likely to have been
anticompetitive. Tampons and pads were two different types of feminine hygiene
products, and many consumers likely felt that the products (while functionally similar)


calculating the HHI. The other category contains many very small firms that we treat as being a
competitive fringe in the calculation of HHI.
25
   According to the 1992 Horizontal Merger Guidelines (Section 1.51), “Where the post-merger HHI
exceeds 1800, it will be presumed that mergers producing an increase in the HHI of 100 points are likely to
create or enhance market power or facilitate its exercise.”
26
   Authors’ calculations using information from Table 3.1 of the report. These data correspond to mergers
where the merging parties received second requests, where the anticompetitive theory being investigated
was horizontal (merger of substitutes), and where data was available to estimate market shares.
                                                    12
were not close substitutes. However, both the tampon and pad markets (or a combined
tampon/pad market) were highly concentrated before the acquisition with only five
branded firms selling either type of product.27 Hence, if pads and tampons were
important substitutes, it would not be surprising to see a price increase post-acquisition.
In fact, according to press reports, the Department of Justice’s antitrust division did
review the merger, but apparently took no action to block or modify the deal.28


Guinness/Grand Metropolitan
        Guinness and Grand Metropolitan merged to become Diageo in a transaction
valued at approximately 36 billion dollars.29 This was a conglomerate merger involving
many consumer businesses, e.g., Pillsbury, Burger King, and the Guinness brewery. The
potential antitrust problems resulted from the combination of both firms very large
portfolios of well known brands of distilled spirits, including Dewars scotch, Johnny
Walker scotch, J&B scotch, Tanqueray gin, Bombay gin, Smirnoff vodka, Popov vodka,
Gilbeys gin, Gordon’s gin and vodka, Malibu rum, and Baileys Irish Cream. In addition
to owning large portfolios of distilled spirits, the companies also were the sole U.S.
distributors of many important liquor brands including Stolichnaya vodka, Wild Turkey
bourbon, and Jose Cuervo tequila. The FTC investigated this merger and found that the
merger would be anticompetitive in two product markets: premium scotch and premium
gin.30 In order to obtain FTC approval, Diageo agreed to divest its Bombay and Bombay
Sapphire gin brands and Dewars scotch brand to another large spirits company, Bacardi,
for 1.9 billion dollars. Despite this divestiture, the merger could still have led to
anticompetitive effects. As mentioned above, the firms each had large portfolios of
liquor brands. If substitution took place between broader sets of premium brands than the
FTC alleged, it would not be surprising to observe a post-acquisition price increase. In
fact, the distilled spirits business contains a relatively small number of players that
control large portfolios of popular brands of distilled spirits. Because the companies



27
   As defined by the FTC/DOJ’s 1992 Horizontal Merger Guidelines, Section 1.5.
28
   New York Times, June 7, 1997.
29
   http://www.ftc.gov/opa/1997/9712/scotch.htm
30
   See the FTC press release at http://www.ftc.gov/opa/1997/9712/scotch.htm.
                                                  13
owned a very large brand portfolio, we have decided to limit our attention to the price
effects of three major types of spirits the two firms sold: scotches, gins, and vodkas.


Pennzoil/Quaker State
           In December of 1998 Pennzoil bought Quaker State in an acquisition valued at 1
billion dollars.31 While the two firms were also competitors in the quick lube market
(Pennzoil’s Jiffy Lube and Quaker State’s Quick Lube), this study focuses on the
competitive effects in the passenger car motor oil market. Passenger car motor oil is sold
through a number of channels. Bulk motor oil is sold to quick lube operations and auto
repair shops by all of the major motor oil companies. It is likely that branded motor oil
sold through this channel does not command a premium price, as consumers who use
special service stations to change their oil likely do not know (or perhaps care) what
brand of motor oil is used in their car. In contrast, consumers who change their own oil,
who account for roughly 45%32 of all oil changes, appear to have strong brand
preferences for motor oil.33
           There are three primary types of motor oil sold in the U.S. Conventional motor
oil, which sells for $1.00 to $1.75 a quart, is the most common form of motor oil for use
in every day driving and accounts for about 88% of sales revenue (and 96% of the
volume) in our data. Semi-synthetic and synthetic motor oils are considerably more
expensive ($2.50-$4.00) and are marketed to people with heavy duty engines (such as 4
wheel drive trucks) or high performance engines (such as sports cars). Synthetic and
semi-synthetic motor oils claim to reduce engine wear and can be used in the engine for
longer periods of time between oil changes. Because synthetics and semi-synthetics
represent a niche in the motor oil market and because neither Pennzoil nor Quaker State
was very successful in this niche at the time of the merger, we focus on conventional
motor oils in this study.34
           Within the conventional motor oil market there are substantial differences (30%-
50%) in the prices and perceived quality of the five “premium” motor oils (Castrol,

31
     The Houston Chronicle. September 19, 1998.
32
     The Detroit News. May 23, 2000.
33
     For example, the premium branded motor oil companies spent 127 million dollars on advertising in 2000.

                                                     14
Havoline, Pennzoil, Quaker State, and Valvoline) sold in the U.S. relative to the price and
quality of the large number of regular brands (typically private label or branded with a
gasoline company name, e.g., Exxon or Chevron). Hence, the merger represented the
merger of two of the five brands of premium motor oil. However, competition from
different types of motor oil (semi-synthetics and synthetics), a large number of generic or
gasoline brand motor oils, and a general trend away from do-it-yourself oil changes to
quick-lube facilities would likely mitigate the potential anticompetitive effects of the
merger. Possibly for these reasons, the merger was approved without any modification
required by the antitrust agencies.


General Mills/Ralcorp
        In January 1997, General Mills purchased the branded cereal business of Ralcorp
(primarily the Chex cereals and Chex snack mix) in a transaction valued at 570 million
dollars. Ralcorp retained its private label cereal business (the largest private label cereal
producer in the U.S.).35 At the time of the merger, the RTE cereal market comprised only
five major participants (General Mills, Kellogg’s, Post, Quaker, and Ralcorp), and had
long been subject to antitrust scrutiny.36 In April 1996 (just prior to the merger’s
announcement) a widely reported price war broke out among the major manufacturers.
Post lowered the prices of its cereals by 20%, and issued coupons that were good for
discounts on the purchase of any Post cereal. General Mills and Kellogg’s responded by
lowering the prices on some of their cereal brands. It was in this newly competitive
environment that the FTC reviewed the merger and allowed it to proceed with only minor
revisions.37 However, from a strictly structural perspective (that is, a highly concentrated
market), there was reason to believe this merger could be anticompetitive.




34
   Castrol and Mobil 1 were the leading brands of synthetic motor oils.
35
   Milling & Baking News. January 21, 1997.
36
   The industry was subject to a long investigation by the FTC, and was sued by the FTC for violating the
antitrust laws the 1970’s.



                                                    15
Aurora Foods’ Purchase of Kraft’s Breakfast Syrup Business
         Aurora Foods is a holding company that owns a number of popular brands of food
products, including Duncan Hines cake mix, Mrs. Pauls fish products, Lenders bagels,
and Celeste pizzas. In July 1997, Aurora, which owned the Mrs. Butterworth brand of
maple flavored breakfast syrup, purchased the Log Cabin syrup brand from Kraft for 222
million dollars. At the time of the acquisition, there were three major brands of breakfast
syrup (Aunt Jemima, Log Cabin, and Mrs. Butterworth), a brand with strong regional
distribution (Hungry Jack), and a number of small regional brands and private label
brands (see table 1h for market shares). On the surface, this merger would appear to be
problematic as it combined two of the three major branded products in one company.
However, there were many substitutes for these products at lower price levels (private
label syrups), at higher price levels (real maple syrups), and among other types of
flavorings for breakfast foods, e.g., jams and jellies. According to the trade press, part of
the justification for the transaction was that Log Cabin did not fit well into Phillip
Morris’s food portfolio, and that Aurora (which purchases and markets established brands
of food products) could more effectively sell the product.38 There does not appear to be
any public mention of either of the antitrust agencies investigating the merger.


IV. Data Description
         A. Source of Data
         All of the price and quantity data used in this study were purchased from
Information Resources Incorporated (IRI). For each merger we purchased data on
weekly total revenue and unit sales for each specific Universal Product Code (UPC) in
the relevant product category,39 information sufficient to determine the manufacturers
selling the products, and descriptions of the categories the products fell in. For example,
in examining the RTE cereal market, we purchased data on each specific item of

37
   The FTC’s modifications gave Ralcorp the right to sell private label Chex immediately following the
merger (instead of waiting 18 months), and gave Ralcorp the right to transfer its right to make private label
Chex to a third party without General Mills permission. (FTC Press Release. May 27, 1997.)
38
   According to one press account Philip Morris spent just $7500 advertising Log Cabin in 1996. Chicago
Tribune, October 20, 1997.
39
   A UPC describes each product and package size uniquely. For example, a 10 ounce box of Cheerios and
a 15 ounce box of Cheerios have different UPCs. Similarly, the 15 ounce box of Honey Nut Cheerios has a
different UPC than the 15 ounce box of Cheerios. A UPC forms the basis for scanning in a retail store.
                                                     16
Cheerios sold (i.e., data broken out separately for 10, 15, and 20 ounce box sizes).
Further, to illustrate the product categorizations provided by IRI, RTE cereals are
grouped into fairly specific groups, e.g., “Adult Fruit and Nut” and “All Family
Wholesome.” The other consumer products have similar descriptors in the data. IRI
collects the revenue and unit sales data from the major retail channels of distribution
(mass merchandise, drug stores, food stores, and convenience stores) at a sample of stores
in a region and then (using proprietary methods) projects what the sales are within a
metropolitan area for that channel. Since these data are obtained from the retail scanners
that record consumer purchases, they are referred to as “scanner” data.
           In purchasing data for this study, we chose the available channels that best
represented consumer purchases of the relevant consumer products. For the two food
product mergers (cereal and pancake syrup), the obvious channel choice was IRI’s food
channel (data from 64 InfoScan food markets which roughly correspond to metropolitan
areas, see appendix table 2 for a list of the various InfoScan markets). For feminine
hygiene products, the two choices were IRI’s food channel and mass merchandiser
channel. Both channels are important in the sale of these products. Because the mass
merchandiser channel only covers 10 InfoScan markets, we elected to use the data from
the food channel. In fact, sales through the IRI food channel are quite substantial.
Annual dollar sales of feminine hygiene products were $1.7 billion in 199740 while sales
in the IRI food channel during 1997 were approximately $570 million, accounting for
33% of sales during the time period.
           Motor oil sales to the consumer market are primarily made through mass
merchandisers and auto parts stores. For this reason, we used data from IRI’s mass
merchandiser channel for the 10 InfoScan markets where data is collected. While these
10 markets represent only a fraction of the U.S., they include the largest metropolitan
areas.
           For the liquor market, the only data set available for our time period was a drug
store sample containing information from 10 InfoScan markets, and complete data were
available for only 5 of the InfoScan markets from three states (San Francisco, CA, San


40
     Supermarket Business, January, 1998.

                                               17
Diego, CA, Los Angeles, CA, Chicago, IL, and Phoenix, AZ). This data source has
several shortcomings. Since we could only observe pricing behavior in a small number
of markets, and since local liquor distributors have limited ability to transship products
between states to eliminate any price discrimination attempted by distributors, our results
may not be generalizeable to the U.S.
         In addition, our data come from one only retail channel of distribution, drug
stores, which is certainly not the main distribution channel for distilled spirits. It is likely
that the product selection seen in drug stores is much narrower than in liquor stores.
While the drug stores typically carry the major brands of spirits they do not appear to sell
all the format sizes available. For example, in our data we found that the price series are
incomplete for large bottle sizes for many scotches (e.g., Johnny Walker Black, Dewars
White Label), which are almost certainly available in liquor stores. This could be an
important issue if manufacturers offered substantial quantity discounts on large bottle
sizes (1.75 liter bottles) relative to small bottle sizes (750 milliliters).41 This would affect
the results of our study if the merger caused firms to alter the pricing of large bottle sizes
relative to small bottle sizes. In fact, for the products where we had data on both large
and small package sizes, we found the price effects of the merger were different, although
not in any systematic way.


     B. Definition of Price
         Since many consumer products come in different package sizes, often at very
different prices (because of quantity discounts), it is not straightforward to define the
price of a “product”. In this study, we purchased data at the UPC level to examine how
different aggregation techniques affected the measure of price, and the estimated price
effect of the merger. The techniques we used to create measures of price vary by product
type because of institutional factors specific to each market. In this section we describe
in detail the methods used to construct price separately by product category.




41
  While distilled spirits are sold in a number of package sizes (single serving, 375 milliliters, 750
milliliters, 1 liter, and 1.75 liters), the vast majority of spirits are sold in the 750 milliliter and 1.75 liter
bottle sizes.
                                                          18
           The motor oil products in our data are sold in either one quart packages or five
quart packages.42 The vast majority of sales we observe are of the one quart package
size, and we have an unbroken time series for prices for this package size. Since the per
unit price discount is not large for purchasing one quart versus five quart units, we
aggregate sales over the two package sizes. Thus, the measure of price we are using for
motor oil is the average revenue per quart (motor oil revenue for all package sizes/ motor
oil quarts for all package sizes). The other important institutional detail in the motor oil
industry is a product’s “weight.” Each vehicle’s engine is designed to take a certain
weight of oil. The most popular weights of motor oil are 10W30, 5W30, and 10W40 and
we have restricted our analysis to these weights.43 As a practical matter, when one brand
of motor oil goes on sale all of the popular weights of oil are also likely to go on sale, and
most of the weights have about the same price point. However, to minimize
measurement error we calculate separate measures of price for each brand and weight of
motor oil.
           Distilled spirits are sold in many bottle sizes, but the vast majority of sales are of
1.75 liter and 750 milliliter bottles. Because the two different bottle sizes are priced and
promoted very differently (with the 1.75 liter bottle having more retail “sales”; i.e.,
temporary price discounts), it would not be appropriate to aggregate the two package
sizes and create a single “price” for a brand of spirits. We analyze the price of the
different bottle sizes separately. The only aggregation over UPCs we do is when there
are multiple UPCs corresponding to the same brand and bottle size, e.g., a holiday
version of a brand of spirits. For this aggregation, we calculate the price of a brand of
spirits as the average revenue (revenue/units) for that brand and bottle size, e.g., all types
of Johnny Walker Red Scotch sold in 750 milliliter bottles.
           We have calculated five different measures of average price for breakfast syrups,
cereals and feminine hygiene products. The exact calculation of each measure varies by
product type due to institutional factors discussed in more detail below. To be
comparable with research by others, such as Nevo (2000), we first calculate the standard
measure of price, average revenue (total revenue/total units sold of a given brand, e.g.,

42
     A typical motor engine requires five quarts of oil, hence the 5 quart package size.



                                                        19
General Mills Cheerios). However, we are concerned about the accuracy of this measure
of price because these products are sold in many different package sizes, often with
substantial quantity discounts. Because a 10 ounce box of Cheerios may be perceived as
a different good than a 15 ounce box of Cheerios, it may oversimplify matters to create
an aggregate price of Cheerios across all package sizes. Unfortunately, there are too
many brands and package sizes in these markets to calculate price separately by package
size (unlike the case for spirits). However, in contrast to the spirits market, the pricing
behavior of manufacturers does not appear to differ much across package sizes. Thus, we
construct a price index for each product that explicitly accounts for the pricing of the
different product’s package sizes. Below we describe how each index is calculated for
each market.
             We calculated four different measures of price for syrup that accounted for
different package sizes. The first two measures are variations on a simple weighted
average price. We first calculated the proportion of revenue earned for each bottle size of
a given brand during the first (last) year in our data. We then calculated price as the
weighted average of the price of each bottle size of syrup using the revenue weights. The
two measures of simple weighted average price use either first year or last year revenue
weights. The second two measures of price use Stone price indexes using either the first
or last year’s revenue weights.44
             We used the same general approach for aggregating RTE cereal as we used for
maple flavored syrups. The added complications in aggregation come from the
manufacturers changing or temporarily discontinuing package sizes. For those products
(which accounted for roughly 10% of RTE cereal revenue) that changed package size
during the sample period, for example, the standard box size changed from 14.5 ounces
to 14 ounces, we redefined the UPC so it appears that the same package size appeared


43
  Some weights of motor oil have specialty purposes, e.g., boat engine oil, are not sold in high volume, or
are not carried in all locations. Hence, we limit the analysis to the three most popular weights.
44
     The stone price index is define as log Pi,j,t =   ∑ω
                                                       k
                                                            i
                                                            k   * log p k,i,j,t where p k,i,j,t is the price of the kth

variation of product i in city j at time t and   ω ki is the revenue share of the kth variation of product i
(   ∑ω
     k
         i
         k   = 1 ). See, e.g., Deaton and Muellbauer (1980) or Hausman and Leonard (2002) for a similar use
of the Stone price index.
                                                           20
during the entire sample period, and we adjust the ounces sold appropriately. For box
sizes that do not appear for the entire sample period (such as Chex cereals, which are
periodically offered in a large box size a few months of the year), we calculate the price
per ounce for the cereal, compare the price to the most popular size of the cereal, and if
the price difference is not too large (less than a 25% difference) we ascribe the sales of
that package size to the most popular package size and adjust the sales and price for that
package size accordingly. After dealing with these two complications, we then use the
techniques described for syrup to construct two measures of a simple weighted price and
two measures of a Stone price index.
          The general approach used to create an average price for feminine hygiene
products is the same as for RTE cereal and syrup with a few additional complications.
Feminine hygiene products, particularly sanitary pads, come in a number of different
product variations that are marketed jointly. For example, sanitary pads are typically sold
in thin, medium, and heavy variations. A particular brand of pads, such as P&G’s
Always, will use the same brand name for all sizes of its product, and will charge the
same package price for each pad size (but alter the quantity in the package so that unit
costs may vary), and will put the items on sale at the same time. Because of the joint
marketing of the products it does not seem sensible to treat each variation of the product,
such as Always thin pad vs. Always thick pad, as separate products. Instead, we want to
create a single measure of price for each brand of pad. Thus, in constructing our price
indices we calculate revenue shares for all package sizes and variations of feminine
hygiene products. Thus, we again have four measures of price, two simple average prices
(using revenue weights from either the first or last year of the sample period) and two
Stone price indices.


V. Empirical Model
          The major issue faced by any attempt to estimate the effect of a merger on prices,
as with any evaluation of an intervention using non-experimental data, is the method used
to control for other confounding factors that may also have changed at the time of the
event. Of especial concern is the effect of possible changes in demand or costs on
prices.    The methods we use to control for these factors are familiar from the literature

                                              21
on “difference-in-differences” estimation and focus on the selection of a control group
and the selection of a window of data surrounding the events we study.45 The former is
important for dealing with permanent time-varying factors while the latter can be very
useful in dealing with transitory time-varying factors.
           We prefer an event window that is long enough to capture any change in price
associated with the change in market structure, but short enough to avoid any
contaminating effects from other changes in the market. We consider three different
merger windows. Our preferred merger window drops the 3 months of data preceding
and following the merger consummation and contains a symmetric amount of data pre-
and post-merger.46 By dropping the data very close to the merger date, we avoid the
issue of exactly when the firms start coordinating their pricing behavior, leaving us with
uncontaminated measures of the firms’ pre- and post-merger pricing.47 By using a
symmetric difference-in differences estimator we also control for any unspecified
transitory selection effects so long as the pricing error process is covariance stationary.48
           We have also analyzed an alternative event window that includes data in the
interval within 3 months of the merger date and contains an equal amount of data pre-
and post-merger. This event window may suffer from contamination of the data around
the time of the merger, but it does provide a larger sample for analysis. Finally, since for
most of the mergers we have considerably more data post-merger than pre-merger, we
also consider an event window that uses all of the data available to us, but still drops
those observations within three months of the merger date. The advantage of this
window is that if makes use of all the data, though it may suffer from transitory selection
effects.



45
   See Ashenfelter (1978) for an early discussion of these issues, Ashenfelter and Card (1985) for
subsequent methods, and Heckman and Robb (1985) for a detailed survey of the key issues.
46
   As discussed earlier, the amount of data we have for each of our mergers varies because we were only
able to purchase data up to 5 years old. For this reason, the length of the event window varies from merger
to merger.
47
   By law, merging parties are strictly prohibited from coordinating their pricing behavior during the HSR
waiting period (when merger review takes place). However, as a practical matter, there is some evidence
that firms do change their pricing behavior following their announcement to merge. For example, Kim and
Singal (1993) find that many of the airlines increased their fares before the mergers were consummated.
48
   This was first pointed out by Heckman and Robb (1985), and the method is used by Ashenfelter and Card
(1985).
                                                    22
         A potential disadvantage of our event windows is a result of the fact that some
mergers that result in price increases may also result in a more efficient consolidation of
resources and a reduction in marginal costs that is ultimately passed through to
consumers. The timing of these two effects may differ, however. Our data only measure
the relatively short-run price effects of consumer products mergers.49
         We consider two different comparison groups as controls for permanent time-
varying factors, such as input cost changes, which might affect prices. Our preferred
control group consists of the private label products sold in each industry. The advantage
of private label products as a control group is that they are likely to be distant substitutes
to consumers for the higher quality branded products affected by the merger. Yet private
label products should share many of the same inputs (with the exception of advertising)
as are used to manufacture branded products. Assuming that these private label products
are supplied perfectly elastically, the prices of these products should serve as good
controls for costs, while at the same time they should be relatively unaffected by any
anticompetitive price increase by the merging parties. The private label products in the
control group we select are those with the characteristics closest to the products owned by
the merging parties.
         For three of the mergers the choice of the private label control group is
straightforward: private label motor oil, private label tampons, sanitary pads and liners,
and private label maple flavored syrup. For the liquor and RTE cereal mergers the choice
is more difficult because of the wide variety of products. For the liquor merger we use
private label gin as the control for gin brands, private label scotch as the control for
scotch brands, and private label vodka as the control for the vodka brands owned by
Diageo. For the RTE cereal market we use the private label cereals in the same IRI
groupings as the different types of Chex, Wheaties, and Cheerios examined in our study.



49
  Even with additional post-acquisition data, it would be very difficult to control for the “but-for” world in
the markets we are studying. For example, in the RTE cereal industry in any given year many new
products are introduced. A new product changes the demand relationships facing those products that are
substitutes for the new product, and likely changes equilibrium pricing for reasons unrelated to the merger,
see e.g., Hausman and Leonard. Overtime, the net effect of these changes likely grows. Disentangling the
price effects of a merger from the price effects resulting from changes in marketing, advertising, new
product introduction, and exogenous shocks to supply and demand is increasingly difficult as the length of
time following the merger grows in consumer products industries.
                                                     23
           The second control group contains the branded products that are close substitutes
to the products owned by the merging parties. The primary advantage of this control
group is it should control for shocks to both demand and cost that affect branded
products. An increase in income, for example, may increase the demand for all branded
products relative to private label products. The prices of close substitutes to the products
of the merging firms will thus also increase, serving as a control for the relative demand
shift. The disadvantage of this control group is that these products are likely to be close
enough substitutes to the merging parties’ products that their prices will also increase as a
result of the merger. Nevertheless, it is likely that the price increase of these competitors
to the merged firm will be lower than the price increases of the merging parties.50 Thus,
while measuring price changes relative to this control group may understate any price
increase due to the merger, the sign of the relative price increase should be correct. In
view of this weakness of this control group, we primarily view results estimated with it as
a specification check on the results our private label control group.
           As with the private label control groups, we choose the products with the
characteristics closest to the merging parties’ products being studied for this second
control group. For the feminine protection and syrup markets the control group is
branded products sold in all 64 geographic markets. For motor oil, the control group
consists of the 3 remaining premium brands of conventional motor oil (Havoline,
Valvoline, and Castrol). The control group for the liquor merger is branded scotches for
the scotch market, branded gins for the gin market, and branded vodka’s for the vodka
market. For the RTE cereal market we choose the branded cereals in the same IRI
groupings as the different types of Chex, Wheaties, and Cheerios examined in our study.
           We use the following regression specification fitted separately for each merging
party product and its relevant control group:
                      11
(1) pi,j,t = α i, j + ∑ D m M i, j,t + β1 (Post-Mergeri,j,t ) +
                     m =1

             β 2 (Post-Mergeri,j,t ) * (Merging Party Product i ) + ε i, j,t
for the ith product, in the jth city, and the tth time period, where Mijt is a month of the year
indicator, αij is a region-specific product fixed-effect, Post-Mergerijt is an indicator equal

50
     This is a property of the model in Deneckere and Davidson (1985), for example.
                                                       24
to one following the merger consummation, and Merging Party Producti is an indicator
equal to one if the product is owned by the parties. The price is measured in natural logs
(either the log of average revenue, log of a weighted average price, or as a Stone price
index, as noted above). The fixed-effects (αij) in equation 2 are allowed to vary by both
product and region because a given product (e.g., Cheerios) may have a different
permanent price in different regions (e.g., Chicago versus Knoxville) and different
products may have different permanent price levels (Cheerios versus Wheaties). We
include month effects (Mi,j,t) to control for seasonal pricing. The coefficient β2 measures
the approximate proportionate price increase of the merging firm’s product relative to
products in the control group. To examine how sensitive our results are to the choice of
control groups, we also estimated regressions without control groups. Because we are
observing the prices of the same products in many different markets in each time period,
we estimate clustered standard errors where we cluster on the time period (Moulton
(1987)).
        We also measure changes in the merging parties’ output following the merger as a
basic specification test of our analysis. Though the effect of a price increase resulting
from a merger will generally lead to a decline in quantity sold, in complex multi-product
mergers these predicted effects depend heavily on the precise structure of the economic
model used for prediction. We measure output using both revenue shares and quantity
shares.51 Regressions are estimated separately for each product owned by the merging
parties and are of the form
                  11
(2) s j,t = α j + ∑ D m M j,t + β1 (Post-Mergerj,t ) + ε j,t
                 m =1

        To control for differences in market size each observation is weighted by the size
of market output in a given region/time period. We also estimate clustered standard
errors where we cluster on the time period.




51
  Both our price and output regressions are reduced forms of a potentially complex demand system, cost
function, and equilibrium specification. A homothetic AID’s model would lead to log price and revenue
share as the appropriate specification for price and quantity in these reduced forms, but other demand
systems would lead to other specifications.
                                                   25
VI. Results
        Tables 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 present the basic empirical results. These tables report
results using our preferred definition of the merger window (equal amounts of data pre-
and post-merger and dropping data within the 3 months of the merger consummation).
The price measure used is average revenue. Tables 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 present summary
statistics describing the results using different definitions of the merger window, price,
and control group. The results imply that there were consumer price increases for some
of the products owned by the merging firms in motor oil, feminine hygiene products,
RTE cereal, and distilled spirits industries. However, in the four mergers where we find
substantial evidence of a price increase, manufacturers did not increase all of their prices
uniformly. Instead, the merged firm chose to increase the price of one of its products (or
a set of products) while holding the other prices more or less fixed. For example, the
combined Pennzoil/Quaker State substantially increased the price of its Quaker State
brand of motor oil, while leaving the Pennzoil brand’s price essentially unchanged. In
contrast, there is little evidence that the combination of two of the leading brands of
maple-flavored syrup resulted in any meaningful price change following the merger.
        With one exception (General Mills/Ralcorp), our analysis of the robustness of the
results suggests that the choice of merger window is not very important for the results,
but the choice of control group can be. While the choice of a branded or private label
control group is not systematically associated with higher or lower estimated price
changes, in those cases where the differences are most striking (Guinness/Grand
Metropolitan and P&G/Tambrands) the price effects are larger with the private label
control group. Finally, while the choice of a price measure (average revenue or a
measure which accounts for differences in pricing across package sizes or product
variations) does not affect the sign of the estimated price effects, the measure does have a
significant effect on the magnitude of a price increase. We interpret this result as
showing the importance of accounting for quantity discounts in studies using scanner
data.
        While we purchased weekly revenue and unit sales data from IRI, we have
aggregated the data to monthly data for all of the analysis presented in this paper. Our

                                             26
goal was to control for the possibility of inventory effects associated with retailer sales. If
consumers purchase dramatically larger quantities of products during sales, they may take
the excess they purchase into consumer inventory.52 By aggregating to the monthly level,
our goal was to at least partially control for intertemporal purchasing substitution, which
is not the focus of our study. We have estimated all specifications of the models
presented in the paper using monthly and weekly data and found the results to be
essentially unchanged with one exception.53
         Finally, we have estimated regressions without control groups for each of the
products using the model specifications corresponding to tables 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11. The
results appear in appendix tables 3-7. In virtually every merger, we observe that the price
level has increased following the merger. Thus, it seems likely that the price increases
we observe in our primary difference-in-difference results are not simply due to a poor
choice of control group.
         Because the estimated price effects associated with the mergers were not uniform
across products, the aggregate impact of the mergers cannot readily be determined from
the results presented in Tables 3-12. For this reason we have constructed an aggregate
estimate of the price effect of each merger. We calculated the aggregate price effect of a
merger as the (revenue) weighted average of the estimated price effects of the products
owned by the merging parties using the estimated price effects from our preferred model
specification (presented in Tables 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11) and the pre-merger relative revenues
of the affected products. The exact calculation is specified in equation (3) below.
                                                               P
                                     (3) Merger Effect = ∑ π i βˆi
                                                              i=1

                                                              P
Where π i is product i’s pre-merger revenue share ( ∑ π i = 1 ), βˆi is the estimated price
                                                              i=1

effect for product i, and P is the number of estimated price effects associated with the



52
   See Hendel and Nevo (2006) and Pessendorfer (2002) for evidence on the importance of inventory
effects.
53
   The results with weekly and monthly data yielded very different results for the cereal merger, suggesting
that consumers take cereal products into household inventory in response to consumer sales. In addition,
with weekly data the choice of price measure and control group were very important in the cereal market.
This is not true with the monthly data.
                                                    27
merger. The estimates are presented in Table 13.54 Four of the five mergers have
resulted in modest price increases, ranging from roughly 3% to 7%, when using the
change in private label products’ prices as a control. The estimated price effects are,
however, sensitive to the choice of control group. The estimated cereal and breakfast
syrup mergers price effects are larger when using a branded control group while the
remaining mergers price effects are larger when using a private label control group.
Finally, we estimated the aggregate price effects of the distilled spirits merger overall and
separately by product type (gin, scotch, vodka) because the price effects varied so much
by product type. In the remainder of this section we discuss the results from each of the
mergers separately.


           Pennzoil/Quaker State
           Table 3 presents the primary results for this merger using the preferred definition
of the merger window. The estimated price effects using a branded and private label
control group are in the first two columns of the table. The rank of the product’s price
increase (relative to its respective control group) is in the next two columns. The final
four columns contain the estimates of the change in the product’s revenue and quantity
market shares following the merger (in absolute share points and relative to the product’s
pre-merger market share).
           Using the private label control group, the post-merger price change for Pennzoil is
about 4%, for Quaker State 8%, and Quaker State Deluxe about 6%. The estimated price
increases are smaller when using the other premium brands of motor oil as the control
group (essentially no change for Pennzoil, a 2% price increase for Quaker State Deluxe,
and a 4% price increase for Quaker State). Quaker State’s price increase is larger than all
but one of the brands in the control group, and Quaker State Deluxe’s price increase is
about equal to the median price increase for the control group (smaller than 6 of the 11
brands in the control group). The estimated declines in market share are broadly
consistent with the price increases. While Pennzoil's market share increases, the Quaker




54
     The calculation of standard errors assumes negligible covariances among the component estimators.
                                                     28
State brands show a significant decrease, e.g., Quaker State loses 1.3 market share points
that represents a 13.5% decrease of its pre-merger market share.55
        Table 4 summarizes the results from 6 separate regressions run for each of the 3
brands studied (for a total of 18 estimated coefficients). The table shows how the results
change relative to the event window used (the first three columns) and relative to the
control group (the last two columns). For example, for the private label control group, all
of the estimated price effects are positive (row 1) and statistically significant (row 2). Of
the 9 price effects estimated with the private label control group, 3 are between 1% and
5% and 6 are greater than 5%. The results do not appear to be sensitive to the choice of
merger window, and the price effects appear lower when using the premium brands as a
control group. However, as can be seen from the frequency distributions, the price
increases are not large, most being less than 5%. These results suggest that the combined
Pennzoil/Quaker State chose to increase prices to those users loyal to Quaker State and to
maintain stable prices on its much larger Pennzoil brand. However, given the large
increase in Pennzoil's market share, it clearly grew at the expense of its rivals and not
only from the market share diversion from Quaker State.


        Proctor and Gamble/Tambrands
        Table 5 presents the estimated price effects, rank of estimated price effects
relative to control group, and corresponding changes in revenue and quantity market
shares for the Proctor/Tambrands purchase, while Table 6 presents a summary of the
results from the other specifications examined. While tampons and sanitary pads may not
appear to be close substitutes to consumers, the results suggest that P&G increased the
price of pads, liners, and possibly tampons following its acquisition of Tambrands. The
results in Table 5 show that relative to private label products, Always liners and pads
prices increased by 8% and Tampax Tampons prices increased by 4%. When compared
to the price of branded products, Always liners and pads still increased (6%, 4%) but
Tampax tampon prices appear to be unchanged (-0.9%). The Always liners and pad price
increases are larger than the products in the branded control group. However, the change


55
 The market shares are calculated for using conventional passenger car motor oil sold through mass-
merchants in the IRI sample using data from the time period 1/5/97 through 12/27/98.
                                                   29
in Tampax’s price is smaller than the price changes of 2 of the 3 brands in the branded
control group. The changes in market share are fairly consistent with the estimated price
changes for Tampax and Always liners, with Tampax showing a loss of 3.08 share points
(a roughly 6% decrease from its pre-merger share) and Always liners losing 2.98 share
points. Always pads show a surprising gain of 1.81 share points despite an increase in its
price relative to branded and private label pads.56
        The summary of the results in Table 6 also suggests this merger resulted in a price
increase. Using the private label control group, 92% of the estimated price effects are
positive, and 70% of these are significantly different from zero. When the branded
control group is used about 78% of the estimated price effects are positive and 59% of
these are significantly different than zero. Only one of the 27 price changes estimated
using the branded control group shows an economically significant (between 1% and 5%)
post-merger price decrease. However, as noted above, the private label control group has
important advantages, because private label producers are less likely to increase their
prices in response to a price increase by the merging parties. Finally, the estimated price
effects are larger when price is measured using average revenue rather than controlling
for package size using the two weighted price indexes. While the results do not
unambiguously show a price increase, on net, the evidence suggests that P&G increased
the prices of its feminine hygiene products after purchasing Tambrands.


        General Mills/Ralcorp
        The merger of General Mills and Ralcorp involved many different brands of RTE
cereal. We have estimated the price effects for the seven brands of General Mills cereals
we believed were the closest substitutes for the four types of Ralcorp's Chex cereals.
Table 7 presents the estimated price effects and changes in market share for our preferred
event window and price measure, and Table 8 summarizes the pricing results for all
specifications of the model run. The results in Table 7 suggest that any price increase
following this acquisition was quite small for the Chex cereals (less than 1%), moderate
for Cheerios, Multi-Grain Cheerios, and Wheaties (2%-4%), and highly variable for the


56
  Market shares for feminine hygiene products are calculated separately for pads, liners, and tampons using
IRI’s supermarket sample for the pre-merger time period 10/27/96 through 7/20/97.
                                                    30
remaining variations of Cheerios and Wheaties (3%-14%). The estimated price increases
of Crispy-Raisin Wheaties, Honey-Frosted Wheaties, Apple-Cinnamon Cheerios, and
Honey-Nut Cheerios are very sensitive to the choice of control group, and are roughly
5%-6% larger when using the branded control group. Further, most of the price changes
for the non-Chex cereals are in the upper tail of price increases relative to the cereal
products in either the private label or branded control group.
         The estimated changes in market share following the merger for some cereal
brands are difficult to reconcile with the post-merger price changes. Confounding factors
may have played some roll in these changes in relative output. The most important factor
in the RTE cereal category is probably non-price competition, particularly new product
introductions. During our time period a number of new products were introduced,
including two new Chex variations (Frosted and Honey-Nut). Substitution from existing
brands of Chex to the new variants may explain the large decreases in market share for
some types of Chex. More generally, product entry and exit may result in substantial
share variation over time. In addition, some products experienced idiosyncratic changes
in demand. For example, two of the Wheaties products (Crispy Raisin and Honey
Frosted) were new at the beginning of our time period and may have experienced some
drop in market share as a result of consumer experimentation. Cheerios had a modest
increase in relative price (4%) and increased its market share by 0.5 share points, a
roughly 13% increase over its pre-merger share.57 This may have been the result of
Cheerios rebuilding its share following a widely publicized incident where contractors
accidentally sprayed raw oats with an unapproved pesticide which resulted in the
destruction of 50 million boxes of Cheerios in 1994.58
         The estimated price effects vary for two of the three types of robustness checks
summarized in Table 8. The choice of event window has some effect on the magnitude
of the estimated price effects of the merger. When using a symmetric event window and
keeping the data around the merger consummation date, the proportion of economically
significant price effects (a predicted price change greater than 1%) increases relative to
the alternative event windows. In addition, the magnitude of the estimated price changes

57
  Market shares for the cereal merger are calculated over the entire set of RTE cereals using IRI’s
supermarket sample and pre-merger data from 7/2/95 through 1/26/97.

                                                    31
is somewhat smaller when using the private label control group rather than the branded
control group (see Table 8, columns 7 and 8).
           The choice of price measure does not appear to be very important when using
monthly data (see first 3 columns of Table 8). However, when the same specifications
were estimated using weekly data, the estimated price effects were much larger using the
average revenue measure of price than with either of the weighted price indices (in fact,
all estimated price effects were larger using weekly data). This sensitivity of the results
to aggregation over time suggests that consumers may take RTE cereal products into
inventory in response to retail sales. In addition, the sensitivity of the estimated price
effects to the measure of price in weekly data suggests that consumers may substitute
across package sizes in response to sales. Because larger package sizes are inferior goods
(e.g., more difficult to store, increased likelihood of spoilage), these results suggest that
controlling for package sizes in may be important.
           While the magnitude of the price changes following the General Mills acquisition
of the Chex brands varied significantly from specification to specification, some general
conclusions can be drawn. First, the estimated price changes for the Chex products were
always small, between a 1% price decrease and a 2% price increase. Second, the price
changes of the variants of Wheaties (Crispy Raisin and Honey Frosted) and Cheerios
brands (Honey-Nut and Apple-Cinnamon) were very sensitive to the choice of control
group. Third, the results strongly suggest that General Mills cereal prices did not fall
after its acquisition of the Chex brands. Virtually every estimated price effect
summarized in Table 8 is positive (90%), and none of the estimated price decreases are
economically significant; i.e., a price decrease of more than 1%. The merger apparently
did not generate cost savings that were passed through to consumers in the form of lower
prices in the time period studied.
           The predicted price effects of General Mills purchase of the Chex brands from
Nevo (2000) are very different from our findings. Nevo predicts price increases (before
efficiencies) of 12.2% for Chex (all of the Chex brands combined), 1.1% for Cheerios,




58
     The Wall Street Journal, August 22, 1994.

                                                 32
0.8% for Honey Nut Cheerios, and 0.1% for Wheaties.59 The quantity responses (before
efficiencies) are predicted to be –19% for Chex, -1.3% for Cheerios, -0.9% for Honey
Nut Cheerios, and –0.1% for Wheaties. Clearly, these predicted price changes are very
different from what we have found (measured relative to either control group). It is
unclear why Nevo’s predictions were so different than our estimates. Possible
explanations include the use of a different data set (quarterly data from1988-1992), the
confounding effect of new product introductions60 or changes in market structure in the
1990s, and the form of the demand structure used.


        Guinness /Grand Metropolitan
        The distilled spirits merger involved many brands. For brevity, we refer to our
results separately for the three major types of spirits affected by the transaction: vodkas,
gins, and scotches. The results in Table 9 (and the summary statistics in Table 10)
suggest that the scotch merger resulted in a price increase. For the four brands of scotch
(three in two bottle sizes), all the model specifications show a significant price increase.
The relative magnitude of the price increases are at or above the median of the branded
control group (Table 10, column 3 for the scotch brands). The frequency distribution in
Table 10 shows that 22 of the 42 estimated price increases are between 1% and 5% and
20 are greater than 5%.
        The results for gins and vodkas are more ambiguous. The key factor appears to
be the choice of control group. In Table 9 when using the private label control group,
about 71% (15 of 21) of the estimated price effects for gins and vodkas are positive.
However, when using the branded control group, all but one of the brands of gin and
vodka show a price decrease following the merger. These results are also seen in the


59
   See Nevo (2000), Table 5. His study does not analyze the other varieties of Cheerios and Wheaties
examined here (those brands had not been introduced in Nevo’s sample period).
60
   In purchasing the Chex cereals from Ralcorp, General Mills likely knew that Ralcorp would begin selling
private label Chex. As noted earlier, the consent decree reached between the FTC and Ralcorp gave
Ralcorp the right to produce private label cereal immediately following the sale of its branded cereal
business. While Ralcorp did not begin selling private label versions of Chex cereals during our sample
period, private label Chex was on supermarket shelves within a few years following the close of the
transaction (and is still available today). General Mills may not have changed Chex pricing because of this
anticipated entry. Virtually all merger simulations (including Nevo’s) are made assuming the set of
existing set of products is constant; i.e., the simulations cannot account for unanticipated new product
development.
                                                    33
summary statistics in Table 10. For the 21 types of gins and vodkas (brands and bottle
sizes), 53 of the 63 price changes estimated with a private label control group are positive
while only 18 of the 63 price changes estimated with the branded control group are
positive.
         The estimated share changes are not entirely consistent with the estimated price
effects. For the scotches, J&B in the 750ml, Johnny Walker Red in the 750ml and 1.75L
bottle, and Scoresby in the 1.75L bottle show share decreases. However, Johnny Walker
Black 750ml, and Scoresby 750ml, show significant share increases. The only
explanation we can find for this result is that the price increase in large bottle sizes
caused consumers to substitute to the smaller bottle size.61 The results for the gins and
vodkas seem to be quite variable. The largest increases, for the citrus versions of
Gordon's and Smirnoff vodkas can be explained by the large growth taking place during
this time for flavored vodkas.


         Aurora Foods/Kraft
         The one merger where we find no strong evidence of a post-merger price increase
is in the Aurora Foods (owner of Mrs. Butterworth) purchase of Kraft's Log Cabin brand
of maple flavored breakfast syrup. The results in Table 11 show that neither the price of
Mrs. Butterworth or Log Cabin changed much following the acquisition. While the
estimated price of Log Cabin relative to other brands of maple flavored syrup increases
by 3% in Table 11, this result is not robust to model specification. An examination of
Table 12 shows that across control groups, measures of price, and merger window
definitions about two-thirds of the price changes fall between a 1% price decrease and a
1% price increase. The results from the market share regressions are consistent with our
conclusion that prices did not change significantly as a result of this merger. Neither of
the estimated changes in market share for Mrs. Butterworth or Log Cabin is economically
or statistically significant. From a market structure perspective, the results from this
merger are the most surprising. Since the result of the merger was essentially a decrease
from three to two competitors, most theoretical models would predict this merger to be


61
  This explanation may be correct, given the market shares for the large bottle sizes is much larger than the
small bottle sizes; i.e., the small bottle sizes may, on net, be picking up some diversion.
                                                     34
anticompetitive. Apparently the wide variety of substitutes of both superior (real maple
syrups) and inferior (private label brands) products, restrained Aurora Foods from
increasing prices.


VII. Conclusions
       Merger review makes up the largest component of antitrust enforcement in the
U.S. In the late 1990’s, the U.S. economy went through the largest merger wave in its
history with the number of merger filings more than doubling between 1994 and 1999.
Despite the increase in merger activity, the number of lawyers and economists employed
at the antitrust agencies remained more or less constant. Given the huge increase in
workload, the agencies clearly had to make difficult choices in deciding which cases to
pursue during this time period.
       In four of the five mergers we investigated, prices appeared to increase a small
but significant amount, typically between 3% and 7%. However, our sample of mergers
is deliberately not representative of the vast majority of transactions analyzed by the
antitrust agencies during the late 1990s. We deliberately chose to study the effect on
consumer prices of those consummated mergers that would be most expected to result in
anticompetitive price increases in order to provide (1) an upper bound on the price
increases that permitted mergers may have produced and (2) a lower bound on the price
increases that might otherwise have occurred in mergers that were blocked. We thus
provide an indication of whether government merger policy may have been too hostile or
too acquiescent.
       A complete evaluation of the appropriate level of governmental intervention in
monitoring mergers is beyond the scope of this paper. We do think, however, that some
advocates of less intervention may be surprised to learn that our best estimate of the price
effects of the marginal merger are positive, not negative as would be the case if the
marginal merger were producing large benefits to consumers through the efficiency of the
enlarged firm. Likewise, we think that some advocates of more intervention may be
surprised to learn that the marginal merger is not producing huge anticompetitive price
increases either.



                                             35
         Our results have several limitations. First, we chose to study consumer products
industries because the price and quantity data required to estimate the competitive effects
of these consummated mergers are readily purchased. During the two-year period from
which are sample is drawn (1997 and 1998) 8013 mergers were filed with the antitrust
agencies. Of these, 20% were in industries that share the two digit SIC codes of the
merging firms we study. Thus, the mergers we examine are from only a small, although
economically important part of the universe of mergers that took place during the period
we study.
         Second, we are not able to analyze either the possible longer term effects of
mergers on prices that may result from the increased economic efficiency of merged
firms, nor are we able to study the role of mergers in the development of new products.
         Finally, our study has only examined the implications of Type II errors, the failure
to block a merger when it might be useful to do so. Our study does not analyze Type I
errors, rejecting mergers that would not have resulted in higher prices or pro-competitive
mergers that were never even attempted because of the merging parties’ belief that the
merger would be successfully challenged. It is possible that by allowing some
anticompetitive mergers to take place, the government may also allow many efficient
mergers to take place that would have been challenged by a stricter antitrust policy. A
complete evaluation of optimal enforcement behavior must be based on a consideration
of all these issues.
         We also think that our results suggest the outline of much further additional
research. First, it seems that the evaluation of merger simulation models by a comparison
of predicted and actual outcomes is in its infancy. In view of the extensive use to which
these models are put, a careful evaluation of their effectiveness seems long over due.
Second, the advent of the wide availability of scanner and other proprietary price data
could, with some organizational effort, be far more widely exploited by the research
community. In principle, the companies that collect and sell these data have a natural
interest in their wider use.62


62
  A natural analogy is to the development of the CRSP data so widely used in financial economics. The
Center for Research on Security Prices apparently resulted from the collaboration of faculty at the Graduate
School of Business at the University of Chicago with Merrill Lynch, whose data they used. See
http://www.crsp.chicagogsb.edu/crsp/history.html.
                                                    36
                                         References
       Antitrust Modernization Commission Report and Recommendations, April, 2007
       Ashenfelter, Orley and Kathryn Graddy. “Anatomy of the Rise and Fall of a
Price-Fixing Conspiracy: Auctions at Sotheby’s and Christie’s,” Journal of Competition
Law and Economics Vol. 1 (2005) pp. 3-20
       Ashenfelter, Orley. “Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings.”
Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 60 (1978) pp.27-57.
       Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card. “Using the Longitudinal Structure of
Earnings to Estimate the Effect of Training Programs.” Review of Economics and
Statistics Vol. 67 (1985) pp. 648-660.
       Baer, William. “Reflections on Twenty Years of Merger Enforcement under the
Hart-Scott-Rodino Act.” Antitrust Law Journal Vol. 65 (1997) pp. 825-863.
       Baker, Jonathan. “The Case for Antitrust Enforcement .” Journal of Economic
Perspectives Vol. 17 (2003) pp. 27-50.
       Barton, David and Roger Sherman. “The Price and Profit Effects of Horizontal
Merger: A Case Study.” Journal of Industrial Economics Vol. 33 (1984) pp. 165-177
       Berry, Steven. “Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Differentiation.”
RAND Journal of Economics Vol. 25 (1994) pp. 242-262.
       Berry, Steven, James Levinson, and Ariel Pakes. “Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium.” Econometrica Vol. 63 (1995) pp. 841-890.
       Berry, Steven and Joel Waldfogel. “Do Mergers Increase Product Variety?
Evidence from Radio Broadcasting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 116 (2001)
pp. 1009-1025.
       Block, Michael K., Fredrick C. Nold, and Joseph G. Sidak. “The Deterrent Effect
of Antitrust Enforcement.” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 89 (1981) pp. 429-445
       Borenstein, Severin. “Airline Mergers, Airport Dominance, and Market Power.”
American Economic Review Vol. 80 (1990) pp.400-404.
       Brookman, Faye. “Marking Time.” Supermarket Business January 1998 pp. 47-
49.




                                            37
       Crandall, Robert W. and Clifford Winston. “Does Antitrust Policy Improve
Consumer Welfare? Assessing the Evidence.” Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 17
(2003) pp. 3-26.
       Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer. Economics and Consumer Behavior New
York, New York: Cambridge University Press (1980).
       Deneckere, Raymond and Carl Davidson. “Incentives to Form Coalitions with
Bertrand Competition.” RAND Journal of Economics Vol. 16 (1985) pp. 473-485.
       Focarelli, Dario and Fabio Panetta. “Are Mergers Beneficial to Consumers?
Evidence from the Market for Bank Deposits.” American Economic Review Vol. 93
(2003) pp. 1152-1172.
       Froeb, Luke, Daniel Hosken, and Janis Pappalardo. “Economics Research at the
FTC: Information, Retrospectives, and Retailing.” Review of Industrial Organization
Vol. 25 pp.353-374,
       Green, Edward and Robert Porter. “Noncooperative Collusion under Imperfect
Price Competition.” Econometrica Vol. 52 (1994) pp. 87-100
       Hastings, Justine, 2004, ‘Vertical Relationships and Competition in Retail
Gasoline Markets: Empirical Evidence from Contract Changes in Southern California,’
American Economic Review, 94(1), pp. 317-328.

       Hastings, Justine and Richard Gilbert, 2005, ‘Market Power, Vertical Integration
and the Wholesale Price of Gasoline,’ Journal of Industrial Economics, 53(4), pp. 469-
492
       Hausman, Jerry and Gregory Leonard. “The Competitive Effects of a New
Product Introduction: A Case Study.” Journal of Industrial Economics Vol. 50 (2002) pp.
237-263.
       Hausman, Jerry, Gregory Leonard, and Douglas Zona. “Competitive Analysis
with Differentiated Products.” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique (1994) Vol. 34, pp
159-180.
       Heckman, James J. and Richard Robb. “Alternative Methods for Evaluating the
Effects of Interventions.” Journal of Econometrics Vol. 30 (1985) pp. 239-267.
       Hendel, Igal and Aviv Nevo. “Sales and Consumer Inventory.” Rand Journal of
Economics, Vol. 37 (2006) pp. 543-561.
       The Houston Chronicle. “Business Briefs.” 19 September 1998 p. 2, Business.


                                           38
       Kim, E. and Vijay Singal. “Mergers and Market Power: Evidence from the
Airline Industry.” American Economic Review Vol. 83 (1993) pp. 549-569.
       Lazarus, George. “Log Cabin Aims to Come Back: Can Cracker Jack?” Chicago
Tribune October 20, 1997 p. 3 Business.
       McCabe, Mark. “Journal Pricing and Mergers: A Portfolio Approach.” American
Economic Review Vol. 92 (2002) pp. 259-269.
       The Merger Yearbook, New York, NY: Securities Data Company (1998).
       The Merger Yearbook, New York, NY: Securities Data Company (1999).
       The Merger Yearbook, New York, NY: Securities Data Company (2000).
       Milling and Baking News. “Ralcorp Shareholders to vote on Spinoff, Branded
Cereal Sale.” 21 January 1997 p. 10.
       Moulton, Brent. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of
Aggregate Variables on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 72 (1990)
pp. 334-338.
       Nevo, Aviv. “Mergers with Differentiated Products: the Case of the Ready-To-
Eat Cereal Industry.” RAND Journal of Economics Vol. 31 (2000) pp. 395-421.
       Newmark, Craig. “Is Antitrust Enforcement Effective? Comment.” Journal of
Political Economy Vol. 96 (1988) pp.1315-1328
       The New York Times, “Company News P.&G.’s Acquisition of Tambrands Clears
Hurdle.” 7 June 1997 p. 33, sec. 1.
       Pautler, Paul. “Evidence on Mergers and Acquisitions.” Antitrust Bulletin Vol.
48. (2003), pp. 119-207.
       Peters, Craig. “Evaluating the Performance of Merger Simulation: Evidence from
the U.S. Airline Industry.” Journal of Law and Economics Vol. 49 (2006) pp. 627-649
       Pesendorfer, Martin. “Retail Sales: A Study of Pricing Behavior in Super
Markets.” The Journal of Business, Vol. 75 (2002), pp. 33-66.
       Pinske, Joris and Margaret Slade. “Mergers, Brand Competition, and the Price of
a Pint.” European Economic Review Vol. 48 (2001) pp.617-643.
       Porter, Robert and Douglas Zona. “Ohio School Milk Markets: An Analysis of
Bidding.” RAND Journal of Economics Vol. 30 (1999) pp. 263-288.



                                            39
         Prager, Robin and Timothy Hannan. “Do Substantial Horizontal Mergers
Generate Significant Price Effects? Evidence from the Banking Industry.” Journal of
Industrial Economics Vol. 46 (1998) pp. 433-452
         Sapienza, Paola. “The Effects of Banking Merges on Loan Contracts.” Journal
of Finance Vol. 57 (2002) pp. 329-367
         Simpson, John and Christopher Taylor. “Michigan Gasoline Pricing and the
Marathon-Ashland and Ultramar Diamond Shamrock Transaction.” Journal of Law and
Economics, forthcoming.
         Sproul, Michael. “Antitrust and Prices.” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 101
(1993) pp. 741-754
         Stigler, George. “A Theory of Oligopoly.” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 72
(1964) pp. 44-61.
         Talaski, Karen. “Quick-Change Oil Chain Booms in Metro Detroit; Convenience,
Location are Jiffy Lube’s Key Appeals.” The Detroit News 23 May 2000 p. 1b, Business.
         Taylor, Christopher and Daniel Hosken. “The Economic Effects of the Marathon
- Ashland Joint Venture: The Importance of Industry Supply Shocks and Vertical Market
Structure.” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 55 (2007) pp. 419-451.
         U.S. Department of Justice/Federal Trade Commission 1992 Horizontal Merger
Guidelines.
         U.S. Federal Trade Commission, Horizontal Merger Investigation Data, Fiscal
Years 1996-2003. Revised August 31, 2004.
         Vita, Michael and Seth Sacher. “The Competitive Effects of Not-For-Profit
Hospital Mergers: A Case Study.” Journal of Industrial Economics Vol. 49 (2001) pp.
63-84.
         The Wall Street Journal. “General Mills Dumps Cereal Boxes Tainted by Wrong
Pesticide.” 22 August 1994 p. B3.
         Werden, Gregory, Andrew Joskow, and Richard Johnson. “The Effects of
Mergers on Economic Performance; Two Case Studies from the Airline Industry.”
Managerial and Decision Economics Vol. 12 (1991) pp. 341-352
         Whinston, Michael D. Lectures On Antitrust Economics, Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press (2006).

                                            40
                                                           Table 1: Merger Filings by Fiscal Year


                                Number of
                               Mergers Filed                                                       Ratio of                                                Mergers in SIC 29
                               Where Second     Number of                        Number of      Enforcement       Mergers in SIC 20   Mergers in SIC 26   (Petroleum Refining
                               Request can be    Second   Percentage Issued a   Enforcement   Actions to Second   (Food and Kindred   (Paper and Allied       and Related
 Fiscal Year   Mergers Filed      Issued         Requests  Second Request         Actions         Requests            Products)           Products)            Industries
   1991            1529            1376             64           4.65%              42            65.63%                 40                  11                    5
   1992            1589            1451             44           3.03%              22            50.00%                 36                  19                    5
   1993            1846            1745             71           4.07%              32            45.07%                 91                  19                   11
   1994            2305            2128             73           3.43%              50            68.49%                 81                  21                   11
   1995            2816            2612            101           3.87%              60            59.41%                 89                  31                   15
   1996            3087            2864             99           3.46%              57            57.58%                 99                  47                   18
   1997            3702            3438            122           3.55%              57            46.72%                107                  38                   15
   1998            4728            4575            125           2.73%              85            68.00%                160                  59                   23
   1999            4642            4340            111           2.56%              76            68.47%                141                  44                   12
   2000            4926            4749             98           2.06%              80            81.63%                 93                  52                   26
   2001            2376            2237             70           3.13%              55            78.57%                 65                  15                    7
   2002            1187            1142             49           4.29%              34            69.39%                 32                  11                    9
   2003            1014             968             33           3.41%              36           109.09%                 29                   8                    7
   2004            1454            1377             35           2.54%              24            68.57%                 33                  13                    7
   Total          37201           35002           1095           3.13%             710            64.84%               1096                 388                  171



Source: Table 5 Pautler (2003), HSR Annual Report, 1991-2004.
Mergers in SIC categories reported for the acquiring person.
                                                              Table 2: Market Concentration



                              Pre-Acquisition Owner                                                                           Post-Merger           Change in
           Industry
                              of Brands                          Primary Brands                          Market Share             HHI                 HHI

                     General Mills                               Cheerios, Wheaties                                   28%
Cereal1                                                                                                                            2357               238
                     Ralcorp                                     Chex                                                  4%
       2             Guinness                                    Tanqueray, Scoresby                                  21%
Liquor                                                                                                                             2026               935
                     Grand Metropolitian                         J&B, Johnny Walker, Smirnoff                         22%
                     Pennzoil                                    Pennzoil Motor Oils                                  29%
Motor Oil3                                                                                                                         2189               517
                     Quaker State                                Quaker State Motor Oils                               9%
                     Proctor and Gamble                          Always Pads and Liners                               25%
Feminine Protection4                                                                                                               2815               959
                     Tambrands                                   Tampax Tampons                                       19%
                     Philip Morris (Log Cabin)                   Log Cabin                                            19%
Pancake Syrup5                                                                                                                     1990               589
                     Aurora Foods                                Mrs. Butterworth                                     15%

1
    Market shares and HHI's calculated using pre-merger revenue data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data, 7/2/1995 - 1/26/97.
2
    Market shares and HHI's calculated using pre-merger revenue data from 5 regions in IRI's drug store channel data, 10/27/96 - 12/14/97.
3
    Market shares and HHI's calculated using pre-merger revenue data from 10 regions in IRI's mass merchandiser channel data, 1/05/97 - 12/27/98.
4
    Market shares and HHI's calculated using pre-merger revenue data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data, 10/27/96 - 7/20/97.
5
    Market shares and HHI's calculated using pre-merger revenue data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data, 10/27/96 - 6/29/97.
                                           Table 3: Estimated Price and Quantity Effects of the Pennzoil/Quaker State Merger1



                                                                        Relative Rank of Brand's Price Increase to
                                              Price Effects                                                                    Revenue Share                        Quantity Share
                                                                                    Control Group2

                                                                          Other Brands:          Private Label:                            Percentage                         Percentage
                                                                         Rank/Number of         Rank/Number of          Change in          Change in          Change in       Change in
Product                             Other Brands       Private Label         Products               Products           Market Share      Market Share       Market Share     Market Share
PENNZOIL                               0.004               0.039               8/12                   1/2                  4.22            18.47%               4.46           21.01%
                                       0.015               0.019                                                           0.83                                 1.12
QUAKER STATE                           0.035               0.081               1/12                    1/2                -1.31             -13.58%            -1.32           -14.25%
                                       0.016               0.015                                                           0.47                                 0.53
QUAKER STATE DELUXE                    0.021               0.061               4/12                    1/2                -0.16             -5.95%             -0.13            -5.32%
                                       0.021               0.022                                                           0.13                                 0.14


1
 Estimated coefficient in bold, standard errors in regular font.
2
 Ranked in descending order, e.g., 8/12 implies that 7 products in the control group had larger estimated price increases and 4 products had smaller price increases.

Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data.
Data from 10 regions in IRI's mass merchandiser channel data.
Monthly data from 1/1997 - 12/2000 excluding 10/1998 – 03/1999.
An observation is a product-city-month. The number of observations varies by specification, however, the regressions using the branded (private label) control group have roughly 9,000
(2,000) observations.
                                 Table 4: Summary of Estimated Price Effects for the Merger of Pennzoil and Quaker State 1

                                                                                         Event Windows                                                            Control Groups


                                                  More Data Post-Acquisition, Drop Symmetric Event Window, Drop   Symmetric Event                     Branded Control        Private Label
                                                  Data Within 3 Months of Merger Data Within 3 Months of Merger Window, Drop No Data                      Group              Control Group
Percent of positive price changes                             100.00%                             100.00%                        100.00%                  100.00%               100.00%
Percent of positive price changes with
                                                               66.67%                              66.67%                         66.67%                  33.33%                100.00%
t-statistic>2
Frequency Distribution of Price Changes:
                     Δp<-.05                                      0                                   0                              0                        0                    0
               -0.05 <Δp < -0.01                                  0                                   0                              0                        0                    0
                -0.01 <Δp < 0.01                                  1                                   1                              1                        3                    0
                 0.01 <Δp < 0.05                                  3                                   3                              3                        6                    3
                    Δp > 0.05                                     2                                   2                              2                        0                    6
Number of Estimated Price Effects                                 6                                   6                              6                        9                    9

1
  A total of 18 regressions were estimated: 3 definitions of the event window, 2 control groups, and 3 products owned by the merging firms (3*2*3=18). Columns 2, 3, and 4 describe the
changes that result from using a different event window (pooling the results from both control groups), columns 5 and 6 describe the changes that result from using a different control group
(pooling the results from all event windows).
                               Table 5: Estimated Price and Quantity Effects of Proctor & Gamble's Purchase of Tambrands 1


                                                                      Relative Rank of Brand's Price Increase
                                            Price Effects                                                              Revenue Share                    Quantity Share
                                                                                to Control Group2

                                                                         Other Brands:       Private Label:                     Percentage                          Percentage
                                                                        Rank/Number of     Rank/Number of        Change in       Change in        Change in         Change in
Product                        Other Brands          Private Label          Products           Products         Market Share   Market Share     Market Share      Market Share
                                   0.061                    0.080             1/4                 1/2              -2.98         -11.05%            -3.81            -15.6%
ALWAYS LINER                       0.008                    0.011                                                  0.24                             0.23
                                   0.045                    0.078             1/3                 1/2              1.81           4.17%             0.71              1.8%
ALWAYS PAD                         0.010                    0.012                                                  0.64                             0.64
                                   -0.009                   0.058             3/4                 1/2              -3.08          -5.96%            -3.26             -6.3%
TAMPAX TAMPON                      0.010                    0.012                                                  0.52                             0.45


1
    Estimated coefficient in bold, standard errors in regular font.
2
    Ranked in descending order, e.g., 8/12 implies that 7 products in the control group had larger estimated price increases and 4 products had smaller price increases.

Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data.
Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.
Monthly data from 11/1996 - 4/1998 excluding 4/1997 – 10/1997.
An observation is a product-city-month. The number of observations varies by specification, however, the regressions with the branded (private label) control group have
roughly 2,500 (1,500) observations.
                                 Table 6: Summary of Estimated Price Effects for Proctor & Gamble's Purchase of Tambrands 1

                                                            Price Measure                                          Event Window                                           Control Group


                                                                                              More Data Post-        Symmetric Event
                                                                                              Acquisition, Drop     Window, Drop Data Symmetric Event
                                                 Average      Weighted        Stone Price      Data Within 3        Within 3 Months of Window, Drop Branded Control                Private Label
                                                 Revenue     Average Price       Index        Months of Merger           Merger          No Data        Group                      Control Group
Percent of positive price changes                83.33%         83.33%          88.89%             88.89%                 88.89%               77.78%              77.78%              92.60%
Percent of positive price changes with
t-statistic>2                                    77.78%         55.56%          61.11%             72.22%                 61.11%               61.11%              59.26%              70.40%
Frequency Distribution of Price Changes:
                   Δp<-.05                          0             0               0                    0                      0                   0                   0                    0
              -0.05 <Δp < -0.01                     1             1               0                    1                      0                   1                   1                    1
              -0.01 <Δp < 0.01                      2             7               5                    3                      6                   5                  10                    4
               0.01 <Δp < 0.05                      4             6               8                    2                      7                   9                   9                    9
                  Δp > 0.05                         11            4               5                   12                      5                   3                   7                   13
Number of Estimated Price Effects                   18            18              18                  18                     18                   18                 27                   27

1
  A total of 54 regressions were estimated: 3 definitions of the event window, 2 control groups, 3 measures of price and 3 products owned by the merging firms (3*2*3*3=54). Columns 2, 3, and 4
describe the changes that result from using different measures of price (pooling the results from both control groups and all event windows), columns 5, 6, and 7 describe the changes that result from
using different event windows (pooling the results from both control groups and measures of price), columns 8 and 9 describe the changes that result from using a different control group (pooling the
results from all event windows and measures of price).
                                          Table 7: Estimated Price and Quantity Effects of General Mills' Purchase of Ralcorp 1



                                                                                        Relative Rank of Brand's Price
                                                           Price Effects                                                                     Revenue Share                     Quantity Share
                                                                                         Increase to Control Group2

                                                                                        Other Brands:          Private Label:                            Percentage                       Percentage
                                                                                       Rank/Number of         Rank/Number of           Change in          Change in        Change in       Change in
Product                                          Other Brands         Private Label        Products               Products           Market Share Market Share Market Share Market Share
CHEERIOS                                               0.046              0.044               27/67                  2/11                 0.50              12.84%           0.09            2.46%
                                                       0.011              0.010                                                           0.08                               0.08
CHEERIOS APPLE CINN                                    0.138              0.067               3/37                    1/7                 -0.21            -25.80%           -0.26          -33.04%
                                                       0.013              0.011                                                           0.03                               0.03
CHEERIOS HONEY NUT                                     0.105              0.035               3/37                    1/7                 -0.04             -1.47%           -0.25           -8.88%
                                                       0.012              0.011                                                           0.07                               0.07
CHEERIOS MULTI-GRAIN                                   0.029              0.027               31/67                  4/11                 -0.02             -2.22%           -0.06          -10.00%
                                                       0.009              0.007                                                           0.02                               0.02
CORN CHEX                                              0.005              0.003               26/67                  1/11                 -0.02             -2.50%           -0.06           -9.08%
                                                       0.017              0.017                                                           0.03                               0.03
MULTI-GRAIN CHEX                                       0.003              0.001               29/67                  3/11                 -0.04            -12.42%           -0.05          -17.10%
                                                       0.014              0.014                                                           0.01                               0.01
RICE CHEX                                              0.007              0.005               27/67                  1/11                 0.11              10.28%           0.00            -0.24%
                                                       0.017              0.016                                                           0.04                               0.03
WHEAT CHEX                                             0.008              0.006               25/67                  1/11                 0.01              1.13%            -0.04           -8.15%
                                                       0.017              0.017                                                           0.02                               0.02
WHEATIES                                               0.027              0.026               30/67                  3/11                 -0.04             -3.36%           -0.16          -13.17%
                                                       0.013              0.012                                                           0.04                               0.05
WHEATIES CRISPY RAISIN                                 0.090              0.028               16/45                   3/8                 -0.06            -19.38%           -0.09          -25.83%
                                                       0.020              0.019                                                           0.03                               0.03
WHEATIES HONEY FROSTED                                 0.110              0.048               9/45                    3/8                 -0.11            -26.43%           -0.14          -35.00%
                                                       0.017              0.014                                                           0.03                               0.03


1
    Estimated coefficient in bold, standard errors in regular font.
2
    Ranked in descending order, e.g., 8/12 implies that 7 products in the control group had larger estimated price increases and 4 products had smaller price increases.

Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data.
Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.
Monthly data from 7/1995 - 8/1998 excluding 11/1996 – 04/1997.
An observation is a product-city-month. The number of observations in each regression varies significantly by specification and the size of the affected product's control group. The regressions with the
branded (private label) control group range between roughly 36,000 and 55,000 (11,000 and 13,500) observations.
                        Table 8: Summary of Estimated Price Effects for General Mill's Purchase of Ralcorp's Branded Cereal Business1

                                                             Price Measure                                                 Event Window                                     Control Group

                                                                                                    More Data Post-          Symmetric Event
                                                                                                  Acquisition, Drop Data    Window, Drop Data    Symmetric Event
                                                               Weighted                            Within 3 Months of       Within 3 Months of   Window, Drop No     Branded Control   Private Label
                                           Average Revenue    Average Price   Stone Price Index          Merger                  Merger               Data               Group         Control Group
Percent of positive price changes              93.93%           89.39%            89.39%                 81.82%                  90.91%              100.00%             98.99%           82.83%
Percent of positive price changes t>2          50.00%           60.61%            60.61%                 59.09%                  57.58%               54.55%             61.61%           52.53%
Frequency Distribution of Price Changes:
                   Δp<-.05                        0                 0                 0                     0                       0                    0                  0                0
              -0.05 <Δp < -0.01                   0                 0                 0                     0                       0                    0                  0                0
              -0.01 <Δp < 0.01                   18                19                19                    24                      22                   10                 23               33
               0.01 <Δp < 0.05                   32                30                30                    24                      27                   41                 38               54
                  Δp > 0.05                      16                17                17                    18                      17                   15                 38               12
Number of Estimated Price Effects                66                66                66                    66                      66                   66                 99               99

1
  A total of 198 regressions were estimated: 3 definitions of the event window, 2 control groups, 3 measures of price and 11 products owned by the merging firms (3*2*3*11=198). Columns 2, 3, and 4
describe the changes that result from using different measures of price (pooling the results from both control groups and all event windows), columns 5, 6, and 7 describe the changes that result from
using different event windows (pooling the results from both control groups and measures of price), columns 8 and 9 describe the changes that result from using a different control group (pooling the
results from all event windows and measures of price).
                                                                                                                             1
                    Table 9: Estimated Price and Quantity Effects of the Guinness/Grand Metropolitan Merger

                                                    Relative Rank of Brand's Price
                              Price Effects                                    2            Revenue Share                    Quantity Share
                                                     Increase to Control Group

                                                    Other Brands:  Private Label:                     Percentage                        Percentage
                                                    Rank/Number of Rank/Number of Change in Market Change in Market Change in Market Change in Market
Product              Other Brands   Private Label   Products       Products            Share             Share           Share             Share
                          -0.021           0.026           5/11            1/2          0.037            2.37%            0.029            1.84%
BOOTH 1.75 GIN
                           0.007           0.014                                        0.10                              0.110
                          -0.017           0.044           3/11            1/2         -0.395          -39.88%           -0.336          -43.04%
GILBEY .75 GIN
                           0.006           0.011                                        0.05                              0.050
                          -0.028          -0.004           9/11            1/2         -0.285           -4.75%           -0.186           -2.84%
GILBEY 1.75 GIN
                           0.007           0.01                                         0.22                              0.230
                          -0.026           0.004           9/11            1/2          0.115            3.56%            0.160            6.04%
GORDONS .75 GIN
                           0.006           0.012                                        0.12                              0.120
                          -0.024           0.011           9/11            1/2         -0.254           -1.55%            0.078            0.41%
GORDONS 1.75 GIN
                           0.007           0.011                                        0.31                              0.420
                          -0.025             0             8/11            1/2         -0.879          -77.68%           -1.230          -76.40%
POPOV 1.75 GIN
                           0.008           0.038                                        0.38                              0.630
                          -0.017           0.038           4/11            1/2          0.538            5.52%            0.209            4.56%
TANQUERY .75 GIN
                           0.007           0.012                                        0.26                              0.150
                           -0.01           0.067           3/11            1/2          0.247            4.51%            0.064            2.02%
TANQUERY 1.75 GIN
                           0.006           0.007                                        0.15                              0.100
                           0.037           0.098           6/18            1/2         -0.435           -2.77%           -0.349          -10.87%
J&B .75 SCOTCH
                           0.006           0.019                                        0.17                              0.110
                           0.029           0.064          10/18            1/2          0.016            0.41%           -0.025           -0.95%
J&B 1.75 SCOTCH
                           0.007           0.023                                        0.12                              0.100
JOHNNY WALKER              0.03            0.067           8/18            1/2          0.556          11.98%             0.193          10.00%
BLACK .75L SCOTCH          0.005           0.02                                         0.08                              0.040
JOHNNY WALKER RED          0.034           0.088           4/18            1/2         -0.046           -1.07%           -0.092           -3.82%
.75 SCOTCH                 0.005           0.022                                        0.16                              0.100
JOHNNY WALKER RED          0.029           0.065           8/18            1/2         -0.157           -3.86%           -0.144           -4.86%
1.75 SCOTCH                0.006           0.017                                        0.15                              0.130
                           0.029           0.062           8/18            1/2          0.380          42.58%             0.352          45.13%
SCORESBY .75 SCOTCH
                           0.005           0.014                                        0.02                              0.020
                           0.027           0.055           9/18            1/2         -1.555          -15.47%           -2.285          -15.57%
SCORESBY 1.75 SCOTCH
                           0.006           0.016                                        0.39                              0.640
                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                Table 9: Estimated Price and Quantity Effects of the Guinness/Grand Metropolitan Merger

                                                                        Relative Rank of Brand's Price
                                               Price Effects                                       2                      Revenue Share                            Quantity Share
                                                                         Increase to Control Group

                                                                        Other Brands:  Private Label:                     Percentage                        Percentage
                                                                        Rank/Number of Rank/Number of Change in Market Change in Market Change in Market Change in Market
Product                           Other Brands          Private Label   Products       Products            Share             Share           Share             Share
                                       -0.038                 -0.026          15/20            2/2         -0.191          -70.74%           -0.165          -74.55%
GILBEYS VODKA .75L
                                        0.02                   0.032                                        0.02                              0.020
                                       -0.011                  0.032           5/20            1/2         -0.421          -20.79%           -0.425          -18.01%
GILBEYS VODKA 1.75L
                                        0.013                  0.017                                        0.19                              0.250
GORDON CITRUS                           -0.02                  0.016          11/20            1/2         -0.002           -0.67%            0.011            4.58%
VODKA .75L                              0.012                  0.02                                         0.02                              0.020
GORDON CITRUS                          -0.034                 -0.015          20/20            2/2          0.149          28.46%             0.225          37.97%
VODKA 1.75L                             0.012                  0.01                                         0.04                              0.050
GORDON REGULAR                         -0.002                  0.046           4/20            1/2          0.488          22.59%             0.431          24.46%
VODKA .75L                              0.009                  0.007                                        0.09                              0.090
GORDON REGULAR                         -0.027                  0.001          17/20            2/2          0.926          10.12%             1.553          14.45%
VODKA 1.75L                             0.011                  0.007                                        0.31                              0.400
                                       -0.008                  0.035           9/20            1/2          0.141          15.33%             0.167          20.24%
POPOV VODKA .75L
                                        0.009                  0.011                                        0.02                              0.020
                                       -0.017                  0.02            9/20            1/2         -1.285          -22.61%           -1.489          -22.16%
POPOV VODKA 1.75L
                                        0.01                   0.008                                        0.28                              0.380
SMIRNOFF CITRUS                         0.003                  0.054           3/20            1/2          0.109          21.80%             0.069          21.25%
VODKA .75L                              0.011                  0.007                                        0.02                              0.020
SMIRNOFF CITRUS                        -0.036                 -0.018          18/20            2/2          0.187          28.33%             0.212          38.36%
VODKA 1.75L                             0.013                  0.006                                        0.04                              0.040
SMIRNOFF REGULAR                       -0.006                  0.032           5/20            1/2         -0.060           -1.13%           -0.033           -0.95%
VODKA .75L                              0.01                   0.011                                        0.06                              0.040
SMIRNOFF REGULAR                        -0.03                 -0.004          15/20            2/2          1.081            7.91%            1.461          12.67%
VODKA 1.75L                             0.011                  0.006                                        0.23                              0.250
TANQUERAY VODKA                        -0.011                  0.03            8/20            1/2          0.044            5.24%            0.025            7.81%
.75L                                    0.014                  0.017                                        0.03                              0.010
1
    Estimated coefficient in bold, standard errors in regular font.
2
Ranked in descending order, e.g., 8/12 implies that 7 products in the control group had larger estimated price increases and 4 products had smaller price increases.
Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 5 regions in IRI's drug store channel data.
Monthly data 11/1996 - 2/1999 excluding 09/1997 – 02/1998.
An observation is a product-city month. The number of observations in each regression varies significantly by specification and the size of the affected product's control group. The regressions
with the branded (private label) control group range between roughly 1,700 and 3,000 (300 and 600) observations.
                             Table 10: Summary of Estimated Price Effects for the Merger of Grand Metropolitan and Guinness 1
                                                      Product Type                                           Event Window                                            Control Group

                                                                                   More Data Post-
                                                                                 Acquisition, Drop Data Symmetric Event Window,      Symmetric Event
                                                                                  Within 3 Months of    Drop Data Within 3 Months    Window, Drop No      Branded Control     Private Label
                                              Gin        Scotch       Vodka             Merger                  of Merger                 Data                Group           Control Group
Percent of positive price changes           43.75%      100.00%       58.97%            80.36%                   53.57%                   60.71%              44.05%             85.71%
Percent of positive price changes
t-statistic>2                               25.00%      100.00%       29.49%            55.36%                   39.29%                   48.26%              28.57%             63.10%
Frequency Distribution of Price Changes:
                   Δp<-.05                      0           0            0                 0                         0                       0                   0                    0
              -0.05 <Δp < -0.01                23           0           18                 8                        20                      13                  37                    4
              -0.01 <Δ p < 0.01                 9           0           27                10                         9                      17                  20                   16
               0.01 <Δp < 0.05                 11          22           28                24                        18                      19                  27                   34
                  Δp > 0.05                     5          20            5                14                         9                       7                   0                   30
Number of Estimated Price Effects              48          42           78                56                        56                      56                  84                   84



1
 A total of 168 regressions were estimated: 3 definitions of the event window, 2 control groups, 28 products owned by the merging firms (3*2*28=168). Columns 2, 3, and 4 describe the results
separately for gins, scotches, and vodkas (pooling the results from both control groups and all event windows), columns 5, 6, and 7 describe the changes that result from using different event
windows (pooling the results from both control groups), columns 8 and 9 describe the changes that result from using a different control group (pooling the results from all event windows).
                              Table 11: Estimated Price and Quantity Effects of Aurora's Purchase of Kraft's Syrup Business 1


                                                                               Relative Rank of Brand's Price
                                                 Price Effects                                                                     Revenue Share                           Quantity Share
                                                                                Increase to Control Group2

                                                                              Other Brands:         Private Label:                             Percentage                           Percentage
                                                                            Rank/Number of Rank/Number of                  Change in            Change in           Change in        Change in
Product                               Other Brands         Private Label         Products              Products          Market Share         Market Share Market Share            Market Share
LOG CABIN                                0.028                 0.020              17/62                  2/4                0.08                      0.40%   -0.22                  -1.20%
                                         0.008                 0.016                                                        0.74                              0.77
MRS BUTTERWORTH                          -0.007                -0.015              36/62                  3/4               -0.09                    -0.57%   0.26                     1.89%
                                         0.006                 0.015                                                        0.53                              0.53


1
    Estimated coefficient in bold, standard errors in regular font.
2
    Ranked in descending order, e.g., 8/12 implies that 7 products in the control group had larger estimated price increases and 4 products had smaller price increases.

Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data.
Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.
Monthly data from 11/1996 - 4/1998 excluding 4/1997 – 10/1997.
An observation is a product-city-month. The number of observations varies by specification, however, the regressions using the branded (private label) control group have roughly 11,000 (1,500)
observations.
                             Table 12: Summary of Estimated Price Effects for Aurora's Purchase of Kraft's Breakfast Syrup Business 1
                                                            Price Measure                                               Event Window                                            Control Group


                                                                                             More Data Post-          Symmetric Event
                                                                                           Acquisition, Drop Data    Window, Drop Data
                                                            Weighted                        Within 3 Months of       Within 3 Months of      Symmetric Event         Branded Control      Private Label
                                           Average Revenue Average Price Stone Price Index        Merger                  Merger           Window, Drop No Data          Group            Control Group
Percent of positive price changes              66.67%           66.67%           66.67%              58.33%                66.67%                 75.00%                 61.11%               72.22%
Percent of positive price changes t>2          25.00%            8.33%            8.33%              25.00%                 8.33%                  8.33%                 27.78%                0.00%
Frequency Distribution of Price Changes:
Δp<-.05                                           0                0                0                   0                     0                       0                     0                    0
-0.05 <Δ p < -0.01                                3                1                2                   4                     1                       1                     1                    5
-0.01 <Δp < 0.01                                  5                7                8                   4                     6                      10                    11                    9
0.01 <Δp < 0.05                                   3                4                2                   3                     5                       1                     5                    4
Δp > 0.05                                         1                0                0                   1                     0                       0                     1                    0
Number of Estimated Price Effects                12               12               12                  12                    12                      12                    18                   18


1
  A total of 36 regressions were estimated: 3 definitions of the event window, 2 control groups, 3 measures of price and 2 products owned by the merging firms (3*2*3*2=36). Columns 2, 3, and 4
describe the changes that result from using different measures of price (pooling the results from both control groups and all event windows), columns 5, 6, and 7 describe the changes that result from using
different event windows (pooling the results from both control groups and measures of price), columns 8 and 9 describe the changes that result from using a different control group (pooling the results
from all event windows and measures of price).
                                             Table 13: Aggregate Price Effects 1




                   Transaction                                           Estimated Price Effect2
                                                        Private Label Control Group    Branded Control Group
                                                                   0.032                          0.057
              General Mills/Chex3
                                                                   0.005                          0.005
                                                                   0.052                          0.014
            Pennzoil/Quaker State4
                                                                   0.013                          0.011
                                                                   0.070                          0.023
               P&G/Tambrands5
                                                                   0.008                          0.007
                                                                   0.004                          0.012
          Aurora Foods/Log Cabin6
                                                                   0.011                          0.005
                                                                   0.027                         -0.010
Guinness/Grand Metropolitan7: Overall
                                                                   0.003                          0.003
Guinness/Grand Metropolitan:
                                                                        0.022                                    -0.021
                        Gin
                                                                        0.005                                     0.003
                                                                        0.071                                     0.031
                      Scotch
                                                                        0.006                                     0.002
                                                                        0.011                                    -0.021
                       Vodka
                                                                        0.003                                     0.005

1
  Estimated coefficient in bold, standard errors in regular font. The calculation of standard errors assumes negligible covariances
among the component estimators.
2
  Aggregate Price Effects are calculated as the (revenue) weighted average of the individual price effects from our preferred
specification (see Tables 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 for coefficient estimates)
3
 Estimated price effects calculated using monthly price data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data (7/1995 - 8/1998 excluding
11/1996 – 04/1997).
4
 Estimated price effects calculated using monthly price data from 10 regions in IRI's mass merchandiser data (1/1997 - 12/2000
excluding 10/1998 – 03/1999).
5
 Estimated price effects calculated using monthly price data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data (11/1996 - 4/1998 excluding
4/1997 – 10/1997).
6
 Estimated price effects calculated using monthly price data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data (11/1996 - 4/1998 excluding
4/1997 – 10/1997).
7
  Estimated price effects calculated using monthly price data from 5 regions in IRI's drug store channel data (11/1996 - 2/1999
excluding 09/1997 – 02/1998).
                                                                     Appendix Table 1: Market Shares

           Feminine Protection Market                                                    Cereal Market                                                Pancake Syrup Market
by Manufacturer:                                                     by Manufacturer:                                                 by Brand:
                                          Dollar      Volume                                              Dollar         Volume                                                     Volume
           Manufacturer                   Share        Share                   Manufacturer               Share          Share                Brand             Dollar Share         Share
P&G                                          25%           24%       General Mills                            28%             25%
Kimberly Clark                               24%            28%      Kellogg USA                              29%             27%     Aunt Jemima                           21%           19%
Tambrands                                    19%           15%       Post                                     19%             19%     Log Cabin                             19%           18%
J&J                                          14%            15%      Quaker                                   10%             10%     Private Label                         19%           28%
Playtex                                        9%            6%      Ralston/Chex                              4%                4%   Mrs. Butterworth                      15%           14%
Other                                          9%           12%      Storebrands                               7%             10%     Hungry Jack                              4%         4%
                                                                     Other                                     4%                5%   Other                                 22%           18%

Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data                    Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data                Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.                     Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.                 Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.
10/27/96 - 7/20/97.                                                  7/2/1995 - 1/26/97.                                              10/27/96 - 6/29/97.




                    Liquor Market                                                     Motor Oil Market
Scotch Whiskey, Gin, and Vodka - by Owner:                           Conventional Motor Oil Market by Brand:

                                           Dollar      Volume                                              Dollar
                Owner                      Share        Share                       Brand                  Share     Volume Share

Guinness                                      24%           21%      Pennzoil                                 29%              27%
Grand Metropolitan                            22%           23%      Castrol                                   18%             16%
American Brands, USA                           9%            11%     Mobil                                     14%             17%
Seagram Company Ltd, Canada                    7%               8%   Valvoline                                 13%             12%
Grant Wm & Sons Ltd, UK                        5%               4%   Quaker State                               9%               8%
Other                                         33%            34%     Havoline                                   7%               8%
                                                                     Other                                     10%             12%
Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data                    Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 5 regions in IRI's drug store channel data. 10/27/96 -     Data from 10 regions in IRI's mass merchandiser channel data.
12/14/97.                                                            1/05/97 - 12/27/98.
                            Appendix Table 2: Regions in IRI Datasets

MASS MERCHANDISER AND
DRUGSTORE MARKETS (10)                   FOOD MARKETS(64)
1    BALTIMORE/WASHINGTON          1     ALBANY                    33   MISSISSIPPI
2    CHICAGO*                      2     ATLANTA                   34   NASHVILLE
3    DALLAS/FT WORTH               3     BALTIMORE/WASHINGTON DC   35   NEW ENGLAND(NORTH)
4    HOUSTON                       4     BIRMINGHAM/MONTGOMERY     36   NEW ORLEANS/MOBILE
5    LOS ANGELES*                  5     BOISE                     37   NEW YORK (NEW)
6    MINNEAPOLS/ST PAUL            6     BOSTON                    38   OKLAHOMA CITY
7    NEW YORK (NEW)                7     BUFFALO/ROCHESTER         39   OMAHA
8    PHOENIX/TUCSON*               8     CHARLOTTE                 40   ORLANDO
9    SAN DIEGO*                    9     CHICAGO                   41   PEORIA/SPRINGFIELD
10   SAN FRANCISCO/OAKLAND*        10    CINCINNATI/DAYTON         42   PHILADELPHIA
                                   11    CLEVELAND                 43   PHOENIX/TUCSON
                                   12    COLUMBUS                  44   PITTSBURGH
                                   13    DALLAS/FT. WORTH          45   PORTLAND
                                   14    DENVER                    46   PROVIDENCE
                                   15    DES MOINES                47   RALEIGH/GREENSBORO
                                   16    DETROIT                   48   RICHMOND/NORFOLK
                                   17    GRAND RAPIDS              49   ROANOKE
                                   18    GREEN BAY                 50   SACRAMENTO
                                   19    HARRISBURG/SCRANTON       51   SALT LAKE CITY
                                   20    HARTFORD/SPRINGFIELD      52   SAN ANTONIO/CORPUS CHR
                                   21    HOUSTON                   53   SAN DIEGO
                                   22    INDIANAPOLIS              54   SAN FRANCISCO/OAKLAND
                                   23    JACKSONVILLE              55   SEATTLE/TACOMA
                                   24    KANSAS CITY               56   SOUTH CAROLINA
                                   25    KNOXVILLE                 57   SPOKANE
                                   26    LITTLE ROCK               58   ST. LOUIS
                                   27    LOS ANGELES               59   SYRACUSE
                                   28    LOUISVILLE                60   TAMPA/ST PETERSBURG
                                   29    MEMPHIS                   61   TOLEDO
                                   30    MIAMI/FT LAUDERDALE       62   TULSA
                                   31    MILWAUKEE                 63   WEST TEXAS/NEW MEXICO
                                   32    MINNEAPOLIS/ST PAUL       64   WICHITA



*Cities Included in the Guinness/Grand Metropolitan Merger Data
Appendix Table 3: Estimated Price Effects for Pennzoil/Quaker State Merger
No Control Group

                                       MERGE
BRAND                                  COEFFICIENT              ST ERROR      T STAT
PENNZOIL                               0.025                    0.019         1.344
QUAKER STATE                           0.061                    0.016         3.922
QUAKER STATE DELUXE                    0.038                    0.021         1.831


Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 10 regions in IRI's mass merchandiser channel data.
Monthly data from 1/1997 - 1/2001 excluding 10/1998 – 03/1999




Appendix Table 4: Estimated Price Effects for Proctor and Gamble/Tambrands State Merger
No Control Group


                                       MERGE
NAME                                   COEFFICIENT              ST ERROR      T STAT
ALWAYS LINER                           0.052                    0.003         17.179
ALWAYS PAD                             0.053                    0.003         17.547
TAMPAX TAMPON                          0.045                    0.004         11.293


Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.
Monthly 11/1996 - 4/1998 excluding 4/1997 – 10/1997




Appendix Table 5: Estimated Price Effects for General Mills Purchase of Ralcorp's Chex Cereals
No Control Group


                                       MERGE
BRAND                                  COEFFICIENT              ST ERROR      T STAT
CHEERIOS                               0.051                    0.007         7.700
CHEERIOS APPLE CINN                    0.060                    0.009         7.017
CHEERIOS HONEY NUT                     0.024                    0.005         4.428
CHEERIOS MULTI-GRAIN                   0.037                    0.006         6.555
CORN CHEX                              0.014                    0.010         1.494
MULTI-BRAN CHEX                        0.012                    0.008         1.412
RICE CHEX                              0.015                    0.009         1.682
WHEAT CHEX                             0.017                    0.010         1.742
WHEATIES                               0.034                    0.009         3.872
WHEATIES CRSP 'N RSN                   0.017                    0.011         1.490
WHEATIES HONEY FROSTED                 0.035                    0.008         4.435


Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.
Monthly data from 7/1995 - 8/1998 excluding 11/1996 – 04/1997
Appendix Table 6: Estimated Price Effects for Guinness/Grand Metropolitan Merger
No Control Group

                                                                                              MERGE
CATEGORY                       BRAND                    SUB-BRAND                    LITERS   COEFFICIENT   ST ERROR   T STAT
GIN                            BOOTHS                   REGULAR                      1.75     0.030         0.008      3.819
GIN                            GILBEYS                  REGULAR                      0.75     0.052         0.008      6.487
GIN                            GILBEYS                  REGULAR                      1.75     0.003         0.005      0.493
GIN                            GORDONS                  REGULAR                      0.75     0.007         0.005      1.544
GIN                            GORDONS                  REGULAR                      1.75     0.016         0.005      3.191
GIN                            POPOV                    REGULAR                      1.75     0.016         0.028      0.563
GIN                            TANQUERAY                REGULAR                      0.75     0.042         0.006      6.667
GIN                            TANQUERAY                REGULAR                      1.75     0.075         0.003      25.125
SCOTCH WHISKY                  J&B                      J & B RARE                   0.75     0.079         0.008      10.017
SCOTCH WHISKY                  J&B                      J & B RARE                   1.75     0.045         0.011      4.025
SCOTCH WHISKY                  JOHNNIE WALKER           JOHNNIE WALKER BLACK LABEL   0.75     0.053         0.010      5.530
SCOTCH WHISKY                  JOHNNIE WALKER           JOHNNIE WALKER RED LABEL     0.75     0.063         0.007      9.044
SCOTCH WHISKY                  JOHNNIE WALKER           JOHNNIE WALKER RED LABEL     1.75     0.047         0.008      6.232
SCOTCH WHISKY                  SCORESBY                 SCORESBY                     0.75     0.047         0.006      8.411
SCOTCH WHISKY                  SCORESBY                 SCORESBY                     1.75     0.037         0.008      4.889
VODKA                          GILBEYS                  REGULAR                      0.75     -0.005        0.017      -0.287
VODKA                          GILBEYS                  REGULAR                      1.75     0.032         0.014      2.334
VODKA                          GORDONS                  CITRUS                       0.75     0.011         0.017      0.628
VODKA                          GORDONS                  REGULAR                      0.75     0.047         0.006      7.384
VODKA                          GORDONS                  CITRUS                       1.75     -0.010        0.008      -1.234
VODKA                          GORDONS                  REGULAR                      1.75     0.006         0.006      1.065
VODKA                          POPOV                    REGULAR                      0.75     0.038         0.010      3.840
VODKA                          POPOV                    REGULAR                      1.75     0.025         0.007      3.485
VODKA                          SMIRNOFF                 CITRUS                       0.75     0.063         0.006      10.025
VODKA                          SMIRNOFF                 REGULAR                      0.75     0.040         0.011      3.525
VODKA                          SMIRNOFF                 CITRUS                       1.75     -0.013        0.004      -3.335
VODKA                          SMIRNOFF                 REGULAR                      1.75     0.002         0.004      0.351
VODKA                          TANQUERAY                REGULAR                      0.75     0.029         0.010      2.957


Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 5 regions in IRI's drug store channel data.
Monthly data 11/1996 - 2/1999 excluding 09/1997 – 02/1998




Appendix Table 7: Estimated Price Effects for Aurora Foods Purchase of Log Cabin
No Control Group

                               MERGE
BRAND                          COEFFICIENT              ST ERROR                     T STAT
LOG CABIN                      0.027                    0.007                        3.689
MRS BUTTERWORTH                -0.007                   0.006                        -1.179


Based in part on Information Resources, Inc. data
Data from 64 regions in IRI's food channel data.
11/1996 - 4/1998 excluding 4/1997 – 10/1997
