NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLUTION OF A LEGAL RULE
Anthony Niblett
Richard Posner
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 13856
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13856

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2008

We are grateful to Ryan Bubb, Charles Cameron, John Coates, Charles Fried, Nicola Gennaioli, Edward
Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Jack Goldsmith, Oliver Hart, Richard Holden, Louis Kaplow, Lawrence
Katz, Daryl Levinson, Thomas Miles, Giacomo Ponzetto, Eric Posner, Joshua Schwartzstein, Jesse
Shapiro, Steven Shavell. Holger Spamann, Matthew Stephenson, and Adrian Vermeule for comments,
and Carlos Berdejo, Justin Ellis, Nevin Gewertz, and Sean Tu for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Anthony Niblett, Richard Posner, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution of a Legal Rule
Anthony Niblett, Richard Posner, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 13856
March 2008
JEL No. K13,K41
ABSTRACT
The efficiency of common law rules is central to achieving efficient resource allocation in a market
economy. While many theories suggest reasons why judge-made law should tend toward efficient
rules, the question whether the common law actually does converge in commercial areas has remained
empirically untested. We create a dataset of 465 state-court appellate decisions involving the application
of the Economic Loss Rule in construction disputes and track the evolution of law in this area from
1970 to 2005. We find that over this period the law did not converge to any stable resting point and
evolved differently in different states. We find that legal evolution is influenced by plaintiffs' claims,
the relative economic power of the parties, and nonbinding federal precedent.

Anthony Niblett
Harvard University
niblett@fas.harvard.edu
Richard Posner
United States Court of Appeals
Richard_Posner@ca7.uscourts.gov

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction.
We investigate the evolution of a particular common law rule pertaining to the
construction industry, as developed by state appellate courts in the United States over the
last 35 or so years. Although the topic might at first glance appear esoteric, the evolution
and efficiency of legal rules are central to understanding any market economy. The
simplest way to see this is by going back to the Coase Theorem (Coase 1960). The
Theorem holds that, as long as initial property rights are well defined and private parties
whose behavior affects each other can freely negotiate and contract over their conduct,
they will agree to act efficiently. Such efficient behavior maximizes total surplus, which
parties can agree to divide via contract among themselves.
But what if the parties cannot negotiate and contract (perhaps because of high
transaction costs), or have failed to do so? In those cases, efficient resource allocation
requires that underlying legal rules, such as the rules of liability, provide parties with
incentives to act efficiently. Such rules would steer parties to outcomes that mimic those
that the market would produce if transaction costs were low. In a common law system,
which prevails in most English-speaking nations, including the United States, legal rules
in a number of important fields, including torts, are created mainly by appellate judges as
a byproduct of deciding cases. Such rules are modified, and sometimes even reversed, in
subsequent decisions, so they evolve over time. If the rules are predictable and efficient,
but not otherwise, parties will act in an efficient manner even without contracting. For
this reason, the efficiency of common law rules is necessary for attaining efficient
resource allocation in a market economy.

2

Scholars in law and economics have sought to understand why common law rules
might be efficient. Posner (1973) recognized the importance of this question, and argued
that appellate judges have personal incentives to maximize efficiency. Rubin (1977) and
Priest (1977) showed that because inefficient legal rules lead to inefficient economic
outcomes, they are more likely to be challenged in court. Such litigation is likely to drive
them out in favor of efficient rules, even when judges do not pursue efficiency. 1
These arguments for efficiency do not come to grips with the legal realist and
critical legal studies criticism that judges have policy preferences other than social
welfare or disagree about what serves social welfare. Indeed, a considerable empirical
literature concludes that judges pursue political objectives (see, e.g., George and Epstein
(1992), Brenner and Spaeth (1995), Songer and Lindquist (1996), Hansford and Spriggs
(2006), and Landes and Posner (2007)). When judges follow personal policy preferences,
the case for the efficiency of common law is harder to make. Nevertheless, one can still
argue, in the spirit of Cardozo (1921), that the law evolves toward better rules through
sequential decisions of judges with diverse preferences (see also: Holmes (1897), Frank
(1930), Llewellyn (1951), Stone (1985), and Posner (2005)). 2
Yet much of the discussion of the efficiency of legal rules remains theoretical,
with no empirical studies of how the law evolves in commercial fields that matter for the
efficiency of resource allocation. That is the gap we try to fill. The doctrine we have
chosen for our study is an important common law tort doctrine known as the “economic

1

See also: Cooter, Kornhauser, and Lane (1979).
Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007) show, for example, that because appellate courts tend to distinguish prior
cases from current ones on the basis of information generated by the latter, rather than overruling the prior
cases and thus losing the knowledge generated by them, sequential decision making leads to the refinement
of the law over time, and thereby improves its efficiency on average even when full efficiency is not
attained.
2

3

loss rule” (ELR). We study the application of the ELR to construction disputes. We ask
whether the courts have adhered to the ELR (with some standard exceptions that might be
necessary to make the rule efficient) in the construction industry, and, if not, how the
pattern of adherence and non-adherence has evolved.
Stated at its broadest, the ELR holds that one cannot sue in tort for “economic
loss” unless that loss is accompanied by personal injury or property damage. (“Economic
loss” thus just means a loss that is not a personal injury or property damage.) So if the
builder of your house installs windows negligently with the result that they do not keep
out the rain, you cannot sue the builder in tort for the cost of re-installing the windows
carefully, because your loss is purely economic. 3 In contrast, if the water that seeps into
the house because of the badly installed windows damages your furniture (i.e., causes
damage to other property), then you can sue the builder in tort.
The antecedents of ELR are very old, but the doctrine was first clearly articulated
in the 1960s and applied to disputes in the construction industry in the 1970s. 4 Most
construction activity is governed by contract, so the vast majority of construction disputes
are contract disputes. There are two principal types of case in which tort claims and
therefore the ELR become relevant in construction. In the first, a plaintiff property owner
sues in tort for economic loss when contracts or warranties have expired or are
unavailable, or when he simply wants to make additional claims. In the second scenario,
a builder sues other builders, architects, engineers, inspectors, or manufacturers for
damages resulting from the defendant’s alleged negligence. We investigate how state
3

But you may be able to recover the cost of repairing or replacing the windows in a suit for breach of
warranty.
4
See Barrett (1989) for a discussion of early ELR cases in the construction industry. An important early
statement of the rule was Holmes’s opinion for the Supreme Court in Robins Dry Dock & Repair Co. v.
Flint, 275 U.S. 303, 308–310 (1927), an admiralty case.

4

appellate courts, whose decisions constitute the precedents that shape common law, have
dealt with such cases.
We have decided to examine the application of the ELR in the construction
industry for four reasons. First, construction disputes arise out of commercial relations,
and legal evolution in commercial law is our principal interest. Second, the industry is
mature. Any changes we observe in the ELR between its first clear articulation and the
present day cannot be attributed to changes in the underlying economic activity, but only
to changes internal to the legal system 5 . Third, there do not appear to be differences
across states in construction that might dictate different legal regimes. (This is important
because the common law of torts is for the most part a state prerogative. One state is not
required to decide construction cases the same way as any other state is—for that matter,
no state is required to make ELR a part of its law.) Thus both time-series and crosssectional analysis of ELR should be unaffected by variance in construction methods and
practices. Fourth, the doctrine is sufficiently recent to enable us to trace its evolution
under modern conditions, but old enough, and construction disputes common enough, to
have generated enough appellate cases 6 to allow an empirical analysis of its evolution.
Our sample contains 465 appellate decisions over 35 years: enough to reach some
tentative conclusions on how the law evolves but not so many as to make the project
unmanageable.
To understand how the application of the ELR has evolved in construction
disputes, we examine three principal issues. First, we consider both the bright-line ELR
5

In section V, we discuss some evidence that differences in state growth rates or state construction activity
cannot account for the differences in the application of the ELR that we document.
6
Cases at the trial level are rarely decided in judicial opinions that explain the factual and legal issues fully.
And the opinions of trial judges have only very limited impact on the evolution of legal doctrine, because
trial-court opinions are not considered precedents, i.e., authorities, binding courts in subsequent decisions.

5

and the ELR with generally recognized exceptions as candidates for the efficient rule, and
ask whether the law achieves or moves toward either of them. Second, we ask more
generally whether the law converges over time to any resting point. If it does not, in an
environment that is basically stationary, it becomes harder to argue that the law tends
toward efficiency – whatever one’s view of efficiency is. The absence of a resting point is
not conclusive evidence of inefficiency. Although the environment may be stable,
disputes may still involve different facts, creating a process of continuous judicial
learning that generates a continuous adjustment of the rules. If the law is efficient and the
facts do not change, however, some tendency toward stability can be expected as a legal
doctrine matures. Third, we look at the evolution of the law in different jurisdictions.
Under the assumption that legal rules in the field of construction should not efficiently
vary across jurisdictions, large differences in the patterns of legal evolution across
jurisdictions would argue against an inference of efficient judicial rulemaking.
To summarize the results, over our sample period the law did not converge to the
bright-line ELR, to the bright-line ELR with generally recognized exceptions (such as
fraud), or to any other resting point. While there is some tendency to convergence in the
first 25 years of the sample, in the last decade courts increasingly have limited the ELR in
construction by creating idiosyncratic exceptions to it – exceptions adopted in only a few
jurisdictions and rejected in others. Moreover, while adherence to the ELR in some form
grows in some states over time, in others it diminishes. These results are inconsistent with
simple theories of efficient judicial lawmaking.
It might seem that judicial disagreement about the proper scope of the ELR makes
the doctrine unrepresentative as an object of study of legal efficiency by marking it as

6

controversial. In cases governed by less controversial doctrines, courts would find it
easier to agree on what would be efficient outcomes, and so there would be faster and
more complete convergence. But no one doubts that efficiency has some domain in law;
the interesting question is whether courts can converge to stable rules in the numerous
areas of law where there is room for disagreement about efficiency or equity. The ELR is
one such area.
In the next section we spell out in more detail the ELR, its application to
construction, and the exceptions to the rule. Section III describes the data. In Section IV,
we present basic trends in state appellate courts regarding recovery for economic losses
in tort, as well as trends in the exceptions to these recoveries. We also discuss the
predictability of the law. Section V looks behind the trends to ask whether they reflect
changes in plaintiffs’ claims, the presence of explicit contracts, the economic power of
the parties, or leadership by the U.S. Supreme Court. We also check how much variation
there is across states. Section VI concludes.

II. The Economic Loss Rule in Construction Disputes.
Although the term “Economic Loss Rule” is recent, the idea of barring recovery
in tort for a pure economic loss is not. 7 The immediate antecedent of the application of
the ELR in construction cases was its application in products liability cases. In the 1960s,

7

An early U.S. case is Anthony v Slaid., 52 Mass. 290 (1846). The most famous case announcing the
fundamental principle is Ultramares Corp. v Touche, 255 N.Y. 170 (1931), in which Cardozo held that an
accountant owes no duty to third parties, such as lenders, to refrain from negligently causing economic
injury (from reliance on accountant’s reports). See also the Robins case, note 3 above, decided four years
before Ultramares. Feldthusen (2000) provides a detailed historical analysis of tort recovery for economic
losses in various common law countries. The arguments for limiting recovery in tort for economic loss are
analyzed in Bishop (1982), Rabin (1985), Goldberg (1994), and Posner (2006). The economic loss rule
exists in approximately its American form in England, but has much less purchase in Continental European
law. See Bussani and Palmer (2003).

7

when the California Supreme Court was making groundbreaking decisions on the liability
of manufacturers for defective products, the question of liability in cases in which the
loss was purely economic, with no accompanying personal injury or property damage
(other than to the defective product itself), was bound to arise, and did. In Seely v White
Motor Co., 8 the court ruled on this issue. The plaintiff had purchased a truck with
defective brakes. The truck overturned, but the plaintiff was not hurt (nor did the accident
damage any other property). He sued in contract as well as in tort to recover repair costs
and lost profits. The court held that strict liability was not available and the plaintiff was
limited to warranty remedies. 9 In later rulings, the ELR was extended to negligence (as
distinct from strict liability) claims in product cases.
The theoretical case for the efficiency of the ELR in situations similar to Seely,
including construction disputes, 10 rests on the possibility of anticipating problems
through contracts. Applied in situations of low transaction costs, the ELR encourages
parties to solve their potential problems through contracts. As Posner (1973) pointed out,
courts prefer parties to govern their relationships through privately negotiated contracts
rather than through tort suits whenever transaction costs are low enough, because the
parties know their business better than the judges can. He reiterated this logic as a judge
in upholding a bright-line ELR in Miller v United States Steel Corp.: “tort law is a
superfluous and inapt tool for resolving purely commercial disputes. We have a body of

8

63 Cal. 2d 9 (1965).
Seely actually recovered for both the repairs of the truck and lost profits under his warranty, but the case
is famous because the court established the legal rule with respect to recovery for economic loss in tort. We
discuss the role of contracts in the application of the ELR in Section V.
10
In cases such as Ultramares, a crucial efficiency justification for the ELR is that it protects parties
engaged in normal business conduct from unpredictable tort claims from strangers if an accident occurs. In
construction disputes, the plaintiffs and the defendants are not strangers, so this argument does not apply.
9

8

law designed for such disputes. It is called contract law.” 11 Thus the buyer of a house
who worries that it is poorly built should demand a warranty rather than repress his
concern and seek a remedy in tort should his fears materialize.
This logic behind the ELR implies denial of monetary recovery to some persons
harmed by wrongful acts, and this troubles some courts. An example is the 1965 New
Jersey case of Santor v. A & M Karagheusian, Inc., 12 in which a consumer recovered tort
damages from a carpet manufacturer when he discovered that the carpet had a defect. The
dealer from whom he had bought the carpet had gone out of business before the
consumer realized that the defect could not be fixed, so the dealer’s warranty was of no
value to him; and there was no manufacturer’s warranty. We do not know whether the
New Jersey court was moved by an alternative view of efficiency or by sympathy for the
plaintiff, but it rejected the ELR.
Even those convinced by the basic efficiency logic of the ELR recognize the need
for some exceptions. One generally recognized exception is fraud (the deliberate
infliction of an economic loss). Another is economic loss that accompanies a personal
injury or physical damage, as in a case in which a defectively installed window lets in
rain that damages furniture. These situations are difficult to anticipate and make
provision for by contract. In our empirical analysis, we keep track of such generally
recognized exceptions, bearing in mind that they may be efficient. The bright-line ELR is
one candidate for an efficient legal rule; the ELR with generally recognized exceptions is
another. And of course, some courts might not be persuaded by the economic logic of the
ELR, or might find the outcomes it yields repugnant, and in the latter case might create

11
12

902 F.2d 573, 574 (7th Cir. 1990).
44 N.J. 52 (1965).

9

“idiosyncratic” exceptions. Idiosyncratic exceptions are applied inconsistently across
jurisdictions and sometimes overruled within the same jurisdiction.
The application of the ELR to construction offers an interesting setting for
analyzing the behavior of appellate courts. We have a rule that is well-known and can be
justified using good efficiency arguments, but may leave some courts dissatisfied. We
have an environment unlikely to be changing over time and from state to state. We can
ask: what do courts do with this rule over time and space? Do their decisions converge
to, or at least move toward, an efficient resting point, which might be the bright-line ELR
or the ELR with generally recognized exceptions? Do their decisions converge over time
at all? Is the evolution of decisions in this area similar across states? Answers to these
questions would bear on the central questions regarding the efficiency of common law. In
the next few sections, we attempt to obtain these answers.

III. Data.
Overview of the Database
We gathered data on 465 state-court appellate decisions in tort cases involving the
ELR (see Appendix for details). We have read all these cases and extracted our variables
from the judicial decisions. We coded the state in which the decision was rendered, the
date of the decision, and the level of the court (whether the state’s highest court or a
lower appellate court). We did not include information about individual judges. We
recorded the type of plaintiff and defendant. We divide parties into one of five general
categories: (1) property owner; (2) builder (such as general contractors and
subcontractors); (3) architect, engineer, or inspector; (4) manufacturer; and (5) other (real

10

estate agent, insurance company, or bank). We noted whether the plaintiff and the
defendant were parties to a contract and whether any contractual claims were made by the
plaintiff (breach of contract, breach of express warranty, or breach of implied warranty),
as well as the outcomes of such claims on trial and on appeal. Our primary interest,
however, is in the resolution of tort claims.
Our data collection was motivated in part by the ambiguity of what should be
considered “efficient” in this context. One possible view is that efficiency calls for
applying the ELR with no exceptions at all (call this the strict view). Another is that
efficiency requires applying the ELR with the exceptions that are generally recognized by
most courts (call this the middle view). A third view holds that courts have vastly more
information about cases than the researchers do, and so the application of the ELR and its
exceptions is highly nuanced and contingent on specific facts of the case (call this the
broad view). Our data allow us to test both the strict and the middle view, but the broad
view is untestable by the methods that we use.
We use data about the specifics of tort claims, and whether they are allowed, to
create tortwin, which denotes the plaintiff’s winning at the appellate level. It is a dummy
variable that takes a value of “0” if the plaintiff’s claim in tort is barred by the ELR and
“1” if it is not. We use tortwin to test the strict view of the ELR, under which tortwin
should be “0” on average. A value of “1” for tortwin does not necessarily mean that the
plaintiff actually recovered damages. The appellate court may decide that recovery is not
barred by the ELR but remand the case to a lower court for considering other defenses,
assessing damages, or resolving other issues material to a final resolution of the dispute.

11

Coding the Reasons for Not Applying the ELR
We also document the reasons courts give when they do not apply the ELR. There
are relatively few such reasons, summarized in Table 3.1. In coding the data, we recorded
the primary exception to the ELR applied by the court. Other exceptions that the court
mentioned along the way (dicta rather than the holding of the case) we ignore.
Generally recognized
exceptions

•
•
•

Idiosyncratic
exceptions

•

•

Other property
Independent torts
Generally recognized independent duties
o Statutory independent duties
o Architect’s independent duty to a general contractor
under the Restatement on Torts
Idiosyncratic independent duties
o Builders owing an independent duty to property owners
o Builders owing an independent duty to other builders
o Architects owing an independent duty to property
owners
o Architects owing an independent duty to subcontractors
o Manufacturers owing a independent duty to property
owners
Other reasons
o The plaintiff does not have a contractual remedy
o The economic loss rule applies only to commercial
plaintiffs
o The economic loss rule does not apply to negligence
claims
o Sudden and calamitous event poses unreasonable risk
of injury

Table 3.1: Distinction between generally recognized exceptions and exceptions that are idiosyncratic.

We distinguish between two categories of reasons given by a court for its
decision: (1) generally recognized exceptions to ELR; and (2) idiosyncratic exceptions.
Under the middle view of efficiency, tortwin should be “0” other than when courts apply
generally recognized exceptions. There are three kinds of generally recognized
exceptions:
Independent Torts: Pure economic loss can occur as a result of either intentional
or unintentional wrongdoing. Intentional wrongdoing is a standard exception to the ELR.

12

For example, when the defendant fraudulently induces the plaintiff to sign a contract, the
ELR does not bar him from suing the defendant in tort for fraud.
Other Property: Plaintiffs are permitted to recover tort damages for personal
injury or property damage. In products liability cases, this includes damage caused by a
defective product to other property belonging to the plaintiff, as well as to property
belonging to a third party. Damage to the defective product itself is treated as economic
loss, but if other property of the plaintiff is damaged, the ELR does not preclude
recovery. State courts vary in their application of this exception. For simplicity, we
classify all applications of the other property exception as generally recognized.
Generally recognized Independent Duty: Courts have recognized exceptions in
which defendants owe a duty to the plaintiff that is independent of any contract. Many of
these exceptions are idiosyncratic, but two are generally recognized. First, as noted in
section 552 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, architects have an independent duty to
a general contractor. This seems an efficient way of avoiding making architects contract
separately with builders when both have already contracted with the owner. Second,
several states have enacted statutory duties in this area. For example, Florida has imposed
a number of statutory duties upon builders, architects, and inspectors. Section 553.84 of
Florida Statutes (1995) provides a cause of action for economic loss when a builder has
injured a property owner as a result of violating the building code or doing construction
without required permits. This duty operates independently of any other available ground
for a remedy.
The coding of exceptions as “generally recognized” does not necessarily mean
that all cases from all jurisdictions have accepted the exception. For example, we have

13

coded fraudulent inducement as a “generally recognized exception” even though in two
cases in our dataset fraudulent inducement was held not to constitute an exception. One
was overruled a year later; the other was based on a statutory interpretation. 13
Courts have carved out a number of additional exceptions, which we refer to as
idiosyncratic (see Table 3.1). These are exceptions that are peculiar to a few states or not
uniformly recognized even within the same state. The label “idiosyncratic” does not refer
to innovations made by courts in situations that have not previously arisen (as in
Gennaioli-Shleifer 2007). Rather, idiosyncratic exceptions are exceptions rejected by
other courts either explicitly or implicitly. For each case that we classify as having been
decided on the basis of an idiosyncratic exception, there is a factually very similar case
decided in favor of applying the ELR.
Most of the idiosyncratic exceptions are independent duties created by courts. A
few courts subject builders or architects to a tort duty to property owners or
subcontractors. For example, Colorado and Georgia hold that builders owe property
owners a tort duty independent of the ELR, but most courts do not. Sometimes an
idiosyncratic exception is inconsistent with other cases in the same state. In an early
Illinois case, an architect was held to owe an independent duty to purchasers of
residential property, but most cases from Illinois apply the ELR in such cases. 14

13

In Woodson v. Martin, 663 So. 2d 1327 (Fla. 1995), the Florida court held that any misrepresentations of
the defects in the house caused only economic losses. This was overruled in Wassall v. W H Payne 682 So.
2d 678 (Fla. 1996) and has been disapproved in a number of other Florida cases. In Flagg Energy
Development Corp. v General Motors Corp., 244 Conn. 126, 151–55 (1998), the Connecticut court
dismissed the claim for fraudulent misrepresentation, but while mentioning the ELR the court actually
based its decision on an interpretation of the Uniform Commercial Code. While the case has been
distinguished in Connecticut, it has not been overruled or disapproved.
14
Ferentchak v Frankfort, 121 Ill. App. 3d 599 (1984), was the early architect case. The similar cases from
Illinois that upheld the ELR are Illinois Housing Development Authority v. M-Z Construction Corp., 110
Ill. App. 3d 129 (1982); 2314 Lincoln Park West Condominium Association v. Mann, Gil, Ebel & Frazier,
Ltd., 136 Ill. 2d 302 (1990); and Martusciello v. JDS Homes, Inc, 361 Ill. App. 3d 568 (2005).

14

Some courts recognize an exception in cases in which the plaintiff has no
contractual remedy, or confine the ELR to commercial, but not to residential, property
owners. These “other reasons,” which seem motivated by sympathy for wronged
plaintiffs seemingly barred by the ELR, are rejected by other courts and we code them as
idiosyncratic exceptions.

Brief Summary of the Data
Cases are not distributed uniformly across the years 1970-2005 covered by the
dataset. In some years we have no observations, while the maximum number of cases in
one year is 28 (in 1998 and 2005). Figure 3.1 plots the number of cases each year, and

0

Number of cases decided
10
20

30

reveals a clear upward trend in appeals cases in which ELR is mentioned.

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Figure 3.1: Number of cases in each year in our dataset.

The growth in the number of ELR cases is affected by our search strategy in
constructing the dataset. Many construction cases from the 1970s and 1980s do not refer
to the ELR explicitly and hence are not included. The result is to bias the plaintiffs’

15

success rate downward in the early years of our sample. A plaintiff is more likely to have
recovered economic damages in a case in which the ELR is not mentioned than in one in
which it was.
In the majority of our cases, a plaintiff property owner is suing a builder,
architect, engineer, inspector, or manufacturer. In 331 cases (71.18%), the plaintiff is a
property owner. Builders are the only other significant plaintiff category (involved in
25.81% of the cases). The most frequent defendants are builders (involved in 34.84% of
all cases), followed by manufacturers (27.10%), architects, engineers, and inspectors
(20.86%), and property owners (14.62%). Table 3.2 summarizes these data.

PLAINTIFF

Property
Owner
Builder
Architect,
Engineer,
Inspector
Manufacturer

DEFENDANT
Property Builder
Architect, Manufacturer Other
Total
Owner
Engineer,
Inspector
48
132
44
98
9
331
(71.18%)
18
21
53
25
3
120
(25.81%)
1
7
0
1
0
9
(1.94%)
1

1

0

2

0

Other

0

1

0

0

0

Total

68
(14.62%)

162
(34.84%)

97
(20.86%)

126
(27.10%)

12
(2.58%)

4
(0.86%)
1
(0.22%)
465

Table 3.2 Breakdown of the parties to the 465 disputes.

Table 3.3 summarizes the outcomes in our 465 cases. Plaintiffs won 170 cases
(36.56%). The most frequent exceptions to the ELR found in our sample are other
property (25.88% of all cases that plaintiffs win); idiosyncratic independent duties
(22.94%); and independent torts (21.76%). Courts invoke generally recognized

16

exceptions to the ELR in 113 of the 170 tortwin cases (66.47%) and idiosyncratic
exceptions in the remaining 57 cases (33.53%).
The data on means begin to tell the story of how the ELR has been applied in the
construction industry. More than 63% of the cases apply the ELR and deny plaintiffs
recovery in tort. In nearly 25% of the cases the decision is for the plaintiff based on a
generally recognized exception to the ELR. Only about 12% of the cases apply
idiosyncratic exceptions. On average, then, the ELR plus its generally recognized
exceptions is widely, but not universally, accepted by state appellate courts. The question
arises whether, over time, this acceptance has grown, suggesting convergence. If it has,
what kinds of decision have withered away? If acceptance has not grown, what kinds of
exception are responsible? We address these questions in the following sections.
Observations
Generally recognized exceptions
Other property
Independent torts
Generally recognized independent duties
Total Generally recognized exceptions
Idiosyncratic exceptions
Idiosyncratic independent duties
Other reasons
Total Idiosyncratic exceptions
Total tortwin

44
39
32
113
39
18
57
170

Table 3.3: Outcomes of cases and frequency of exceptions

IV.

Aggregate Outcomes.
Figure 4.1 presents the fraction of cases each year in which plaintiffs won

(tortwin). It reveals a U-shaped pattern: tortwin declines steadily over the first 20 years of
the data but rises in the last decade. The frequency with which claims are rejected based
on the ELR rises in the 1970s and 1980s but falls after the mid-1990s.
17

There are various ways to establish the U shape more formally. One strategy is to
use Locally Weighted Least Squares (Lowess) to fit the curve (Figure 4.2). We fit the
Lowess curve over the 465 binary observations of tortwin. The trend curve is an amalgam
of 465 linear regressions around each local point using a localized subset of the data. This

0

.2

% of cases
.4
.6

.8

1

smoothes the data and generates a trend curve.15

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Figure 4.1: Percentage of plaintiff tort victories each year

The Lowess curve suggests that outcomes in our sample indeed follow a Ushaped curve over time, with the bottom tortwin rate of about 30% reached in the early
1990s. Thus, there has never been convergence on what we call the “strict” view of
ELR—the view that it always bars the recovery of economic loss in tort.
One can obtain the same U shape with more restrictive models. A simple
quadratic model fitting case outcomes over time and time2 yields strongly significant
15

The smoothing parameter (referred to as bandwidth) is the proportion of all observations that each
regression uses. The smaller the bandwidth, the coarser the trend line appears, since individual regressions
are more localized. The default bandwidth for Lowess curves in STATA is 0.8 (meaning that each of the 465
regressions uses 372 observations), which we use throughout. The picture is similar with a bandwidth of
0.25, where each regression uses 116 observations.

18

results. The coefficient on time is -3.7966 with a t-statistic of -2.70. The coefficient on
time2 is 0.0009 with a t-statistic of 2.70. Both are significant at the 1% level. The
quadratic best fit suggests that the turning point came in 1993.
We can also estimate linear regressions dividing the sample at various points in
the late-1980s or early-1990s. These specifications yield a negative and statistically
significant trend in tortwin in the earlier sub-sample and a positive and statistically
significant trend in the later one (see Figure 4.3). This pattern, too, is inconsistent with

0

.2

% of cases
.4
.6

.8

1

either the average acceptance of, or even convergence to, the strict view of ELR.

1970

1980
Tortw in trend

1990
Year

2000

2010

% tortw in cases in a year

Figure 4.2: Trend of plaintiff victories in tort over time using Lowess estimation with a bandwidth of 0.8

19

.8
% of cases
.4
.6
.2
1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Line of best fit: tortw in 1970-1987
Line of best fit: tortw in 1988-2005
Trend tortw in

Figure 4.3: Graph illustrating the significance of the downward trend in tortwin from 1970 to 1987 (t = 1.98) and the upward trend from 1988 to 2005 (t = 2.05). The black trend line is the same lowess curve
from Figure 4.2.

Figure 4.4 decomposes tortwin as a percentage of total cases into generally
recognized and idiosyncratic exceptions. Both trend down in the 1970s and 1980s, except
that the number of cases decided on the basis of generally recognized exceptions bottom
out earlier, in the mid-1980s, at about 20% of all cases, and then begin rising gently (and
not statistically significantly) in the mid 1990s to about 30% of all cases, with a decline at
the end of the sample period back to 20%. Idiosyncratic exceptions fall until the mid1990s, to about 10% of all cases – a remarkable testament to apparent convergence to the
ELR with generally recognized exceptions – except that they then rise back to around
20% toward the end of the sample period. Both the downward trend before the mid-1990s
and subsequent upward trend in idiosyncratic exceptions are significant (Figure 4.5).

20

.5
.4
% of cases
.3
.2
.1
1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Generally recognized exceptions
Idiosyncratic exceptions

0

.1

% of cases
.2

.3

Figure 4.4: Percentage of all cases using generally recognized exceptions (blue) and idiosyncratic
exceptions (red).

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Line of best fit, idiosyncratic exceptions: 1970-1994
Line of best fit, idiosyncratic exceptions: 1995-2005
Trend of idiosyncratic exceptions

Figure 4.5: Graph demonstrating the significance of the downturn in idiosyncratic exceptions over the
period 1970-1993 (t = -2.02), and the significance of the upturn in over the period 1994-2005 (t = 1.83).
The black Lowess curve is the same trend as the red line illustrated in Figure 4.4.

The real story in these data seems to be the growth of idiosyncratic exceptions,
both as a percentage of all cases and as a percentage of tortwin (see Figure 4.6), in the

21

last decade of the sample. We do not see convergence to ELR with generally recognized
exceptions, and thus reject the middle version of the ELR’s efficiency as well. Had this
paper been written a decade ago, we would have concluded that the legal rule has
converged to nearly universal acceptance of the ELR with generally recognized
exceptions. The substantial and statistically significant growth in cases decided plaintiffs’
favor by application of the idiosyncratic exceptions in the last decade of the sample

0

.2

% of cases
.4
.6

.8

1

precludes such a conclusion today.

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Trend: % of exceptions that are idiosyncratic
% of exceptions that are idiosyncratic in each year

Figure 4.6: Percentage of all tortwin cases that use idiosyncratic exceptions.

To study these trends in more detail, we next break up the outcome data to
determine which exceptions the courts use to allow the plaintiff to avoid the ELR. Figure
4.7 shows the trend of the courts’ use of each of the exceptions over time. The decline in
plaintiff victories throughout the 1970s and 1980s comes mainly from a decrease in the
number of cases in which plaintiffs are allowed to claim independent tort duties to them.
Both cases involving generally recognized independent duties and cases involving

22

idiosyncratic independent duties fall significantly over this period. 16 There is also a
significant decline in cases involving independent torts until the mid-1990s. 17
The increase in plaintiff victories from the mid-1990s onwards is harder to break
down. While all the exceptions trend upwards, particularly the other property,
independent torts, and idiosyncratic independent duty exceptions, none of them

0

.05

% of cases
.1
.15

.2

.25

individually increases significantly.

1970

1980

1990
Year

Independent Torts
Generally Recognized Duty
Other Reasons

2000

2010

Other Property
Idiosyncratic Duty

Figure 4.7: The breakdown of the incidence of exceptions over time.

Another way to look at the patterns is by focusing on dissents in judicial opinions;
55 of our 465 cases include at least one dissenting opinion. Overall there is no difference
between the frequency of dissents in cases in which the ELR is upheld and in the cases in
which an exception is made. But in cases in which the court relies on an exception that is
idiosyncratic, the incidence of dissent is, as one would expect, significantly higher, as

16

For the sub-sample 1970 to 1992, generally recognized independent duties fall significantly: t = -2.69
(significant at 1% level). For the sub-sample 1970 to 1998, idiosyncratic independent duties fall
significantly: t = -2.12 (significant at 5% level).
17
Over the sub-sample 1970 to 1995, independent torts fall significantly: t = -2.27 (significant at 5% level).

23

“idiosyncratic” implies that the law is unsettled. Of the 113 cases in which generally
recognized exceptions were applied, only 10 (8.84%) included a dissent, while in the 57
cases in which idiosyncratic exceptions were applied, 11 cases (19.29%) included a
dissent. This difference is significant at the 5% level (t = -1.97).
A look at the frequency of dissents over time yields additional insights. As Figure
4.8 shows, there is a significant downward trend in dissents in cases in which the ELR is
used to defeat recovery. 18 In other words, when the majority enforces the ELR as a bar to
recovery, the presence of opposing voices is diminishing. Dissents in the cases in which
exceptions are applied exhibit no statistically significant trends. Thus suggests that courts

.05

.1

% of cases
.15
.2

.25

.3

are continuing to struggle with the exceptions to the ELR.

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Dissent if ELR upheld
Dissent if exception to ELR made

Figure 4.8: Incidence of dissents in cases where the ELR is applied and cases where exceptions are made.

Predictability

18

Coefficient = -0 00544 (t = -2.14).

24

Parties to a construction-related transaction who are deciding whether to write a
contract and if so what to put in it are interested in what a court would do should they
have a dispute. Courts might be predictable but still use inefficient rules, which would
induce the parties to contract more carefully or take some other measure to minimize the
likelihood of getting involved in litigation—all at a cost. If courts are unpredictable,
transacting parties will bear an extra cost in the form of uncertainty about the outcome of
any dispute that might arise—an uncertainty that a contract (or a more complete contract)
would reduce provided the judicial interpretation of contracts is more predictable than the
judicial application of the ELR.
Determining whether judicial behavior is predictable in this situation is difficult
for us for a number of reasons. First, we do not have all the details of the transactions
involved in the cases, and the contracting parties and even the courts know more about
those details than the authors of a statistical study can know. Second, predictability
depends on when the transaction took place and in what jurisdiction. Third, from the
point of view of predictability, we have a highly unrepresentative sample, as it is limited
to disputes that went all the way to state appellate courts, indicating that the parties’
views of the facts and the law were so different that they could not settle the case.
Still, we can ask, as a start, how predictable the courts are if parties have our full
data sample in their heads and believe that courts apply the ELR subject only to generally
recognized exceptions. Parties with this knowledge and belief would be correct nearly
88% of the time. The predictability of the rule does not change significantly even if the
parties have additional information, such as the state whose courts would resolve the

25

dispute and the type of plaintiff and defendant that they are. 19 Predictability was much
lower at the beginning of the sample, with many fewer cases to base predictions on. That
is inevitable at the outset of any common law doctrinal development. More disturbing is
that idiosyncratic exceptions were on the rise toward the end of our sample period.
In short, judicial behavior with regard to the application of the ELR in the
construction industry is fairly predictable but far from certain. Parties expecting courts to
apply the ELR with generally recognized exceptions in the event of a dispute to which
the ELR might be applicable are in for a surprise about 12% of the time. We cannot say
based on our data how much extra risk-bearing and contracting costs this level of
unpredictability entails.

Summary
The story that emerges from the trends we analyze does not confirm any simple
theory of the evolution of common law. The law does not start at an efficient point, but it
is also very far from being random. The majority of the appellate courts in our sample
accept the ELR, and when they do not, they often rely on generally recognized
exceptions. Judicial behavior is fairly predictable, but far from certain.
The evolution of the law over time reveals some fascinating patterns. The initial
twenty years after the Seely decision, the case that set the law on its modern path, are best
described as years of growing acceptance of the ELR, with declining application of either
19

We run a probit regression of the rule being used on case facts, such as state, plaintiff type, defendant
type. We predict when a court will use an idiosyncratic exception using this factor-based approach and note
that the additional facts do not generate any additional predictive value. This factor-based approach and its
extensions have been used by political scientists (e.g., Segal 1984, Richards and Kritzer 2002) to
investigate the predictability of (mostly U.S. Supreme Court) case outcomes rather than the predictability
of the application of a particular legal rule. See also Cameron and Kornhauser (2005) for a discussion of
theoretical issues with this literature.

26

generally recognized or idiosyncratic exceptions. In the final decade of the sample,
however, courts moved away from strict application of the ELR as a result of more
frequently invoking some of the generally recognized exceptions, such as the independent
tort and other property exceptions, and – more surprisingly – some of the idiosyncratic
exceptions as well. The data reveal no convergence to any rule, let alone an efficient rule
under either of our candidate definitions of efficiency.
As we noted in the introduction, we cannot reject the view that judicial decisions
are efficient if we adopt a sufficiently broad definition of efficiency, one that allows for
the possibility that the law and the facts are more complicated that one can learn from
reading a judicial opinion. Perhaps if all were known, the cases would be understood to
produce efficient outcomes in a larger percentage of cases. But although there are
dissents in only about one-eighth of the cases, these dissents are much more frequent
when idiosyncratic exceptions are applied, which casts some doubt on the hypothesis that
those decisions would be seen as efficient if only enough details were known about them.
So what is behind the time patterns we observe: both the convergence toward the
ELR in the first 20 years of the sample and the movement away from it afterwards? In the
next section we address this question from different perspectives.

V. Behind the Patterns.
We try to deepen our understanding of the patterns uncovered in section IV by
examining five aspects of the evolution of the ELR in the construction industry. First, we
examine the claims that plaintiffs make in our sample and ask whether changes in those
claims can explain the patterns of court decisions. In a decentralized world of legal

27

evolution, plaintiffs would try new strategies when they found barriers to recovery with
old ones. Perhaps the movement away from the ELR in later years reflects such
adaptation, as plaintiffs discover or invent claims to which courts are more receptive.
Second, we examine whether the application of the ELR is influenced by the
existence of an explicit contract between the parties. Because the presence of such a
contract indicates that the parties considered the various risks of their relationship, courts
may be more likely to apply the ELR to tort claims when litigants have a contract.
Third, we investigate the relative economic power of the plaintiff and defendant.
Judges’ sympathy for weaker parties may help explain deviations from the ELR in cases
in which plaintiffs have less economic power than the defendants.
Fourth, we examine court leadership. In 1986 the U.S. Supreme Court issued a
decision in an admiralty case, East River, 20 which broadly endorsed the ELR. Although
East River is far away from construction and is not binding on state courts applying state
law, we can ask whether the decision influenced the state courts in construction cases.
Fifth, we examine state variation in decisions. We ask whether the lack of
convergence to the ELR is explained by the fact that in many states there are very few
appellate cases involving ELR in construction. Perhaps it is those states that account for
lack of convergence in the aggregate. By looking at the states with the highest caseloads,
we can ask whether those states exhibit a greater tendency to convergence.

Claims
Figure 5.1 shows that the proportion of cases in which the plaintiff claims
negligence has been falling (statistically significantly) since the mid-1980s. While claims
20

East River S.S. Corp. v. Transamerica Delaval, Inc., 476 U.S. 858 (1986).

28

of strict liability have also trended downward since the start of our sample, the trend is
significant only over certain periods. As the ELR becomes increasingly accepted,
plaintiffs are using types of claim less likely to be barred by it. The increase in claims of
fraud is mildly significant since the early 1980s, while the increase in claims of negligent
misrepresentation over the same period is strongly significant. 21 The increase in claims
for “other torts” is significant over the course of our entire sample. 22 We get very similar
results if we look at the claims relative to tortwin cases rather than relative to all cases.
The change in the nature of plaintiff claims can explain some of the rise in
tortwins. Put simply, plaintiffs claim fraud and courts are receptive. However, the

0

% of cases with type of claim
.2
.4
.6
.8

changes in claims do not help explain the rise in idiosyncratic exceptions.

1970

1980
Negligence
Fraud
Other Torts

1990
Year

2000

2010

Strict Liability
Negligent Misrepresentation

Figure 5.1: Trends in claims made by plaintiffs.

ELR and the Contractual Relationship between Parties

21

Over 1983-2005, the trend for fraud is positive and significant at the 10% level (t = 1.92). In the same
period, the trend for negligent misrepresentation claims is positive and significant at the 1% level (t = 2.93).
22
From 1970 to 2005, the trend for “other torts” is positive and significant at the 10% level (t = 1.78).

29

We consider whether judicial application of the ELR depends on whether the
parties have an express written contract – thus excluding oral contracts, implied
warranties, and contractual rights as a third-party beneficiary of someone else’s contracts.
If the courts want to promote efficiency, they may be more willing to apply the ELR
when the parties have gone to the trouble of defining their relationship in a contract. Seely
itself may be an example of such logic.
In Table 5.1 the percentage of tortwin is greater when plaintiffs do not have an
express written contract, although the difference is not quite significant (t = 1.53). And
courts are significantly more likely to rely on idiosyncratic exceptions when the parties
do not have a contract (t = 1.95). Courts in effect “make” a contract for the plaintiff when
there is no actual contract between the parties, rather than being willing to penalize the
plaintiff for having failed to negotiate a contract that would have protected him from the
loss that he is suing to recover.

Parties did not have an express written contract
Parties did have an express written contract

Cases
288
177

Tortwin%
39.27%
32.20%

Idiosyncratic%
14.58%
8.47%

Table 5.1: Breakdown of tortwin and incidence of idiosyncratic exceptions depending on whether parties
had an express written contract.

If courts are moving toward efficiency, the tortwin percentage in cases in which
parties have an express written contract should fall over time. The data in Figure 5.2 do
not support this hypothesis. Both tortwin and the use of idiosyncratic exceptions rise
significantly after 1997. (The initial downward trend is not significant.) Courts are
becoming more willing to allow exceptions to the ELR when the parties have a contract,
and more willing to allow idiosyncratic exceptions.

30

.6
.4
% of cases
.2
0

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Tortw in if parties have an express contract
Idiosyncratic exceptions if parties have an express contract

Figure 5.2: Tortwin and incidence of idiosyncratic exceptions when examining only the 177 cases where
parties have an express contract.

We can further investigate whether success in tort and contract are substitutes or
complements in the 291 cases in which plaintiffs claim both tort and breach of contract.
Table 5.3 reveals positive correlation (0.2316) between tortwin and winning in contract (t
= 4.11). And there is no statistical difference in the use of idiosyncratic exceptions when
plaintiffs win and when plaintiffs lose their contract claims (t = 0.99).

Plaintiff won contract claim
Plaintiff lost contract claim

Cases
106
185

Tortwin %
45.28%
22.70%

Idiosyncratic %
12.26%
8.65%

Table 5.3: Breakdown of tortwin and incidence of idiosyncratic exceptions depending on whether plaintiffs
won their contract claim.

The focus on the contractual relationship casts further doubt on the hypothesis
that the law is converging toward an efficient rule. Although the hypothesis that judges
favor defendants who were in a contractual relationship with the plaintiff is weakly
supported, the fact that outcomes in tort and in contract are positively correlated suggests
that courts are allowing exceptions to the ELR even when claims in contract are valid.
31

The trends in tortwin and in the application idiosyncratic exceptions also suggest that
courts increasingly are allowing plaintiffs to recover in tort even when they have an
express written contract with the defendant.

Relative Economic Power of the Parties
We now examine the hypothesis that the relative economic power of plaintiff and
defendant affects the courts’ application of the ELR. Table 5.4 divides parties into two
groups that provide us with a rough proxy for economic power.
Weak parties
• Individual property owners and tenants
• Associations of residents
• Subcontractors and small builders

Strong parties
• Commercial property owners
• Public property owners
• General contractors
• Developers
• Architects and engineers
• Inspectors
• Manufacturers
• Suppliers
• Other parties (banks, insurance
companies, real estate agents)

Table 5.4: Broad division of parties into “weak” and “strong”.

Table 5.5 shows the rate of plaintiff recovery and the incidence of idiosyncratic
exceptions for the four types of plaintiff-defendant combinations.
Relationship
Weak plaintiff – weak defendant
Weak plaintiff – strong defendant
Strong plaintiff – weak defendant
Strong plaintiff – strong defendant

Cases (%)
73 (15.70%)
154 (33.12%)
35 (7.53%)
203 (43.66%)

Tortwin %
Idiosyncratic %
43.86%
12.33%
37.66%
17.53%
34.29%
17.14%
33.50%
7.39%

Table 5.5: Breakdown of tortwin and incidence of idiosyncratic exceptions by relative economic power of
the parties.

There is no statistically significant difference between the groups in tortwin
percentages. Courts are more likely to apply an idiosyncratic exception when facing a
weak plaintiff and strong defendant (17.53% of cases) compared to when both parties are

32

strong (7.39% of cases). This difference is highly significant (t = -2.97). However, the
application of idiosyncratic exceptions is also higher when courts face a strong plaintiff
and weak defendant (17.14%) than when both parties are strong (t = -1.89). No other
differences are significant. This evidence offers mild support for the idea that sympathy
moves courts to use idiosyncratic exceptions to help weak plaintiffs.

The Potential Effect of the U.S. Supreme Court’s Decision in East River
In East River (1986) the Court endorsed bright-line ELR. A plaintiff shipbuilder
had a contract with the defendant to design, manufacture, and install turbines for four
supertankers. The ships malfunctioned and were damaged, and the plaintiff sought to
recover the costs of repair, plus income lost while the ships were out of service. The
plaintiff initially made claims in both contract and tort; but the contract claims turned out
to be barred by the statute of limitations. The negligence claims were rejected by the
Supreme Court, which held that customer dissatisfaction with product quality is not a
cognizable claim in admiralty tort law. Following the reasoning in Seely, the Court held
that such claims can be brought only as claims for breach of warranty.
Although the East River decision was not binding on state courts, we examine
whether it had a significant influence on those courts in the construction realm. Influence
is difficult to ascertain here, since, as we showed in Section IV, tortwin had been trending
down for at least a decade before East River and bottomed out in the early 1990s. We
find no effect of East River on the speed of convergence.
Another way to assess influence is by number of citations. Since East River
denies recovery, we expect that state court decisions that cite East River are likely to

33

deny liability. Indeed, 52 of the 68 cases (76.47%) in our sample that cite East River deny
the plaintiff recovery, while only 196 of the 314 cases since East River that do not cite
the case deny recovery (62.42%). This difference is significant (t-test statistic = 2.21).
Still, one needs to be cautious: cases that cite East River may do so as cover, trading on
the prestige of the Supreme Court, whereas cases that do not cite East River can justify
not citing it on the ground that an admiralty case is irrelevant to construction disputes. If
this explanation is correct, the citation evidence yields some support for the “legal realist”
hypothesis that state courts do what they want and use citations to provide rhetorical
support for their conclusions.
While East River may have had some influence in consolidating support for the
ELR, the proportion of cases citing East River has fallen since the early 1990s. This trend
is significant (t = -2.24 for years 1990-2005). We cannot conclude from our data that the
U.S. Supreme Court has had a major influence on the state courts’ treatment of ELR, at
least in the construction industry.

Variation across States
There is tremendous variation in tortwin across states. Kentucky has 100%
tortwin; Wyoming, Kansas, Virginia, and Maine have 0% tortwin. We ask whether
tortwin can be explained by geographical or economic differences; the answer appears to
be no. 23 We ask whether the differences in tortwin can be explained by the methods in
which judges are selected and retained that different states employ, and again the answer

23

Testing for differences in tortwin across regions does not provide any notable patterns. Testing for
differences based on levels of economic growth in each state from 1970 to 2005 generates insignificant
results; and testing for differences based on growth in the construction industry in each state from 1970 to
2005 also yields insignificant results.

34

is no. 24 Nor can differences in tortwin be explained by differences among judges in
political ideology. 25
Some states have fewer cases than others, and perhaps states with the highest
caseloads, which have had the most experience with the ELR, have more respect for the
doctrine. To examine this hypothesis, we focus on the five states with the highest
caseloads in our sample. In these states, tortwin percentage varies greatly (see Table 5.6).
New York is very strict on plaintiffs, with a mere 15.91% tortwin, while California is far
more lenient, with a 52.94% tortwin. High caseload does not explain greater adherence to
the ELR: tortwin is not significantly affected by the number of cases decided in a state (t
= -1.22).
STATE
CA
FL
OH
IL
NY
Total

Total cases
34
47
32
56
44
213

Tortwin
18
19
12
18
7
139

% tortwin
52.94
40.43
37.50
32.14
15.91
34.74

Idiosyncratic
3
3
2
4
2
14

Idiosyncratic%
8.82
6.38
6.25
7.14
4.55
6.57

Table 5.6: Tortwin and use of exceptions in five states with highest caseloads

Not only do the averages differ greatly across the five busiest states; so do the
trends (Figure 5.3). The percentage of tortwin in California is high on average but
significantly decreasing over time (t = -2.62). In contrast, tortwin in New York and

24

States differ in the method by which judges ascend to the bench and in the way they are retained. We
investigate whether this has any effect on the application of the ELR and its exceptions. We use the
categories employed in Choi, Gulati, and E. Posner (2007) to divide states into four types of judicial
selection method (appointed, merit-selected, partisan election or nonpartisan elections). The methods by
which judges are retained are highly correlated with selection method. The differences in tortwin across
states of different judicial selection methods are not significant.
25
Using a simple measure of party-adjusted surrogate judicial ideology (“PAJID”) from Brace, Langer, and
Hall (2000), we test whether the ideology of the Supreme Court judges in a given state can help explain the
variation in tortwin across states. In the cases in which the court upheld the ELR to preclude recovery, the
average PAJID score was 47.20. In tortwin cases, the average PAJID score was 47.46. The difference is not
significant (t = 0.1817).

35

Illinois is considerably lower but growing. In Florida, the increase in the frequency of

0

.2

% of cases
.4
.6

.8

1

tortwin since the early 1980s is extremely significant (t = 3.49).

1970

1980

1990
Year
California
Illinois
Ohio

2000

2010

Florida
New York

Figure 5.3: Tortwin over time in the five states with the highest caseloads

Unlike the overall tortwin pattern, the proportion of cases that apply exceptions
that are idiosyncratic is influenced by caseload. This inverse relation is significant (t = 2.85) and is illustrated in Figure 5.4. The implication is that idiosyncratic exceptions are
more likely to be introduced when courts have less of their own experience in this area.
This hypothesis is supported by a comparison of the first 10 decisions heard in each state
with the subsequent decisions in those states (if the state hears at least 10 cases). 15.81%
of the “early” cases in these states applied exceptions that are idiosyncratic, compared to
just 8.02% of the “later” cases. This difference is significant (t = -2.56).

36

1
.8
% of cases
.4
.6
.2
0
0

20
40
Number of cases in each state

60

% of cases that use idiosyncratic exceptions
Linear best fit

Figure 5.4: Percentage of cases that use idiosyncratic exceptions regressed on the number of cases in a
state (t = -2.85).

The punch line of this analysis is that low state caseloads might offer an
explanation for why we have not seen stronger convergence to the ELR, and more
specifically why we have seen an increase in the use of idiosyncratic exceptions in the
past decade. Although the ELR is quite widely accepted, the law does not come to a rest,
and states continue experimentation, often in ways inconsistent with the ELR and its
generally recognized exceptions. Experience slows this experimentation down, as one
would expect, but not completely.
The increase in the application of idiosyncratic exceptions is not limited to states
with low caseloads. In fact, 76% of idiosyncratic exception cases since 1997 have come
from states with 10 or more cases. Wisconsin (the state with the sixth highest caseload)
has seen a sharp rise in cases decided by the application of idiosyncratic exceptions. Four
of the five largest states have all used an idiosyncratic exception in the last six years of

37

our sample. Thus, even in busy states we see an increasing tendency of courts to get
around the ELR.

VI. Conclusion.
Our investigation of the application of the Economic Loss Rule to construction
disputes yields some surprising results. Over the 35 years covered by our study, the
doctrine has evolved in a way that cannot be easily described as convergence to
efficiency. While over the first quarter century the law moved significantly toward
adopting the ELR with generally recognized exceptions, over the last decade it has
moved away from this equilibrium. Had we written this paper 10 years ago, we would
have found the law converging to ELR with generally recognized exceptions, but the law
moved away from that rule afterwards, with no changes in the economic environment to
explain the movement. Moreover, the law evolved very differently in different states,
which is inconsistent with efficiency in the absence of an economic explanation for the
differences among states in the nature of construction disputes.
The lack of full convergence does not mean that judicial behavior is random or
that the law is entirely unpredictable. On average in our sample, courts in construction
disputes applied the ELR with generally recognized exceptions about 88% of the time,
which would give the parties engaged in a transaction in which a potential ELR issue
lurked reasonable though not complete certainty. The more unsettling findings are that
the law has become less predictable in the last decade, that many states are increasingly
using idiosyncratic exceptions to limit the ELR, and that the amount of appellate

38

litigation involving ELR in construction disputes is growing. These are not signs of the
law settling down.
Some additional evidence sheds light on how legal evolution works. Plaintiffs’
claims respond to what courts are receptive to, such as claims of fraud. But that is not the
whole story. The key reason for non-convergence is that courts distinguish cases and
create idiosyncratic exceptions to the prevailing legal doctrine that other courts reject. In
the last decade covered by our study, courts increasingly used such exceptions even when
the parties had express contracts.
Idiosyncratic exceptions differ across states, with many states going in their own
direction with regard to what exceptions they recognize or create. State courts at first
responded to a nonbinding 1986 U.S. Supreme Court ruling embracing the bright-line
ELR in an admiralty case, but this influence declined over time. There is evidence that
state courts with heavier caseloads in this area of litigation are more likely to converge to
the adoption of the ELR with generally recognized exceptions, but even in those states
there is residual uncertainty.
We conclude that appellate courts exercise a moderate amount of discretion in
deciding cases, leaving the law reasonably predictable but far from certain, even after
three decades of evolution. The deviations from efficiency are not huge, but they do not
disappear over time. There may be evolutionary benefits of such legal flexibility, but the
hypothesis that, in traditional commercial areas, common law is predictable and efficient,
or at least is moving there, is not supported by the evidence in this very particular sphere.

39

References
Barrett, Sidney (1989), “Construction Claims: Recovery of Economic Loss in Tort for
Construction Defects: A Critical Analysis,” 40 South Carolina Law Review 891942.
Bishop, William (1982), “Economic Loss in Tort,” 2 Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 129.
Brace, Paul, Laura Langer, and Melinda G. Hall (2000), “Measuring the Preferences of
the State Supreme Court Judges,” 62 Journal of Politics 387-413.
Brenner, Saul, and Harold Spaeth (1995), Stare Indecisis: The Alteration of Precedent on
the Supreme Court, 1946-1992, (New York: Cambridge University Press).
Bussani, Mauro, and Vernon Valentine Palmer (editors) (2003), Pure Economic Loss in
Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Cameron, Charles M., and Lewis A. Kornhauser (2005), “Modeling Law: Theoretical
Implications of Empirical Methods,” NYU Mimeo 2005.
Cardozo, Benjamin N. (1921), The Nature of the Judicial Process, (New Haven: Yale
University Press).
Choi, Stephen J., G. Mity Gulati, and Eric A. Posner (2007), “Professionals or
Politicians: The Uncertain Empirical Case for an Elected Rather than Appointed
Judiciary,” John M Olin Law & Economics Working Paper No. 357
Coase, Ronald (1960), “The Problem of Social Cost,” 3 Journal of Law and Economics
1-44.
Cooter, Robert, Lewis Kornhauser, and David Lane (1979), “Liability rules, Limited
Information, and the Role of Precedent,” 10 Bell Journal of Economics 366-373.
Feldthusen, Bruce (2000), Economic Negligence, (Toronto: Carswell (4th ed)).
Frank, Jerome (1930), Law and the Modern Mind, (New York: Brentano’s).
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer (2007), "The Evolution of Common Law,” 115
Journal of Political Economy 43-68.
George, Tracey F., and Lee Epstein (1992), “On the Nature of Supreme Court Decision
Making,” 86 American Political Science Review 323-337.
Goldberg, Victor P. (1994), “Recovery for Economic Loss Following the Exxon Valdez
Oil Spill,” 23 Journal of Legal Studies 1-40.

40

Hansford, Thomas G. and James F. Spriggs II (2006), The Politics of Precedent on the
U.S. Supreme Court, (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Holmes, Oliver Wendell (1897), “The Path of the Law,” 10 Harvard Law Review 457478.
Landes, William M. and Richard A. Posner (2007), “Judicial Behavior: A Statistical
Study,” University of Chicago Law School Mimeo.
Llewellyn, Karl N. (1951), The Bramble Bush: On Our Law and Its Study, (New York:
Oceana).
Posner, Richard A. (1973), Economic Analysis of Law, (New York: Little-Brown (1st
ed)).
Posner, Richard A. (2005), “Judicial Behavior and Performance: An Economic
Approach,” 32 Florida State University Law Review 1259-1279.
Posner, Richard A. (2006), “Common Law Economic Torts: An Economic and Legal
Analysis,” 48 Arizona Law Review 735-748.
Priest, George (1977), “The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient Rules,”
6 Journal of Legal Studies 65-82.
Rabin, Robert L. (1985), “Tort Recovery for Negligently Inflicted Economic Loss: A
Reassessment,” 37 Stanford Law Review 1513-1538.
Richards, Mark J. and Herbert M. Kritzer (2002), “Jurisprudential Regimes in Supreme
Court Decision Making,” 96 American Political Science Review 305-320.
Rubin, Paul (1977), “Why is the Common Law Efficient?” 6 Journal of Legal Studies 5163.
Segal, Jeffrey (1984), “Predicting Supreme Court Cases Probabilistically: the Search and
Seizure Cases, 1962-1981,” 78 American Political Science Review 891-900.
Songer, Donald R., and Stefanie A. Lindquist (1996), “Not the Whole Story: The Impact
of Justices’ Values on Supreme Court Decision Making,” 40 American Journal of
Political Science 1049-1063.
Stone, Julius (1985), Precedent and Law: Dynamics of Common Law Growth (Sydney:
Butterworths).

41

Appendix: Construction of the Database
All data are obtained from the LexisNexis “Construction” library. To find the
cases, we searched the library for state appeals court cases decided prior to December 31,
2005, that satisfy the following criteria: (1) the phrase “economic loss” is found in either
the Overview or the Core Terms; and (2) any of the following terms—“contract!”,
“agree!”, or “warrant!”—are found in the Overview or the Core Terms. The Overview is a
summary of the case of approximately 150 to 200 words. The Core Terms is a list of 30
to 50 key terms that appear in the decision. This search strategy captures all state appeals
cases from the construction industry where the ELR defense is raised by defense lawyers.
No issue of different coverage periods for different states arises in our sample period.
This search yielded 1171 cases. Of these, 209 were not appellate cases and so
were dropped, and another 4 were not from state courts. Another 496 cases were
excluded as irrelevant because the LexisNexis Construction library turns out to include
cases that do not pertain to construction. In 50 cases, more than one dispute is addressed
on appeal. For example, a plaintiff may bring claims against the general contractor and
subcontractors in one case. When the plaintiff brings different claims against the two
defendants and both claims are being heard on appeal, we divide the case into two
distinct observations. When the plaintiff brings claims against multiple defendants but the
appeal addresses only one of them, it is left as one observation. We have 46 cases that
give rise to 2 observations and 4 cases that give rise to 3 observations; the other 412 cases
involve single claims decided on appeal. Of the 516 individual disputes thus coded, 37 do
not involve tort claims and another 14 involve tort claims that were not appealed. After
removing these 51 disputes, we have the sample of 465 observations.

42

