                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EMPLOYER-TO-EMPLOYER FLOWS IN THE UNITED STATES:
               ESTIMATES USING LINKED EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE DATA

                                           Melissa Bjelland
                                             Bruce Fallick
                                           John Haltiwanger
                                           Erika McEntarfer

                                         Working Paper 13867
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13867


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
The views expressed herein are attributableMarch only to2008
                                                           the author(s) and do not represent the views of
the U.S. Census Bureau, its program sponsors or data providers, or of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System or its staff. This document reports the results of research and analysis undertaken
by the U.S. Census Bureau staff. It has undergone a Census Bureau review more limited in scope than
that given to official Census Bureau publications. This document is released to inform interested parties
of ongoing research and to encourage discussion of work in progress. This research is a part of the
U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Program (LEHD), which is partially
supported by the National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093 and SES-0427889 to Cornell
University (Cornell Institute for Social and Economic Research), the National Institute on Aging Grant
R01~AG018854, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Some or all of the data used in this paper are
confidential data from the LEHD Program. The U.S. Census Bureau supports external researchers'
use of these data through the Research Data Centers (see www.ces.census.gov). For other questions
regarding the data, please contact Jeremy S. Wu, Manager, U.S. Census Bureau, LEHD Program, Demographic
Surveys Division, FOB 3, Room 2138, 4700 Silver Hill Rd., Suitland, MD 20233, USA. (Jeremy.S.Wu@census.gov)
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Melissa Bjelland, Bruce Fallick, John Haltiwanger, and Erika McEntarfer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Employer-to-Employer Flows in the United States: Estimates Using Linked Employer-Employee
Data
Melissa Bjelland, Bruce Fallick, John Haltiwanger, and Erika McEntarfer
NBER Working Paper No. 13867
March 2008
JEL No. E24,J62,J63

                                             ABSTRACT

We use administrative data linking workers and firms to study employer-to-employer flows. After
discussing how to identify such flows in quarterly data, we investigate their basic empirical patterns.
We find that the pace of employer-to-employer flows is high, representing about 4 percent of employment
and 30 percent of separations each quarter. The pace of employer-to-employer flows is highly procyclical,
and varies systematically across worker, job and employer characteristics. Our findings regarding
job tenure and earnings dynamics suggest that for those workers moving directly to new jobs, the new
jobs are generally better jobs; however, this pattern is highly procyclical. There are rich patterns in
terms of origin and destination of industries. We find somewhat surprisingly that more than half of
the workers making employer-to-employer transitions switch even broadly-defined industries (NAICS
super-sectors).


Melissa Bjelland                                    John Haltiwanger
U.S. Census Bureau                                  Department of Economics
LEHD                                                University of Maryland
Room 2138, Building 3                               College Park, MD 20742
4700 Silver Hill Road                               and NBER
Suitland, MD 20746                                  haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
melissa.bjelland@ey.com
                                                    Erika McEntarfer
Bruce Fallick                                       U.S. Census Bureau
Federal Reserve Board                               LEHD
Washington, DC 20551                                4700 Silver Hill Road
bruce.fallick@frb.gov                               Suitland, MD 20746
                                                    erika.l.mcentarfer@census.gov
I. Introduction
        An enormous amount of worker and job reallocation continually takes place in the U.S.
economy. For example, Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006) (hereafter DFH) report that
the quarterly job creation and destruction rates each average around 6 to 8 percent of total
employment and that accession and separation rates are 2-3 times as large.6 Job reallocation
induces worker reallocation with less profitable firms shedding jobs and thus workers and more
productive firms adding them. Much of the observed job reallocation occurs within narrowly
defined sectors, so the primary drivers of the continual reallocation of jobs evidently include
idiosyncratic shocks to technology, demand and costs. The pace of job reallocation does,
however, fluctuate both secularly and cyclically, and as such is related both to the overall pace of
technological change and to macroeconomic shocks. In addition to these job dynamics, workers
also continuously sort themselves over a given distribution of jobs. Workers switch jobs and
change employment status because of “supply-side” events such as labor force entry, family
relocation and retirement, or for reasons of career development, better pay and preferable
working conditions.

        There is a large and growing empirical and theoretical literature quantifying and studying
these worker and job flows and their interactions with the outcomes of firms and workers. The
U.S. statistical agencies now have a variety of data products -- e.g., the Business Employment
Dynamics (BED) and the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) programs at BLS
and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) and Longitudinal Employer Household
Dynamics program (LEHD) programs at the Census Bureau -- that tabulate these flows by a
variety of worker and firm characteristics. Given the huge volume of these flows and the
inherent frictions involved in the reallocation of jobs and workers, there is considerable interest
in understanding the nature and implications of these frictions at the micro and aggregate level.
One important element largely missing from the expanding measurement of worker and job
flows is the flows of workers in a time period directly from one employer to another. The

6 See Table 1, Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006) that draws upon JOLTS, BED and LEHD statistics to
quantify job and worker flow rates. There are many studies of these worker and job flow rates including Davis,
Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996), Acs, Armington and Robb (1999), Burgess, Lane and Stevens (2000).




                                                        3
measurement and analysis of employer-to-employer flows sheds light on how the frictions in the
labor market are being resolved over time, across sectors, and across different types of firms and
workers. Such direct employer-to-employer flows are not without frictions, but by construction
they reflect flows that do not involve a period of frictional unemployment.

       Quantifying and studying employer-to-employer flows is of interest not only because of
what it tells us about frictions in the labor market, but also because employer-to-employer flows
include origin and destination information about the employers. It is of interest to know about
origin and destination of transitions for workers of different characteristics (age, gender,
education, ethnic and foreign born status). It is also of interest to know how earnings change
with such transitions, and origin-destination information permits measurement of earnings
changes.

       In this paper, we use the recently developed longitudinal linked employer-employee data
from the LEHD program at Census Bureau to measure and study employer-to-employer flows.
These data are exceptionally well suited to an examination of quarterly worker flows as they
trace the job histories of a large proportion of employed individuals over several years. As we
discuss in section II, the long histories of workers as well as the rich set of employer
characteristics yield advantages over related measurement of employer-to-employer flows from
the CPS (see Fallick and Fleishman 2001 and 2004). The CPS based flows have alternative
advantages, as we also discuss in section II, so we regard these measurement efforts as
complementary.

       Our main findings are as follows. First, we find that the flow of workers from employer
to employer is large and is an important component of overall worker flows. Using our preferred
measurement method, we find that quarterly employer-to-employer flows account for about
3.9% percent of employment on average and 29% percent of main job separations. These
patterns vary systematically over time – with interesting secular, seasonal, and cyclical variation.
We find that employer-to-employer flows are procyclical, rising throughout the late 1990s and
falling sharply in 2001. We also find that the pace of employer-to-employer flows as a fraction
of employment and separations has remained low in the post-2001 period following the



                                                  4
recession. This latter finding is consistent with related findings in the recent literature of a
declining pace of worker and job flows in the U.S. economy in the post-2000 period (see DFH).

       The pace of employer-to-employer flows varies systematically by worker, job and firm
characteristics. For workers, employer-to-employer flows as a fraction of employment and
separations declines with age through the mid 60s and then flattens out -- the decline with age as
a fraction of separations is especially rapid in the age range 50-65 when retirements presumably
become a more important form of separation than employer-to-employer transitions. We find
that less educated workers have a higher pace of employer-to-employer flows as a fraction of
employment but there is no discernable pattern by education as a fraction of separations. The
pattern by education reflects the higher overall rate of worker flows of less educated but
conditional on a separation, education is not an important factor.

       Employer-to-employer (henceforth E-to-E) flows are somewhat concentrated among
frequent job changers, and even more so among the employees of high-turnover firms. Firms in
the highest quintile of turnover -- those where more than 6.6% of workers experience an E-to-E
flow in an average quarter -- account for over 60% of total E-to-E flows. Concentration of E-to-
E flows among highly mobile workers is less pronounced but still in evidence – over 50% of
total E-to-E flows in a representative quarter are from workers who changed jobs at least twice in
the previous three years. Yet fully 20% of employer-to-employer flows in a given year involve
workers separating from a job held for more than two years.

       Our findings regarding job tenure and earnings dynamics suggest that for those workers
moving directly to new jobs, the new jobs are generally better jobs, and that moving directly to a
better job is easier in boom than a bust. Tenure at new jobs is generally longer than at separating
jobs, with 25% of destination job matches lasting more than two years. We find that on average
workers who make employer-to-employer transitions see large increases in earnings. However,
this pattern is highly procyclical. The average worker making a direct employer-to-employer
transition in a recession sees a smaller increase in earnings than a worker making such a
transition in a boom. This hit on earnings gains for making a transition during a recession is
especially large for younger workers. We also find larger quarterly growth in earnings for



                                                  5
workers making employer-to-employer transitions than workers who remain in their same job.
This latter pattern holds for all quarters and age groups we observe.

       There are rich patterns in terms of origin and destination of industries. We find, to our
surprise, that a very large fraction of the workers making employer-to-employer transitions
switch even broadly defined industries. More than half of workers making an employer-to-
employer transition switch NAICS super-sectors. Some of this finding is explained by looking
at the details of the origin and destination sectors. For example, for workers employed in the
software publishing industry we find that just over 1/4 of the workers making an employer-to-
employer transition remain in software publishing. However, the destination industries reflect
closely related activities, such as Custom Computer Programming Services, Computer Systems
Design Services and Semiconductor Manufacturing.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the LEHD data infrastructure and its
suitability for measuring employer-to-employer flows. Section III describes the measurement
methodology for measuring employer-to-employer flows in the LEHD data. Section IV presents
the main empirical findings and Section V has concluding remarks.



II. Advantages of Using LEHD Data to Estimate Employer-to Employer Flows

        Recent research on employer-to-employer flows in the United States exploited the
dependent interviewing techniques used in the Current Population Survey (CPS) to provide
nationally representative estimates of high-frequency flows of workers between employers.
Fallick and Fleischman (2004) estimated that 2.6% of employed persons change employers each
month, and that employer-to-employer flows fell markedly during the recession that began in
2001. The CPS has several advantages for estimating E-to-E flows of workers. The CPS is
already the primary source of the data on flows of workers across labor market states, so the
estimated E-to-E flows can be joined consistently with the other flows in generating a more
complete picture of labor market dynamics. The CPS sample is representative of the entire
civilian noninstitutional population in that it is not limited to particular cohorts, household
members, or sectors. The data measures flows at a monthly frequency, and so is likely to capture


                                                  6
movements from one employer to another that do not involve a significant period of
nonemployment. And, of course, the CPS contains a rich set of demographic and other
information on individuals.7

        However, the CPS also has several important limitations. The size of its sample, while
large for a survey of households, remains small for some purposes. The representativeness of the
CPS is compromised by significant attrition, especially because, by design, it does not follow
workers when they change residences. The CPS follows individuals for only four consecutive
months, so long employment histories cannot be constructed. As a household survey, it relies on
the responses of individuals or other members of their households. And the survey design is
such that it can be used to measure flows only between a worker’s main jobs. The CPS also
measures worker flows from only one side of the market: the worker’s side.

        The LEHD data offer several advantages for estimating the magnitude of job-to-job
flows. First, the LEHD is based on comprehensive administrative data covering a large fraction
of the U.S. workforce. This makes possible analysis of flows of workers across detailed
industries, detailed demographic groups, and even flows of workers following specific regional
economic shocks. In particular, the universe of the LEHD data is employment covered by the
state unemployment insurance (UI) system. State unemployment insurance system coverage is
broad and basically comparable from state to state. Covered employment generally includes all
employees of firms within a state with some notable exceptions.8 UI and associated ES-202 data
are provided to the Census Bureau by over 40 participating state partners. These data are
supplemented with Census demographic data, providing worker characteristics such as age, race,
and gender.

        Second, unlike the CPS, which follows individuals for only four consecutive months, the
longitudinal nature of the LEHD data means individual work histories can be followed

7
 See Fallick and Fleischman for a more complete description of the CPS data and the merits of the CPS
relative to other previously available data sources.

8 Workers not covered by the state unemployment system include many agricultural workers, independent
contractors, some religious and charitable organizations, the self-employed, some state government workers, and
employees of the federal government (who are covered under a separate insurance system). For detailed information



                                                       7
continuously for years. This is important as it allows us to examine the extent to which gross
job-to-job flows in the U.S. economy are driven by a small but mobile segment of the workforce.
The LEHD data follows workers across employers as long as they continue to collect UI-
covered wages, and follows workers who change residence so long as they continue to work in
one of the over 40 states participating in the program.9

        Lastly perhaps the most unique aspect of the LEHD data is the presence of the link
between the worker and the employer. The longitudinal nature of the linked data on both the
individual and business side allow us to track the flows of workers between a large sample of
firms in the U.S. economy, while also identifying workers’ employment histories and the
dynamics of the firms across which workers are being redistributed. This link allows us to
determine to what extent flows between employers are driven by the dynamics of the employers
themselves. For instance, we can examine to what extent are employer-to-employer flows
concentrated among employees in high turnover firms. Or to what extent flows are driven by job
creation at destination firms, or job destruction at separating firms.

        The LEHD data do have a few disadvantages in identifying employer-to-employer flows.
There is some potential to miss employer-to-employer transitions that involve cross-state
migrations in employment. Employment in the federal government, unincorporated self-
employment, religious and charitable organizations, and certain agricultural enterprises are not
covered.10 Most fundamentally, the LEHD data do not measure employment at a point in time.
The unemployment insurance records that underlie the data report only quarterly earnings. They
contain no information regarding how many hours or weeks were worked within the quarter- or
which weeks were worked if the worker was at the firm for less than a full quarter. In addition to
limiting the analysis to quarterly frequency, this presents some problems in distinguishing
between true E-to-E flows and multiple-job-holding, and in determining the direction of some
employer-to-employer flows in the presence of short-duration jobs. These are not insignificant
problems given that short-job to short-job flows account for a substantial fraction of employer-

on UI covered employment see Stevens (2000) and The BLS Handbook of Methods.
9 In the current study, however, we will not follow workers across state lines.
10 Although it is useful to note that the LEHD program has ongoing plans to add Federal workers and self-employed



                                                       8
to-employer flows. We will discuss in detail how we deal with this feature of the data in the next
section.

           Golan, Lane, and McEntarfer (2006) used LEHD data to examine annual flows of
significantly attached workers between employers within and across industries. They found that
25% of workers who demonstrated some attachment to their employer changed jobs in a given
year, split almost evenly between industry stayers and industry changers. As the focus of the
current paper is to estimate the quarterly frequency of employer-to-employer flows in both main
and secondary jobs, our methodology differs from theirs. The next section explains in greater
detail the methodology we use estimate the quarterly flows of workers between employers in the
LEHD data.

           Before proceeding to the measurement methodology and the estimates of the employer-
to-employer flows, we note that the underlying source data for all of the statistics reported in this
paper are administrative data that provide universal coverage of workers in covered sectors.
Unlike estimates of employer-to-employer flows from survey data (e.g., the CPS), with about 6-7
million jobs and 200,000 to 360,000 employer-to-employer flows observed each quarter there is
no significant sampling error in our estimates and we report no sampling error statistics. There
may of course be measurement error from a variety of sources (e.g., measurement error in
longitudinal identifiers or industrial classification for employers or reported earnings for
workers) that impact the reliability of these estimates but such error reflects non-sampling error.
A comprehensive description of the LEHD data infrastructure files, the measurement
methodology and in turn the possible sources of nonsampling error is provided in Abowd et. al.
(2006). In the current paper, only descriptive statistics of the employer-to-employer flows are
provided with little or no statistical analysis of hypotheses about the causes and consequences of
employer-to-employer flows.

III. Defining Employer-to-Employer Flows in LEHD data



workers.




                                                  9
       The quarterly nature of the LEHD data presents some unique methodological issues with
regard to measuring job-to-job flows. As mentioned in the previous section, the unemployment
insurance records that underlie the data do not measure employment at a point in time, but only
report quarterly earnings. They contain no information regarding which weeks during the
quarter the worker was employed or how many hours or weeks she worked within the quarter.
Table 1 below provides a hypothetical example of wage history data, in this case the quarterly
wage histories for two individuals who were each employed with two different employers during
the year.

       Our goal is to characterize quarterly job transitions, including those involving shorter
jobs or secondary jobs. We begin by defining the existence of a job match in quarter t if worker
i has positive earnings from employer j in that period (denoted mijt = 1). Matches in only one
of two consecutive quarters indicate that either an accession or separation has occurred. That is,
workers with positive earnings in one period but none in the subsequent period are assumed to
have separated from their employers at some point during the quarter with positive earnings.
Similarly, individuals who are observed to move from receiving no earnings from a firm to
earning a positive amount are assumed to have acceded to the employer sometime during the
quarter with positive earnings. In Table 1, we would say that Person 2 separated from Employer
B and acceded to Employer Z during quarter 2. Formally, we define accessions and separations
as follows:

       (1) Accessions (a1): individual i acceded to employer j during quarter t

        a1ijt =    1 if mijt-1 = 0 & mijt = 1

                  9 0 otherwise


       (2) Separations (s1): individual i separated from j during t

        s1ijt =    1 if mijt = 1 & mijt+1 = 0

                  9 0 otherwise




                                                10
where mijt = 1 if worker i had positive earnings at employer j in quarter t, and mijt = 0 otherwise.



        If we define an employer-to-employer flow simply as an accession to a new employer k
that occurs in the same quarter as that same worker separated from employer j, we have the
following definition of an employer-to-employer flow:11


        (3) Flow Employer-to-Employer Transition (EEmijkt ): individual i transitions from
        firm j and to firm k during t:
                          EEmijkt = 1 if s1ijt = 1 & a1ikt = 1

                                     9 0 otherwise
        where s1ijt and a1ikt are defined as above.

        A limitation of the definition in (3) is that in the case of matches that appear in only one
quarter, we cannot distinguish with any confidence between an employer-to-employer flow and
multiple job holding. For instance, imagine a work history such that of Person 1 in Table 1.
Although Person 1 would be defined as experiencing an employer-to-employer flow in the
second quarter according to the definition (EEm) in equation (3), it is also possible that Person 1
held jobs at firm A and firm Q simultaneously. The inclusion of multiple job holding in this
measure is likely to result in an over-counting of employer-to-employer flows. Another problem
with one-quarter jobs is that, even if we treat them as representing an E-to-E flow, it is difficult


 11 While valid E-to-E flows might include situations in which a person separates from one employer in quarter t
 and accedes to a different employer in quarter t+1, we choose not to count these transitions. For the purposes of
 our current study, we are interested in flows that do not involve a significant period of intervening
 nonemployment. As noted above, we know only each individuals earnings from a given employer for the entire
 quarter. Thus, we know whether an individual worked for a given employer during the quarter, but we do not
 know which weeks during the quarter the match was in effect. A typical quarter contains thirteen weeks. If the
 timings of the separation in one quarter and of the accession in the subsequent quarter are independent of each
 other and each is uniformly distributed within the quarter, then the mean duration between the two employers is
 thirteen weeks, which is longer than we would like to count for an E-to-E transition. Therefore, we restrict our
 present analysis to employer-to-employer flows that occur within a single quarter, that is, to flows where the
 separation and accession, as defined above, occur in the same quarter. While it is possible to have a short non-
 employment spell during an employer-to-employer flow that occurs within the quarter, it is unlikely to be a spell of
 more than a month in length. (Again assuming uniform distributions, the mean duration is about four weeks.) We
 leave an analysis of flows into and out of longer spells of non-employment for future work.


                                                        11
to decide which is the origin job and which is the destination job. Preliminary estimates of E-to-
E rates using the EEm measure in LEHD data found rates as high as 16% using this measure.
This seems an improbably high rate of job-to-job flows and thus, this measure is likely over-
counting the true number of flows.

        For these reasons, for most of our analysis we use a more restrictive definition of
employer-to-employer flows that requires that two quarters of positive earnings be observed both
at the separating and the acceding employer. Formally,


        (4) Consecutive-Quarter Employer-to-Employer Transition (EEbijkt): individual i
        transitions from firm j and to firm k during t:
                 EEbijkt =    1 if s2ijt = 1 & a2ikt = 1

                             9 0 otherwise

where s2ijt = 1 if s1ijt = 1 and mijt-1 = 1 and a2ikt = 1 if a1ikt = 1 and mikt+1 = 1.

        Here we use consecutive quarters of earnings to construct an estimate of point in time
employment. If a worker has positive earnings at an employer in both quarter t-1 and quarter t,
we can say with reasonable confidence that he was an employee of that firm on the first day of
quarter t (as well as the last day of quarter t-1). Thus the restrictions we add here amount to (a)
the worker must be employed at the separating job on the first day of the relevant quarter, and
(b) the worker must be employed at the acceding job on the last day of the relevant quarter, with
both the separation and the accession occurring during the quarter.12 The additional attachment
restriction in EEb compared to EEm provides greater confidence that the transition we have
identified is, in fact, an employer-to-employer flow, as well as making clear the direction of this
flow. Of course, the greater clarity comes at the cost of excluding some employer-to-employer
flows that include very short jobs, so this definition may underestimate the true magnitude of
employer-to-employer flows.



12 In the example in Table 1, Person 2 experiences a consecutive-quarter employer-to-employer flow in the second
quarter from firm B to firm Z.


                                                       12
        One can go farther in this direction to restrict attention to jobs that more clearly have
some traction to them. In this spirit we also examine a definition of E-to-E flows that includes
only jobs that we can tell last for at least one full quarter, which, in our quarterly data, means that
positive earnings in the match were observed in three consecutive quarters. That is, we can infer
that individual i worked for firm j for the entirety of quarter t if mijt-1 = 1, mijt = 1, and mijt+1 = 1.
Full-quarter E-to-E flows are then defined as flows in t from one full-quarter job in t-1 to
another full-quarter job in t+1. More formally:


        (5) Full-Quarter Employer-to-Employer Transition (EEfijkt): individual i transitions
        from firm j and to firm k during t:
                EEfijkt =    1 if s3ijt = 1 & a3ikt = 1

                            9 0 otherwise

where s3ijt = 1 if s2ijt = 1 and mijt-2 = 1 and a3ikt = 1 if a2ikt = 1 and mikt+2 = 1.


        This definition excludes a greater number of true E-to-E transitions involving short-term
jobs than does the EEb definition. This may be an advantage or a disadvantage depending on the
question and the population under consideration, but we expect the EEf definition to understate
the overall number of E-to-E flows. This measure does have the advantage of allowing us to
better examine earnings transitions associated with flows between employers, because we
observe a full quarter of earnings at both the origin and the destination jobs. We will use full-
quarter flows mainly when estimating earnings growth associated with flows from employer to
employer.

        Applying these definitions is straightforward if a person experiences no more than one
separation and no more than one accession each quarter. However, the application is more
complicated if a person experiences multiple separations or accessions in a quarter such that
more than one pair of jobs would fit the definition of an E-to-E flow. For purposes of counting
the number of E-to-E transitions, we impose the rule that a given separation or accession can
contribute to only one E-to-E transition. Even so, for more general purposes there remains the


                                                     13
problem of pairing the separations with the accessions so as to identify the origin and destination
job in each transition. We would like to pair origin and destination jobs that play similar roles in
the worker’s career, those that the worker herself would identify as replacing each other. To take
an extreme example, we would not like to pair a separation from a full-time job with an
accession to a part-time weekend job, if more equal pairings are possible.13

         Given the limited information at our disposal, we do this by pairing jobs with the most
similar relative earnings. Lacking data on the number of hours or weeks worked during a
quarter, we recognize that the relative earnings of jobs in a single quarter can be influenced by
when during the quarter each job began or ended, and by transitory fluctuations in hours worked.
In order to minimize these influences, we compare earnings-weighted average quarterly
earnings.14 When there exist multiple job separations or job accessions for a worker in a
particular quarter, we take the separating job with the greatest average earnings over the previous
four quarters and match it to the accession with the greatest average earnings in the subsequent
four quarters. We refer to this match as the ‘primary’ employer-to-employer flow in a quarter. If
after pairing the separation and accession with the greatest earnings there remains another
unmatched separation/accession pair, the separation and accession with the next highest earnings
are matched. And so on until there is no potential accession/separation pair that matches the job
attachment criteria for the particular flows measure. As it happens, multiple E-to-E flows in a
quarter are fairly rare, generally less than 0.5% of flows in any quarter.

         A related issue is identifying the importance of the separating and acceding jobs to the
person’s career. For example, we would like to differentiate between transitions from a main job
to another main job versus transitions involving secondary jobs. To do this, we compare
earnings weighted average earnings in the previous four quarters for separating jobs to those in
all other jobs (both separating and otherwise) in that same period; the job with the highest
average earnings we define as a main job. We do the same for acceding jobs, looking forward

13 If course, even with only one separation and one accession in a quarter, we may observe E-to-E flows that have
this unequal nature.
14 More specifically, we rank all separating jobs by the earnings weighted average earnings over the period t-3 to t,
(∑tt-3wijt2)/4. We then rank all accessions by earnings weighted average earnings over the period t to t+3,
(∑tt+3wijt2)/4. We then pair the highest ranked separating job with the highest ranked acceding job.


                                                         14
four quarters. Employer-to-employer flows involving main jobs as both the origin and
destination job we define as ‘main-to-main’ job flows. About 96% of E-to-E flows in an average
quarter of our sample are main job to main job flows by this definition.

IV. Empirical Patterns of E-to-E Flows

        For the current analysis, we construct a 13-year panel of linked employer-employee data
by pooling the wage histories of three large LEHD states that have data from 1991-2003.15 We
include in our sample both male and female workers, age 15-99, although we break out much of
our subsequent analysis by age groups. We impose no earnings restrictions other than those
discussed in the previous methodology section requiring positive earnings to identify
employment at the firm. We have calculated transitions only within each state; transitions from
an employer located in one state to an employer located in another state are lost. None of the
selected states have a large metropolitan areas at the border of the state that would be conducive
to a large number of cross-state transitions. 16

A. The overall size of E-to-E flows

        Table 2 summarizes the magnitude of employer-to-employer flows in LEHD data, using
both our primary flows measure (EEb) as well as our more restrictive measure (EEf). First we
will discuss the results for our primary EEb flows measure. Overall, we find that 3.9% of jobs
held on the first day of the quarter experience a separation from that job and an accession to a
new employer during the quarter. Using employment as a denominator instead of jobs, the
figure is very similar: 4.1% of persons employed on the first day of the quarter separate from an
employer during the quarter and are employed at the new job on the last day of the quarter.                    As
a percentage of separations, 27% of workers separating from jobs during the quarter have a new

15 The earliest quarter of available LEHD data varies somewhat by participating state, with many states having data
series that start in 1990 or 1991, and almost all states having data from 1998 forward.
16 We limited the current study to three illustrative states and to within-state movements in order to reduce the
substantial computational burden of the analysis. The long run objective is to make these employer-to-employer
flows part of the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) of the LEHD program so that these statistics would be
available for all states and would also incorporate cross-state movements yielding E-to-E flows.




                                                        15
employer on the last day of that quarter. This is a significant amount of job reallocation
occurring in the economy in any given quarter. Note that while our estimate of a 4% quarterly
E-to-E rate is somewhat lower than the quarterly employer-to-employer transition rate implied
by the 2.6% monthly E-to-E rate Fallick and Fleischman found in the CPS, it is much closer than
the very high rate we found in our preliminary analysis of EEm flows, which likely included
instances of multiple job holding. This gives us greater confidence in using EEb as our primary
E-to-E flow measure.

         Table 2 also summarizes the magnitude of flows for the more restrictive EEf flows
measure. The EEf measure restricts itself to longer jobs -- those that last at least one quarter.
We find that 2.2% of jobs held for all of the previous quarter experience a separation from that
job and an accession to a new job that lasts at least one quarter. This is lower than the transition
rate that includes shorter jobs, not surprisingly. This is partly due to the lower separation rate
from longer jobs but also due to the lower percentage of full-quarter separations that involve an
EEf flow. Only 20% of separations from jobs held at least one quarter are to a new job held at
least one quarter. Although this restriction is interesting for some purposes, particularly the
analysis of employer-to-employer transitions involving longer jobs, our primary purpose for
introducing it is to utilize the full quarter of earnings at separating and acceding jobs to have an
apples-to-apples comparison for measuring earnings changes. We will not impose it until we
come to discuss the earnings changes associated with E-to-E transitions.

         Table 3 breaks out employer-to-employer transitions by whether the flows involve main
or secondary jobs.17 Most jobs in our data are main jobs, with only 5.9% of workers in our data
holding multiple jobs on the first day of a given quarter. The overwhelming majority of our E-
to-E flows are flows from one main job to another (96%). Our estimate of the E-to-E rate for
main jobs, 3.9%, is similar to that for all jobs. We would expect that most workers would be less
likely to leave their main jobs voluntarily without another job already lined up or particularly
good prospects, than they would be to leave a secondary job under such circumstances, and our

17 We define as a main job the job held on the first day of the quarter that has the greatest earnings weighted
average earnings over the previous four quarters (see section III for the discussion of our earnings ranking
algorithm). To define destination main jobs we use the job held on the last day of the quarter with the greatest



                                                         16
results confirm this. We find that separations are less common from main jobs (13%) than from
secondary jobs (31%), and that separations from main jobs are much more likely to result in a
flow to another employer (29%) than separations from secondary jobs (8%).

         The E-to-E flow rates derived from the CPS by Fallick and Fleischman, mentioned
above, are based on comparisons of main jobs from one month to the next. The main job
measures in Table 3 should therefore be more comparable to the CPS definition. Our estimate of
a 3.9% quarterly E-to-E rate is lower than three times the 2.6% monthly E-to-E rate Fallick and
Fleischman found in the CPS. There are several reasons that estimates of E-to-E flows may
differ between the LEHD and the CPS. First, our definition of the main job, based on an explicit
ranking by earnings, need not match the subjective concept of a main job used in the CPS.
However, the similarity of our estimates of E-to-E flow with and without the restriction to main
jobs suggests that this does not explain much of the discrepancy. Probably more important are
differences between a monthly point-in-time measure of employment as in the CPS and the
quarterly earnings measures developed with the LEHD. In particular, the requirement in our
preferred definition that separating jobs are held on the first day of the quarter and acceding jobs
are held on the last day of the quarter eliminates many E-to-E flows involving very short-
duration jobs.18 Other differences between the CPS and our LEHD pooled state sample will
result in differences between the two estimates. First, as noted at the outset, the figures reported
here from the LEHD represent only 3 states. Second, the two sources differ in scope (for
example, the CPS includes the unincorporated self-employed). Third, the sample periods do not
match exactly (1992-2002 vs. 1994 to 2003). Nevertheless, despite these differences in data and
methodology, the two sources yield estimates that are roughly comparable in magnitude when it


earnings weighted average earnings over the subsequent four quarters.
18 One issue here is multiple transitions within the quarter. Suppose that both the monthly and quarterly data were
point-in-time measured at the same point in the month. Say that the monthly rate of E-to-E transitions (CPS
definition) is X, and a fraction Y of all persons who make a monthly E-to-E transition make another monthly E-to-E
transition during the quarter. Then the rate of quarterly E-to-E transitions is not 3*X; it is (3-2*Y)*X. If this were
the only issue, then, the figure from the CPS and that from the LEHD would be perfectly reconciled if ¾ of all
monthly E-to-E transitions were made by individuals who make another monthly E-to-E transition within the quarter.
 In fact the evidence from the CPS suggests that the fraction Y is only about 8%. In contrast, below we show that a
touch more than ½ of quarterly E-to-E transitions are made by individuals who make another E-to-E move within the
year.


                                                         17
comes to the importance of E-to-E flows, with Fallick and Fleischman finding that E-to-E
transitions constitute 39% of main job separations, compared to the 29% figure in our data.



B. Fluctuations and Trends in E-to-E transitions.

         Figures 1 and 2 show our estimates of how the quarterly E-to-E rate has changed over
time between 1992 and 2003. The popular perception is that United States has become an ever
more transient labor market, wherein workers change jobs more often, both from choice and
necessity, and contingent work arrangements have become more common. As background, in
the states in our study, overall labor market transitions -- both the rates of separation and of
accession -- rose slightly during the 1990s and fell beginning in 2001. Similarly, as discussed in
DFH, the BED data shows that job creation and job destruction both increased slightly over the
expansion of the 1990s and fell during the recession, with some recovery having begun only in
since 2003. In addition, DFH show that unemployment inflows and outflows (measured from
the CPS) also exhibit a declining trend over this period. These patterns of worker, job and
unemployment flows suggest if anything a declining trend in the pace of churning of workers
and jobs over the last 15 years or so.

         E-to-E flows provide a unique measure of churning since this flow inherently reflects
both sides of the separations/accessions accounts. What we see, whether looking at E-to-E
transitions as a fraction of employment or as a fraction of separations, is that E-to-E rates rose
from 1992 to 2000, fell dramatically in 2001, and stabilized in 2002 and 2003 at a lower level
than in the 1990s. We find that the correlation between the underlying net growth rate of
employment (for the states we use for this analysis) and the E-to-E flows is strongly positive – at
an annual frequency the correlation is 0.82 (with a standard error of 0.006).19 While this is just
one cyclical episode, it is nevertheless striking that employer-to-employer transitions are so
cyclically sensitive. Unfortunately, our data stop just as the labor market began to seriously
recover. Thus, we cannot infer a secular trend from our period of study. However, our finding


19 The correlation at a quarterly frequency (abstracting from seasonal variation) the correlation is 0.32 with a
standard error of 0.06.


                                                          18
that the pace of the E-to-E flows remains low in the post-2001 period is consistent with the
declining pattern of job and worker flows found in DFH.

       There is also a pronounced seasonal cycle in the pattern of E-to-E flows. In our sample,
E-to-E flows as a fraction of jobs are more common in the third quarter, with the second quarter
also high for much of the period. On average over our sample period, the E-to-E rate, as a
fraction of jobs, is 4.0% in the third quarter, compared to a low of 3.5% in the first quarter.
Interestingly, the seasonal pattern is different as a fraction of separations, where the stand-out is
the low rate at which separators move to new employers in the fourth quarter of the year. Not
surprisingly, however, these patterns are not entirely uniform either across states or across
industries. The seasonality of E-to-E flows raises many interesting questions and deserves
further exploration. We leave such exploration for future work.

C. The distribution of E-to-E flows

       We have documented that employer-to-employer flows are common, in the sense that the
magnitude is large. We would also like to know how common such flows are in the sense of
being experienced widely across workers and firms. In terms of the limited demographic
characteristics available to us at this point, E-to-E flows are fairly widespread. Age is the major
source of concentration, although education also plays some role. The difference across gender
is minimal.

       It has been well known from sources like the NLSY that turnover, including E-to-E rates,
falls rapidly with age from the early post-schooling years through early middle age. Less was
known about E-to-E flows at older ages. Fallick and Fleischman found that E-to-E rates (relative
to employment) were fairly stable from about the mid-40s on, despite an increase in separation
rates that becomes quite steep around retirement ages. The LEHD data tell a somewhat different
story. Figure 3a shows that E-to-E rates fall continuously with age before flattening out in the
mid 60s.20 Figure 3b shows that the fraction of separations that are E-to-E transitions, not
surprisingly, falls rapidly in ages in the early 60s, as retirements presumably take up a large
share of separations.




                                                 19
        Figure 4 shows that differences by education are not as pronounced. Relative to
employment, E-to-E rates are lower for workers with more education. However, much of this
simply reflects greater general turnover among less educated workers. When viewed relative to
separations, E-to-E rates fall more gently as education rises.21

        These demographic differences show that while E-to-E flows are quite widespread, some
workers are more likely than others to change employers. But, of course, there is a great deal of
heterogeneity not accounted for by the crude demographic characteristics we have available, and
many workers change employers repeatedly. Table 4 examines to what extent frequent job
changers dominate the overall rate of flows. It shows the frequency of E-to-E transitions
(conditional on being employed) in the first quarter of 1997, broken down by the number of E-
to-E transitions a person has made in the three-year period 1994-1996. Even among those who
have made no E-to-E transitions during the 1994-1996 period, 2.6% changed employers in
1997q1. Not surprisingly, however, the likelihood of an E-to-E transition (conditional on being
employed) is higher for those who have made such a transition recently, and rises with the
number of recent E-to-E transitions. For the most part, this is because workers who changed
employers more frequently in the previous few years are more likely to separate in general from
their current employers, but, as the right-most column shows, even as a fraction of separations E-
to-E rates are higher for those who recently changed employers more often.

        This pattern of Aoccurrence-dependence@ is reflected in the concentration of E-to-E flows
among workers. As shown in second panel of Table 4, about 4% of E-to-E transitions in a three-
year period (1994-1996) are accounted for by the 1% of workers who change employers most
frequently (who happen to make at least 5 E-to-E transitions in the 1994-96 period). About 53%
percent of E-to-E flows are accounted for by the 25% of workers who have had more than one E-
to-E flow over the period.



20
  Although the pattern at these older ages varies by state.
21
  The patterns by education vary by state, so even this qualitative results should not be taken as
representative of the nation.



                                                     20
       Another side to this die is the way in which the rates of E-to-E flows vary by job tenure.
Figure 5 shows that the fraction of workers who change employers is lower among workers with
more tenure, in keeping with their overall lower rates of separation. But among those who do
separate, there is not a straightforward relationship between tenure and the probability that the
separation is an E-to-E transition. As a fraction of separations, higher-tenure workers (defined as
those with their employer for more than two years) have similar E-to-E rates as low-tenure
workers (defined as those with their employer less than one year), but lower E-to-E rates than
medium-tenure workers (with their employers one to two years).
       Similarly, some employers are more likely than others to be a source of E-to-E flows.
The top panel of figure 6 divides the firms in our sample into five approximate quintiles,
weighted by employment, according to the percentage of their average workforce that changes
employer each quarter. In the middle quintile, firms with “average” E-to-E outflows see about
1.8% of their workforce change employers each quarter. But E-to-E flows are highly
concentrated: The highest-EE quintile of employers accounts for nearly two-thirds of all E-to-E
flows, while the bottom quintile accounts for almost none. As you can see from the right-most
bar in each set, this concentration of E-to-E flows is not entirely attributable to the concentration
of overall separations among firms. While there is some association between the two, the
highest quintiles share of E-to-E flows exceeds its share of separations in general by 20
percentage points, while the lowest quintile, which sees almost no E-to-E flows, accounts for a
little more than 10% of overall separations.

D. Destination jobs

       To the extent that employer-changes are voluntary, we would expect workers to be more
satisfied, on average, with their new jobs than with their old. One manifestation of this would be
longer average tenures at the destination jobs than at the jobs of origin. Especially among young
workers, who account for a disproportionately large share of E-to-E flows, aging and experience
gained would also tend toward progressively more stable employment relationships, and so
longer average tenure at the new jobs. The long temporal reach of the LEHD allows us to
examine this question. We find that E-to-E flows do appear to move workers toward longer job



                                                 21
tenures. Table 5 divides the employer-employee matches in our sample into three categories:
those that last less than one year (short), those that last 1-2 years (medium), and those that last
more than 2 years (long).22 Short jobs constitute a disproportionately large share of both the
origins and the destinations of E-to-E flows. However, a larger proportion of E-to-E flows begin
in short jobs than end there (53% vs. 47%), and a considerably larger share of E-to-E flows end
in long jobs than begin there (25% vs.19%). One would also expect that workers voluntarily
switching from relatively good job matches (i.e. longer tenure jobs) would also be, on average,
more satisfied with their new job than those leaving worse matches. The high rate at which
workers separating from longer tenured jobs move to another long job – 43% of E-to-E flows
involving separations from longer jobs are to another long job – suggests this is indeed the case.

         Similarly, to the extent that employer changes are voluntary, we would expect them to be
associated, on average, with increases in earnings. This appears to be the case as well. Figure 7
shows the median percent change in earnings for moves from one full-quarter employer to
another.23 For comparison, the figure also shows the median changes for full-quarter workers
who do not separate from their employers. The median changes in earnings for employer-
changers are large, and much larger than the median changes for non-separators. And for
employer-changers, more than for non-separators, the earnings changes dropped off markedly
when the labor market weakened moving toward the recession in 2001. Presumably a much
larger proportion of the employer-changers during this period lost their jobs and faced earnings
losses, or at least smaller gains, upon reemployment.

         While the median worker who makes a job-to-job transition experiences an earning
increase, there is substantial dispersion in the distribution of earnings changes. The earnings
change from job-to-job transitions at the 25th percentile is –14 percent and is 37 percent at the


22 Job tenure must be inferred from LEHD administrative data. We define job tenure here as the number of
contiguous quarters of positive wages for a particular employer-employee match. Because tenure for separating jobs
is censored on the left, and tenure for acceding jobs is censored on the right, we use a mid range year of the panel for
our tenure analysis, where the maximum length of either a separating or acceding job is six years.
23 Because we do not have information on weeks or hours worked during the quarter, we confine our examination of
earnings changes to full-quarter matches, in order to minimize the distorting influence of part-quarter jobs. Also, in
order to preserve confidentiality, the “medians” shown here are really the average of the 48th through 52nd percentiles
of earnings changes.


                                                          22
75th percentiles. Like for the median, these patterns are procyclical with the 25th percentile
earnings change falling to –17 percent and the 75th percentile falling to 33 percent in 2001. The
finding of substantial earnings reductions for a non-trivial fraction of job-to-job transitions
suggests that not all such transitions are voluntary at least in the sense that they reflect
transitions initiated solely by the worker in order to obtain earnings gains.

       As seen in Figure 8, the earnings gains upon changing employers are greatest for younger
workers. This is most marked for the youngest group of workers, the black line in Figure 8,
where many of the workers may be moving from part-time in-school or summer jobs to career
jobs. However, consistent with theories of job matching, it is also true for prime age groups.
For the oldest group, the median earnings changes are often negative, perhaps reflecting bridge
jobs with lower wage rates and reduced hours.
       To put these patterns into context, it is instructive to compare job-to-job transitions with
separations that do not yield a direct job-to-job transition. Such an analysis is beyond the scope
of this paper, but in a companion paper (Fallick, Haltiwanger, and McEntarfer, 2007)we explore
this comparison on a somewhat more restricted sample. There we find that the median earnings
change for workers who experience a spell of joblessness between jobs is lower than for workers
who experience a direct job-to-job transition. For example, for workers separating from firms
without large displacement events, the median earnings change for workers who experience
2-3 quarters of joblesslessness is about -6 percent, compared to an 8 percent median increase for
those who move directly to another job. For separations where a large displacement occurs, we
find that workers with 2-3 quarters of joblessless have a median earnings change of about a -10
percent, compared to about a 3 percent change for those with direct job-to-job transitions. We
also find considerable dispersion in the earnings changes for workers who experience a spell of
joblessness, and that this dispersion increases with the length of the spell of joblessnessness.
These comparisons help provide perspective on the consequences for earnings of job-to-job
transitions as compared to transitions that involve joblessness, including, for example, those
found in the job displacement literature (e.g., Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan 1993).




                                                  23
       Many E-to-E flows serve to reallocate workers across industries. The bar chart in Figure
9 illustrates the great extent of industry-switching among employer-changers. Among workers
of all ages (the right-most set of bars), approximately 60% of E-to-E movements are movements
from one of the eleven NAICS super sectors to another, and only 16% of E-to-E transitions
remain within the same most narrowly defined (6-digit) NAICS industry. The frequency of
industry-switching varies by age, with younger workers naturally more likely to change sectors
and least likely to remain within the same 6-digit industry. But even among the oldest category
of workers, changing broad industries when changing employers is the norm.

       The prevalence of industry-switching among E-to-E flows is thus widespread, but its
extent does vary considerably by industry. The rows of Table 6 shows the percentage of E-to-E
flows out of jobs in each of the eleven NAICS super sectors that remain in that super sector (the
diagonal elements) or move to each other super sector. Even at this high level of industry
aggregation, movements across industries are the rule. Remaining in the same supersector
typically characterizes the plurality of E-to-E moves, but in only two cases does staying in the
same super sector characterize even a bare majority.

       Naturally, the most popular destinations for workers who switch industries via E-to-E
movements differ from industry to industry. Thus, for example, workers leaving the professional
& business services super sector (which includes temporary help firms) are quite likely to move
into manufacturing, while those leaving leisure & hospitality are quite likely to move into trade,
transportation & utilities. These patterns are often not reciprocal. For example, many of the E-
to-E flows out of information are into trade, transportation & utilities, but few E-to-E flows go in
the opposite direction.

       The LEHD data allow us to examine these movements across industries in great detail.
Figures 10 through 12 show the top ten most common destination industries for E-to-E flows
from three particular detailed industries. Two of these industries B software publishing and
temporary help services B grew over the period of our data, both in absolute numbers of jobs and
in their share of jobs in the economy. The third industry B textile mills B shrank both in absolute
numbers and in share. For software publishing and temporary help (figures 11 and 12), which



                                                24
are 6-digit industries, we defined destination industries at the 4-digit level. For textile mills
(figure 10), which is a 3-digit industry, we defined destination industries at the 3-digit level.

       The top-ten destinations comprise almost 2/3 of the E-to-E transitions from software
publishing. The most common destination -- 27% of total flows - is other employers in software
publishing. The remainder is dominated by other computer-related industries, mostly producers
but also wholesalers and retailers. The one exception is employment services/temporary help
(8% of flows), where the employees may, in fact, be working at computer-related companies.

       Not surprisingly, the destinations for E-to-E transitions from temporary help agencies are
more diverse, with the top ten destinations comprising a little less than 1/3 of the total. Within
the top ten, the majority are other companies in employment services, with the remainder
moving into a variety of manufacturing, food service, and other industries, presumably industries
in which a large share of temporary help employees actually work.

       For E-to-E transitions from textile mills, the top ten destinations comprise 38% of
transitions. Among these, other textile mills and establishments in the related apparel
manufacturing industry make up the majority. Employment services (both temporary help and
professional employer organizations) and restaurants round out the top ten.

       We obviously do not want to draw conclusions from just a few industries, but these
examples do suggest the importance of sector-related skills and of geographic proximity, as well
as the substantial role of the temporary help industry in job mobility.


V. Conclusion
       In this paper, we used longitudinal linked employer-employee data from the LEHD
program at Census Bureau to measure and study employer-to-employer flows. These data
provide a uniquely comprehensive source of information on workers and employers, while their
quarterly nature present particular challenges to measurement of flows. We find that the pace of
employer-to-employer flows is high – representing about 4 percent of employment and 30
percent of separations each quarter. The pace of employer-to-employer flows is highly




                                                  25
procyclical. The cyclicality of employer-to-employer flows is a feature of the worker and job
flows that should be taken into account in interpreting and modeling labor market dynamics.

       The pace of employer-to-employer flows varies systematically across worker, job and
employer characteristics. For workers, employer-to-employer flows as a fraction of employment
and separations declines with age through the mid 60s and then flattens out -- the decline as a
fraction of separations with age is especially rapid in the age range 50-65 when retirements
presumably become a more important form of separation than employer-to-employer transitions.
We find that less educated workers have a higher pace of employer-to-employer flows as a
fraction of employment but there is no discernable pattern by education as a fraction of
separations. The pattern by education reflects the higher overall rate of worker flows of less
educated but conditional on a separation, education is not an important factor.

       Our findings regarding job tenure and earnings dynamics suggest that for those workers
moving directly to new jobs, the new jobs are generally better jobs, and that moving directly to a
better job is easier during a boom than a bust. Tenure at new jobs is generally longer than at
separating jobs. We find that on average workers who make employer-to-employer transitions
see large increases in earnings. However, this pattern is highly procyclical. We also find a
larger quarterly growth in earnings for workers making employer-to-employer transitions than
for workers who remain in their same job.

       There are rich patterns in terms of origin and destination of industries. We find
somewhat surprisingly that a very large fraction of the workers making employer-to-employer
transitions switch even broadly-defined industries. More than half of workers making an
employer-to-employer transition switch NAICS super-sectors.

       The focus of the current paper is primarily measurement and reporting of basic empirical
patterns of employer-to-employer flows from a rich, new longitudinal employer-employee
database at the U.S. Census Bureau. The magnitude and variation in employer-to-employer
flows we have reported make clear that this measure of labor market dynamics should become a
standard measure incorporated with measures of accessions, separations, job creation and job
destruction. This measurement oriented paper is just the first step in the analysis of employer-to-



                                                26
employer flows. To understand the implications of employer-to-employer flows for our
understanding of labor market dynamics, an obvious next step is to compare the outcomes for
those workers who separate and immediately move to another job vs. those who separate and
experience a spell of joblessness before finding another job. We know from the literature on job
displacement (e.g., Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1992)) that workers who suffer a job loss
from a business experiencing a mass layoff experience substantial earnings losses that are at least
partly driven by spells of joblessness. It is clearly of interest to understand the relationship
between the dynamics of the types of separations we have focused on in the current work and the
type of separations associated with displacement. Exploring these issues is a high priority for
future research.




                                                  27
                                          References
Abowd, John M., John Haltiwanger, and Julia I. Lane, 2004. “Integrated Longitudinal
       Employee-Employer Data for the United States.” American Economic Review Papers
       and Proceedings, 94(2): 224-229.
Abowd, John, Bryce Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin L. McKinney, Marc
       Roemer, and Simon Woodcock. “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the
       Quarterly Workforce Indicators” LEHD Technical Paper No. 2006-01.

Acs, Zolton J., Catherine Armington, and Alicia Robb, “Measures of Job Flow Dynamics in the
       U.S.”, CES 99-1, U.S. Bureau of the Census, January 1999.

Burgess, Simon, Julia I. Lane, and David Stevens, 2000. “Job flows, worker flows, and
       churning.” Journal of Labor Economics 18(3): 473-502.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger. “The Flow Approach to Labor
       Markets: New Evidence and Micro-Macro Links.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       20(3): 3-26.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction
       (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996).
Fallick, Bruce and Charles A. Fleischman, 2001, “The Importance of Employer-to-Employer
       Flows in the U.S. Labor Market,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series #2001-18,
       Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Fallick, Bruce and Charles A. Fleischman, 2004, “Employer-to-Employer Flows in the U.S.
       Labor Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows,” Finance and Economics
       Discussion Series #2004-34, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Fallick, Bruce, John Haltiwanger, and Erika McEntarfer, 2007. “Employment and Wage
       Consequences of Job Separation in the U.S.”, mimeo.
Golan, Amos, Julia Lane, and Erika McEntarfer, 2006. “The Dynamics of Worker Reallocation
       Within and Across Industries.” Economica (forthcoming).
Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde and Daniel Sullivan, 1993 “Earnings Losses of Displaced
       Workers.” American Economic Review, vol. 83(4), pages 685-709.



                                              28
Table 1: Example of Quarterly Earnings Histories


        Person/Employer Match                  Q1        Q2         Q3          Q4
        (Job)

        Person 1     Firm A                    $0        $500       $0          $0

        Person 1     Firm Q                    $0        $1000      $0          $0

        Person 2     Firm B                    $2500     $1500      $0          $0

        Person 2     Firm Z                    $0        $750       $3000       $3000


Notes: all persons, firms, and wages in examples are fictionalized and do not reflect any individual’s
wage records.

Table 2: Employer-to-Employer Flow Rates By Employment and Separations


Employer-to-Employer Flow Rate                                     Consecutive-       Full-
                                                                   Quarter E-to-      Quarter E-
                                                                   E Flows (EEb)      to-E Flows
                                                                                      (EEf)
E-to-E flows/jobs                                                  0.0387             0.0220
Persons experiencing E-to-E/employment                             0.0410             0.0230
E-to-E flows/job separations                                       0.2647             0.2020
Persons experiencing E-to-E/persons separating from jobs           0.2727             0.2045


        Notes: Employer-to-employer flow rates are calculated as the ratio of the number of job
        flows (or person flows) of the flow type to the number of jobs (or separations) that have
        the same attachment criteria as the separating job in the E-to-E flow. Thus the
        denominator for EEb/separations is all jobs for which s2ijt = 1, for EEf/separations it is
        all jobs for which s3ijt = 1. The jobs denominator is EEb flow rates is all jobs for which
        mijt = 1 and mijt-1 = 1. The jobs denominator for EEf flow rates is all jobs for which mijt =
        1 and mijt-1 = 1 and mijt-2 = 1.




                                                    29
Table 3: Employer-to-Employer Flows: By Main and Secondary Jobs


Description:                                                                Rate:

Proportion of workers with only a main job in a quarter                     0.9407
Proportion of workers with secondary jobs in a quarter                      0.0593
Separation rate from main jobs                                              0.1345
Separation rate from secondary jobs                                         0.3145
E-to-E flows/jobs: main job to main job flows only                          0.0393
E-to-E flows/jobs: secondary job flows only                                 0.0288

Percentage of Flows:
      Main job-to-Main Job                                                  0.9558
      Main job-to-Secondary job                                             0.0057
      Secondary-to-Main job                                                 0.0102
      Secondary-to-Secondary job                                            0.0283

Percentage of Separations:
      Separation from main job into new main job                            0.2899
      Separation from main job into new secondary job                       0.0017
      Separations from main job that do not involve a E-to-E flow           0.7084
      Separation from secondary job into new main job                       0.0219
      Separation from secondary job into new secondary job                  0.0587
      Separations from secondary jobs that do not involve a E-to-E flow     0.9194


        Notes: All E-to-E flows are EEb flows. Separations from main jobs are defined
        as separations from jobs with positive earnings in t and t-1 that have the greatest
        earnings weighted average earnings over the last four quarters (i.e. max[(∑tt-
             2
        3wijt )/4]). Accessions to main jobs are defined as accessions to jobs with positive
        earnings in t and t+1 that have the greatest earnings weighted average earnings in
        the subsequent four quarters (i.e. max[(∑t+3twijt2)/4]).




                                           30
Table 4: E-to-E Flow Rates Conditional on Flow History and Concentration of E-to-E
                      Flows Among Highly-Mobile Workers

                                          Proportion of       Proportion of
                                          workers in this     separating workers
                                          group having a      in this group
                                          E-to-E flow in      having a E-to-E
                                          1997q1              flow in 1997q1
    Number of E-to-E Flows in 3 years
    (1994-1996)
         0                                           0.0265              0.2488
         1                                           0.0583              0.3514
         2                                          0.08398              0.3916
         3                                           0.1084              0.4185
         4+                                          0.1452              0.4479
    Number of Separations in 3 years
    (1994-1996)
         0                                           0.0193              0.2285
         1                                           0.0365              0.2891
         2                                           0.0561              0.3222
         3                                           0.0759              0.3516
         4+                                          0.1119              0.3953


    Percent of Total E-to-E Flows During 1994q1-1996q4 Accounted for by the Top X% of
    Persons Ranked by Number of E-to-E Flows During the Interval


                                              % of Total E-to-E Flows
               Top 1% (5+ flows)               4.13%
               Top 5% (3+ flows)              24.70%
               Top 25% (2+ flows)             53.46%




                                        31
Table 5: Employer-to-Employer Flows By Job Length at Separating and Acceding Job: All
EEb Flows in 1997 (Percent/Row Percent).

                     Tenure at Acceding Job
  Tenure at           Short Job       Mid-Length       Longer Job     % of all
  Separating Job      (2-3 quarters) Job               (>2 years)     E-to-E
                                      (1-2 years)                     flows
  Short Job           29.49 / 55.50    14.35 / 27.01   9.29 / 17.49   53.13
  (2-3 quarters)
  Mid-Length Job      11.94 / 49.74    8.42 / 30.12    7.59 / 27.15   27.94
  (1-2 years)
  Longer Job          5.51 / 29.12     5.32 / 28.12    8.09 / 42.76   18.93
  (>2 years)
  % of all E-to-E     46.94            28.09           24.97
  flows

      Notes: Tenure at separating jobs is calculated using contiguous quarters of positive wages
      for this worker-employer match from t to the beginning of the time series (1991q1).
      Tenure at acceding jobs is calculated using contiguous quarters of positive wages from t
      to the end of the time series (2003q4). As tenure in our data is censored on both the right
      and on the left, we use a mid-range year of the panel for this analysis, where there are six
      years of data looking backwards as well as forwards.




                                               32
Table 6: Origin/Destination Matrix of NAICS Super-Sector Transitions




                                          33
Figure 1: Time Series of EEb flows: Fraction of beginning-of-quarter jobs that experience
a flow to another employer by year: quarter.


                     Employer-to-Employer Rates By Year:Q (Jobs)

              0.06

              0.05

              0.04
   EEb/jobs




              0.03                                                    EEb/jobs

              0.02

              0.01

                0
              19 1

              19 q 1

              19 1

              19 1

              19 1

              19 q 1

              19 1

              20 1

              20 1

              20 q 1

              20 1
                   q1
                   q



                   q

                   q

                   q



                   q

                   q

                   q



                   q
                 92

                 93
                 94

                 95

                 96

                 97

                 98

                 99

                 00

                 01

                 02

                 03
              19




                                             34
Figure 2: Time Series of EEb flows: Fraction of separations that experience a flow to
another employer by year: quarter.


                                 Employer-to-Employer Rates By Year:Q
                                             (Separations)

                     0.35
                      0.3
   EEb/separations




                     0.25
                      0.2
                                                                                                                                        EEb/separations
                     0.15
                      0.1
                     0.05
                       0
                            1992q1
                                     1993q1
                                              1994q1
                                                       1995q1
                                                                1996q1
                                                                         1997q1
                                                                                  1998q1
                                                                                           1999q1
                                                                                                    2000q1
                                                                                                             2001q1
                                                                                                                      2002q1
                                                                                                                               2003q1




                                                                                                     35
Figure 3: Employer-to-Employer (EEb) rates by age


                            Employer-to-Employer Rates by Age (Jobs)

                     0.12

                      0.1

                     0.08
   EEb/jobs




                     0.06                                                                            EEb/jobs

                     0.04

                     0.02

                       0
                            14
                                 19
                                      24
                                           29
                                                34
                                                     39
                                                          44
                                                               49
                                                                     54
                                                                              59
                                                                                   64
                                                                                         69
                                                                                              74
                                 Employer-to-Employer Rates by Age
                                           (Separations)

                     0.35
                      0.3
   EEb/separations




                     0.25
                      0.2
                                                                                               EEb/separations
                     0.15
                      0.1
                     0.05
                       0
                            14
                                 20
                                      26
                                           32
                                                38
                                                     44
                                                          50
                                                               56
                                                                         62
                                                                              68
                                                                                    74




                                                                    36
Figure 4: Employer-to-Employer (EEb) Rates By Education


                         Employer-to-Employer Rates By Educational
                                        Attainment

                              0.3

                             0.25
   E-to-E rate




                              0.2
                                                               EEb/jobs
                             0.15
                                                               EEb/separations
                              0.1

                             0.05

                                 0
                                                      te




                                                       e


                                                       n
                                                      te

                                                     ge




                                                    io
                                                    at
                                                   ua

                                                  ua

                                                 lle




                                                  at
                                                du
                                               ad

                                               ad




                                              uc
                                              co

                                              ra
                                            gr

                                            gr




                                          Ed
                                            G
                                            e
                                         ol




                                         m
                                         ol




                                       ge


                                        e
                                      ho

                                      ho

                                      So




                                      at
                                     le
                                   sc

                                   sc




                                  du
                                   ol
                                 C

                                ra
                        gh


                                h
                              ig




                             -G
                     hi

                             H




                           st
                    a




                         Po
                 ot
                 N




                                                 37
Figure 5: Employer-to-Employer Rates by Job Tenure


                               Employer-to-Employer Rates by Length of Separating Job (Jobs)


                    0.12

                     0.1

                    0.08                                                                    EEb as a fraction of employment
                                                                                            (Long Jobs: >2 yrs)
  EEb/jobs




                                                                                            EEb as a fraction of employment
                    0.06                                                                    (Medium Jobs: 1-2 yrs)
                                                                                            EEb as a fraction of employment
                    0.04                                                                    (Short Jobs: < 1 yr)


                    0.02

                       0
                        q1

                               q4

                                      q3

                                             q2

                                                    q1

                                                           q4

                                                                  q3

                                                                         q2

                                                                                  q1

                                                                                       q4
                       96

                              96

                                     97

                                            98

                                                   99

                                                          99

                                                                 00

                                                                        01

                                                                               02

                                                                                      02
                     19

                            19

                                   19

                                          19

                                                 19

                                                        19

                                                               20

                                                                      20

                                                                             20

                                                                                    20




                               Employer-to-Employer Rates By Length of Separating Job (Separations)


                     0.4
                    0.35
                     0.3
  EEb/separations




                                                                                            EEb as a fraction of separations
                    0.25                                                                    (Long Jobs: >2 yrs)
                                                                                            EEb as a fraction of separations
                     0.2                                                                    (Medium Jobs: 1-2 yrs)
                    0.15                                                                    EEb as a fraction of separations
                                                                                            (Short Jobs: <1 yr)
                     0.1
                    0.05
                       0
                     19 q1
                     19 q3

                     19 q1

                     19 q3

                     19 q1
                     19 q3

                     19 q1

                     20 q3
                     20 q1

                     20 q3

                     20 q1

                     20 q3
                     20 q1

                     20 q3
                           q1
                        96

                        96
                        97

                        97

                        98
                        98

                        99

                        99

                        00
                        00

                        01

                        01
                        02

                        02

                        03
                     19




                                                                             38
Figure 6: Concentration of E-to-E flows in firms with many flows.

                        Concentration of E-to-E flows in firms with high flow rates 1997:2


  0.7

  0.6

  0.5
                                                                                          Share of total E-to-E flows
  0.4
                                                                                          Share of employment
  0.3
                                                                                          Share of separations
  0.2

  0.1

   0
         1st quintile     2nd quintile     3rd quintile   4th quintile    5th quintile
        [EEb/emp <=       [EEb/emp >      [EEb/emp >      [EEb/emp >      [EEb/emp >
           0.272]         0.2725 and     1.489 and <=     3.1746 and         6.667]
                           <= 1.489]        3.1746]        <= 6.667]



                           Concentration of E-to-E flows: 1997q2 (weighted by EEb)


  0.8

  0.7

  0.6

  0.5
                                                                                          Share of total E-to-E flows
  0.4                                                                                     Share of employment
                                                                                          Share of separations
  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

   0
         1st quintile  2nd quintile 3rd quintile           4th quintile    5th quintile
        [EEb/emp <= [EEb/emp > [EEb/emp >                  [EEb/emp       [EEb/emp >
          4.1958]     4.1958and <= 7.5 and <=             >12.5 and <=         25]
                           7.5]        12.5]                   25]




                                                                   39
Figure 7: Time Series of Earnings Changes: Full-quarter E-to-E Flows


          Percent Earnings Changes Associated with Full-Quarter Employer-to-Employer
                          Flows vs Full-Quarter Jobs w/no Seperations


  10
   9
   8
   7
   6                                                                 Median % change in quarterly
                                                                     earnings -- EEf flow s
   5                                                                 Median % change in quarterly
   4                                                                 earnings - Full-quarter jobs

   3
   2
   1
   0
       1992      1994     1996      1998      2000      2002


Note: All medians are fuzzed, equal to the average of the 48th, 49th, 50th, 51st, 52nd percentiles.
All earnings are real 2001 dollars. Full-quarter E-to-E flows are used as they contain a full-
quarter of earnings before and after the flow. Full-quarter continuing jobs are defined at those
jobs that are full-quarter in t-1 and in t+1.




                                                 40
Figure 8: Time Series of Earnings Changes: EEf flows by Age Group
                                                       Median Percentage Real Quarterly Earnings Change:
                                                                           By Age


                                      18
   % real quarterly earnings change




                                      16
                                      14
                                      12
                                      10                                                                                       EEf Age 14-25
                                                                                                                               EEf Age 26-35
                                       8
                                                                                                                               EEf Age 36-50
                                       6                                                                                       EEf Age 51-64
                                       4                                                                                       EEf Age 65-99

                                       2
                                       0
                                             1992   1993   1994    1995   1996   1997    1998   1999   2000   2001   2002
                                      -2
                                      -4


                                                     M edian Percentage Real Quarterly Earnings Change:
                                                                 Full-quarter continuing jobs

  4.5
    4
  3.5
                                                                                                                      Non-sep F Age 14-25
    3
                                                                                                                      Non-sep F Age 26-35
  2.5
                                                                                                                      Non-sep F Age 36-50
    2
                                                                                                                      Non-sep F Age 51-64
  1.5
                                                                                                                      Non-sep F Age 65-99
    1
  0.5
    0
                                      1992          1994          1996       1998          2000        2002

Note: All medians are fuzzed, equal to the average of the 48th, 49th, 50th, 51st, 52nd percentiles.
All earnings are real 2001 dollars. Full-quarter E-to-E flows are used as they contain a full-
quarter of earnings before and after the flow. Full-quarter continuing jobs are defined at those
jobs that are full-quarter in t-1 and in t+1.


                                                                                    41
Figure 9: Rates of Industry Change By Age Group


              NAICS Industry Switching By Age Group
                           (EEb Flows)

  70
  60

  50                                                Does not change 6-digit NAICS
                                                    NAICS Super-Sector Switcher
  40                                                NAICS Sector Switcher only
                                                    NAICS Subsector Switcher only
  30
                                                    Changes 4-digit NAICS only
  20                                                Changes 5-digit NAICS only

  10
   0
        Age   Age   Age   Age   Age           All
       14-25 26-35 36-50 51-64 65-99




                                         42
Figure 10: Top 10 Destination NAICS, Textile Mills




                                           43
Figure 11: Top 10 Destination NAICS, Workers in Software Publishing


           Top 10 Destination NAICS for Workers in Software Publishing
                                  (NAICS 5112)
                              EEb flows: 1992-2003, N=10,027
                                  (other industries=39%)




                                                     Employment Services
                                                          (13.74%)

                                                               Commercial Equipment
                   Computer Systems                            Wholesalers (3.99%)
                    Design (20.34%)
                                                                 Wholesale electronic
                                                                  markets (3.58%)

                                                                      Architectural
                                                                  &Engineering Services
                                                                        (3.27%)

                                                                     Semiconductor
                                                                  Manufacturing (3.07%)

                                                                  Electronics and
                                                                 appliance stores
                                                                      (2.85%)

                   Softw are Publishers                          Other Support
                        (44.12%)                                Services (2.62%)

                                                               Data Processing
                                                                   (2.41%)




                                              44
Figure 12: Top 10 Destination NAICS, Temp Help




                                        45
