                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE OTHER EX-ANTE MORAL HAZARD IN HEALTH

                                         Jay Bhattacharya
                                         Mikko Packalen

                                       Working Paper 13863
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13863


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2008




Bhattacharya thanks the National Institute on Aging for funding his work on this project. We thank
Neeraj Sood for helpful discussions. We are responsible for all remaining errors. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jay Bhattacharya and Mikko Packalen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Other Ex-Ante Moral Hazard in Health
Jay Bhattacharya and Mikko Packalen
NBER Working Paper No. 13863
March 2008
JEL No. I1,O3

                                              ABSTRACT

It is well known that public or pooled insurance coverage can induce a form of ex-ante moral hazard:
people make inefficiently low investments in self-protective activities. This paper points out another
ex-ante moral hazard that arises through an induced innovation externality. This alternative mechanism,
by contrast, causes people to devote an inefficiently high level of self-protection.

As an empirical example of this externality, we analyze the innovation induced by the obesity epidemic.
Obesity is associated with an increase in the incidence of many diseases. The induced innovation hypothesis
is that an increase in the incidence of a disease will increase technological innovation specific to that
disease. The empirical economics literature has produced substantial evidence in favor of the induced
innovation hypothesis.

We first estimate the associations between obesity and disease incidence. We then show that if these
associations are causal and the pharmaceutical reward system is optimal the magnitude of the induced
innovation externality of obesity roughly coincides with the Medicare-induced health insurance externality
of obesity. The current Medicare subsidy for obesity therefore appears to be approximately optimal.
We also show that the pattern of diseases for obese and normal weight individuals are similar enough
that the induced innovation externality of obesity on normal weight individuals is positive as well.


Jay Bhattacharya
117 Encina Commons
Center for Primary Care
and Outcomes Research
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu

Mikko Packalen
University of Waterloo
Department of Economics
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1
Canada
packalen@uwaterloo.ca
1     Introduction

Within economics, it is well-known that pooled insurance coverage can create a disincentive
for the insured individual to invest in self-protective activities – a form of ex-ante moral
hazard (Ehrlich and Becker, 1972). Much of the health economics literature, by contrast,
has focused on ex-post moral hazard induced by insurance coverage (Pauly, 1968; Manning
et al., 1987). Both the ex-ante moral hazard and the ex-post moral hazard lead to a negative
externality: the former causes people to invest insu¢ ciently in self-protection, while the
latter causes people to consume health care resources at an ine¢ ciently high level. In this
paper, we identify a distinct and non-mutually exclusive second form of ex-ante moral hazard
that runs in the opposite direction from the one identi…ed by Ehrlich and Becker (1972).
    The presence of a population with a given chronic condition within the general population
induces research e¤orts by …rms to develop pharmaceutical and other products to treat the
diseases caused by the chronic condition. The resulting innovations bene…t all people who
are a- icted with any of those diseases. This yields a positive externality: people do not
account for this induced innovation e¤ect when they make the decisions that lead them to
develop the chronic condition. In other words, this mechanism causes people to devote an
ine¢ ciently high level of self-protection.
    As an empirical example of this externality, we analyze the innovation induced by the
obesity epidemic. Obesity is associated with an increase in the incidence of many diseases.
The induced innovation hypothesis is that an increase in the incidence of a disease will
increase technological innovation speci…c to that disease. The empirical economics literature
has produced substantial evidence in favor of the induced innovation hypothesis.
    We …rst estimate the association between obesity and disease incidence. We then show
that if these associations are causal then the magnitude of the induced innovation external-
ity of obesity roughly coincides with the Medicare-induced health insurance externality of
obesity. The current subsidy for obesity therefore appears to be approximately optimal for


                                              1
people who are covered with private insurance before old-age. We also show that the pat-
tern of diseases for the obese and for the normal weight are similar enough that the induced
innovation externality of obesity on normal weight individuals is positive as well.1
        In our analysis we do not assume that there exists a free lunch in pharmaceutical in-
novation. Instead, we assume that the pharmaceutical reward system is optimal from the
consumers’perspective in the following sense: the bene…t to consumers from the additional
innovation induced by any marginal increase in the reward for pharmaceutical innovation is
equal to the marginal increase in the reward for pharmaceutical innovation.2



2         Background

In this section, we provide cursory reviews of the extensive literatures that touch on our
argument. These include the clinical literature on the consequences of obesity, the health
economics literatures on the medical costs associated with obesity and on the external e¤ects
of obesity in a pooled health insurance context, and the economics literature on the induced
innovation e¤ect.


2.1        Obesity, Disease, and Health Expenditures

Americans are increasingly overweight or obese.3 The proportion of adults classi…ed as
obese increased from 12.0% in 1991 to 20.9% in 2001 (Mokdad et al., 1999, 2003; Wang and
    1
      In this paper, we ignore any ex-post moral hazard induced by obesity. There are two reasons why this
decision is justi…able. First, the elasticity of demand for health care is larger (in absolute value) for those
without chronic conditions (Manning et al., 1987; Bajari et al., 2006). Second, Lakdawalla and Sood (2006)
show that when it comes to pharmaceutical expenditures, there may not be any ex-post moral hazard at all
–co-payments make out-of-pocket prices close to marginal cost.
    2
      We do not aim to settle the debate on whether patent duration is set at the right level for the reward
system to satisfy this property. Rather, the conclusions can be adjusted according to the reader’s beliefs
about this contentious issue.
    3
      Body mass index (BMI) is the standard measure used to determine an appropriate weight in the medical
literature. BMI is weight, measured in kilograms, divided by height, measured in meters, squared. Individuals
with a BMI between 25 and 30 are considered overweight, while those with a BMI of 30 or more are considered
obese (National Institute on Health, 1998). Henceforth, we use BMI and body weight interchangeably.


                                                      2
Beydoun, 2007).
   Obesity is associated with an increased risk of a range of chronic conditions, including
diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and stroke (Kasper et al., 2004). In some cases, there
are solid biochemical and physiological reasons to suppose that the association is causal,
such as in the case of diabetes. In other cases, the evidence is murkier. Associations such as
these arise for many reasons, not all of them medical. Here, we do not attempt to settle (nor
are we capable of settling) the debate over whether there is a causal relationship between
obesity and any particular chronic condition with which obesity is associated. Instead,
our aim is to show that if the e¤ect of obesity on disease incidence is causal and obesity
therefore has a negative Medicare-induced public health insurance externality then obesity
has also a positive induced innovation externality. The Medicare-induced negative public
health insurance externality of obesity is therefore not a su¢ cient rationale for policies that
are directed toward reducing obesity.
   Not surprisingly, expected health care expenditures are higher for obese individuals than
for normal weight individuals. A large number of studies document this fact. The vast
majority of these studies use convenience samples consisting of individuals from a single
employer or a single insurer (Elmer et al., 2004; Bertakis and Azari, 2005; Burton et al.,
1998; Raebel et al., 2004). There are also studies of obesity-related medical expenditure
di¤erences in an international setting. Both Sander and Bergemann (2003), in a German
setting, and Katzmarzyk and Janssen (2004), in a Canadian setting, …nd higher medical
expenditures for obese people.
   There are a few studies that use nationally representative data. Finkelstein et al. (2003)
use data from the linked National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) and Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS). They estimate that annual medical expenditures are $732 higher for
obese than normal weight individuals. On an aggregate level, approximately half of the
estimated $78.5 billion in medical care spending in 1998 attributable to excess body weight



                                               3
was …nanced through private insurance (38%) and patient out-of-pocket payments (14%).
Sturm (2002), using data from the Health Care for Communities (HCC) survey, …nds that
obese individuals spend $395 per year more than non-obese individuals on medical care.
Thorpe et al. (2004) also use MEPS data, but they are interested in how much of the
$1,100 increase between 1987 and 2000 in per-capita medical expenditures is attributable to
obesity. Using a regression model to calculate what per-capita medical expenditures would
have been had 1987 obesity levels persisted to 2000, they conclude that about $300 of the
$1,100 increase is due to the rise in obesity prevalence.
       This is a large literature, which space constraints prevent us from surveying in more
detail. The many studies that we do not discuss here vary considerably in generality –some
examine data from a single company or from a single insurance source –though they all reach
the same qualitative conclusion that obesity is associated with higher medical care costs.4
None of this literature attempts to address whether the relationship between obesity and
associated health care expenditures are causal. We do not attempt to settle this issue here
and, for the same reasons outlined above on the link between obesity and disease incidence,
we do not need to settle it.


2.2       Health Insurance, Ex Ante Moral Hazard, and Induced Inno-

          vation

That obesity is associated with higher health care expenditures is only a necessary …rst step in
establishing the traditional ex-ante welfare loss from obesity through health insurance. In the
case of employer-provided health insurance, for instance, Bhattacharya and Bundorf (2005)
show that di¤erences in wages between obese and non-obese workers with employer-provided
health insurance undo nominal risk pooling between the workers. Without no pooling, there
is no externality. This argument does not extend to public insurance, such as Medicare,
   4
    Some of the studies we reviewed, but arbitrarily do not discuss here include Bungam et al. (2003), Musich
et al. (2004), Quesenberry et al. (1998), Thompson et al. (2001) and Wang et al. (2003).

                                                     4
where there is clearly pooling, an induced transfer from thinner to heavier, and no wage
mechanism to undo it. Even in the case of public insurance, though, obese individuals are
likely to pay higher out-of-pocket medical expenditures because of cost-sharing in insurance
coverage. Being obese therefore imposes costs on the person holding the weight.
    Bhattacharya and Sood (2007) show that, in pooled health insurance, if the elasticity
of body weight with respect to the transfer from thinner to heavier individuals (induced by
insurance) is zero, there is no welfare loss from the ex-ante externality. Unless the subsidy
induced by insurance causes someone to become heavier, the insurance transaction is a
costless transfer. With the exception of Rashad and Markowitz (2006), there has been little
work attempting to measure the size of this key elasticity.
    To date, we are not aware of any work that has attempted to estimate the size of the
externality caused by ex-ante moral hazard through the induced innovation e¤ect. Lak-
dawalla and Sood (2007) examine the e¤ect of extending drug insurance on welfare through
induced innovation. In comparison, we focus on the ex-ante moral hazard e¤ect of induced
innovation. We also distinguish between what the e¤ect is on di¤erent demographic groups,
such as normal weight individuals and the obese.
    Our analysis is based on the induced innovation hypothesis put forward by Hicks (1932)
and Schmookler (1966). Empirical investigations of the induced innovation hypothesis in the
pharmaceutical industry include Acemoglu and Linn (2004), Finkelstein (2007), Lichtenberg
and Waldfogel (2003), and our companion paper (Bhattacharya and Packalen, 2008), which
all …nd support for the induced innovation hypothesis. Our companion paper also …nds
evidence of obesity-induced pharmaceutical innovation. Newell et al. (1999) and Popp (2002)
…nd support for the induced innovation hypothesis in the energy sector.
    Our analysis is also related to the studies on preference externalities by Waldfogel (2003)
and George and Waldfogel (2003).5 These studies examine the e¤ect that the racial char-
   5
     These contributions in turn build on the theoretical contributions by Hotelling (1929), Spence (1976a,b)
and Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) on market size and product variety.



                                                     5
acteristics of the population within a market have on the supply of radio programming and
newspapers. While these studies focus on the e¤ect of population characteristics on product
variety, we seek to determine the e¤ect of preference externalities both on the overall welfare
as well as on the welfare of the obese and the normal weight separately. Furthermore, in our
case the preference externality is determined by consumers’decisions rather than inherent
characteristics (to extent that body weight is in fact a decision).



3    An Induced Innovation Externality Model

Our analysis of the induced innovation externality is based on four principles. First, the
extent of innovation of drug therapies for a disease depends on the size of the entire world-
wide potential market for pharmaceuticals for the disease. Second, the induced innovation
externality of obesity is calculated as the e¤ect that a marginal increase in obesity in the
United States has on the consumer surplus of the population in the United States. This
de…nition facilitates a direct comparison of the induced innovation externality of obesity
with the Medicare-induced health insurance externality of obesity. We therefore ignore the
induced innovation externality that a marginal increase in obesity in the United States has
on consumers in the rest of the world. Third, we assume that pharmaceutical producers
accurately forecast any marginal increase in obesity prevalence and hence such an increase
immediately a¤ects the rate of pharmaceutical innovation. This assumption is not crucial
for our results because only a small fraction of the lifetime induced innovation externality of
obesity is due to the e¤ect that obesity has on an individual’s annual pharmaceutical expen-
ditures before the individual reaches mid-age. Fourth, we assume that the pharmaceutical
reward system is privately optimal for the consumers in the United States in the sense that
a marginal increase in the annual reward for pharmaceutical innovation yields an equivalent
increase in the annual stream of consumer surplus from pharmaceutical innovation that is
captured by the population in the United States.

                                              6
   Both body weight and age have a strong impact on a person’s annual pharmaceutical and
other health care expenditures, and the e¤ects vary across diseases. Let Et;i (normal) and
Et;i (obese) denote the mean annual expenditures on drug therapies for disease i for normal
weight and for obese individuals, respectively, at age t. Let Ei denote the average annual
expenditures on drug therapies for disease i. The potential market size for drug therapies for
disease i is NW ORLD Ei , where NW ORLD is the size of the world-wide population. Measuring
the potential market size by expenditures rather than disease incidence allows for obesity to
in‡uence pharmaceutical expenditures both through the e¤ect that obesity has on disease
incidence and through the e¤ect that obesity has on the intensity at which an individual
consumes drug therapies for a disease conditional on having that disease.
   The reward that pharmaceutical …rms receive annually from an individual for inventing
drug therapies that treat the disease i and that are introduced either before or during a
given year is a …xed share RP AT EN T     (1    RM C ) of the individual’s annual expenditures
Et;i on drug therapies that treat disease i. The coe¢ cient RP AT EN T is the share of the
pharmaceutical revenue that is captured by brand-name drugs. The factor (1        RM C ) is the
share of the revenue for brand-name drugs that the pharmaceutical …rms receive in excess
of variable (production, marketing, and general administration) costs.
   We assume that the consumer surplus Vt;i that an individual at age t receives from new
drug therapies for the disease i is a …xed percentage RCS of the reward for innovation that
the pharmaceutical …rms receive from the individual for new drug therapies for the disease
i. Pharmaceutical innovation therefore increases the individual’s lifetime expected consumer
surplus annually by
                         Vt;i = RCS     RP AT EN T   (1   RM C )   Et;i                    (1)

at age t.
   Consider now the e¤ect of one person becoming obese. For this individual the incidence
of disease i changes from Et;i (normal) to Et;i (obese). This change in the disease incidence


                                                7
changes the potential market size for new drug therapies that treat the disease i. This in turn
changes the rate of innovation of drug therapies for the disease i. We denote the associated
percentage change in the rate of innovation of drug therapies for the disease i by              Ii .
   We divide the change in the rate of innovation,             Ii , into two separate e¤ects: the com-
position e¤ect and the general rate of innovation e¤ect. The composition e¤ect is the e¤ect
that the change in the disease incidence has on the relative allocation of pharmaceutical
R&D across diseases and on the associated the rate of innovation for the disease i relative
to all other diseases. The general rate of innovation e¤ect is the e¤ect that the change in
the disease incidence has on the overall level of pharmaceutical R&D and on the associated
general speed of pharmaceutical innovation.
   The composition e¤ect is given by          MiR       "c ; where      MiR is the percentage e¤ect that
the change in the disease incidence has on the relative potential market size of drug therapies
for the disease i:

                           Ei NW ORLD +Et;i (obese) Et;i (normal)
                           P                                               PEi NW ORLD
                           i [Ei NW ORLD +Et;i (obese) Et;i (normal)]       i Ei NW ORLD
                     MiR                                                                   ;           (2)
                                                 PEi NW ORLD
                                                  i Ei NW ORLD



and where "c is the associated reward-elasticity of the composition of innovation.
   The general rate of innovation e¤ect is given by             M        ", where   M is the percentage
e¤ect that the change in the disease incidence has on the total pharmaceutical market size:

                                    P
                                       i   [Et;i (obese) Et;i (normal)]
                               M               P                        ;                              (3)
                                                   i Ei NW ORLD

and where " is the associated reward-elasticity of innovation.
   The total innovation e¤ect       Ii of the change in the disease incidence can therefore be
written as
                                   Ii =       MiR       "c +   M     ";                                (4)




                                                    8
where generally "c           ".6 We assume that " > 0. The equality "c = " holds in the special
case that the allocation of R&D resources for each disease is independent of the demand for
R&D resources for the innovation of drug therapies for all other diseases.
      When the rate of innovation changes by                        Ii the associated change in the stream of
consumer surplus from pharmaceutical innovation for disease i is Vt;i                              Ii for an individual
with annual pharmaceutical expenditures Et;i . The total induced innovation externality of
                                                               P
the marginal increase in obesity over all diseases is therefore i Vt;i Ii for an individual
with annual pharmaceutical expenditures Et;i . Using the expressions (1) and (4) for Vt;i and
 Ii , respectively, this induced innovation externality be rewritten as

                      X
  Externalityt =             Et;i     RP AT EN T      (1   RM C )         RCS           MiR      "c +    M    " :   (5)
                         i


      The expression (2) for the e¤ect that the marginal increase in obesity has on the relative
potential market size for drug therapies for disease i can be rewritten as
            2                                                                                            3
                                                           P
                Et;i (obese)        Et;i (normal)                  (Et;i (obese)     Et;i (normal)) 5           1
  MiR = 4                                                  P
                                                               i
                                                                                                                       ;
                Ei 1 +
                         Et;i (obese) Et;i (normal)                         Et;i (obese) Et;i (normal)       NW ORLD
                                 Ei Nworld                 i Ei 1 +                 Ei Nworld
                                                                                                                    (6)
which implies that

                                                                         P
                               Et;i (obese)    Et;i (normal)                    (Et;i (obese)    Et;i (normal))
 NW ORLD          MiR                                                       i
                                                                                           P                        (7)
                                              Ei                                              i Ei


when NW ORLD is large. Solving the equality (7) for                          MiR and substituting the resulting
expression for      MiR as well as the expression (3) for                       M into the expression (5) for the
obesity externality yields the following expression for the induced innovation externality of
  6
  While the exact e¤ect is Ii = (1 + Mi ") 1 + MiR "c                                1 we omit the term ( Mi ")
 MiR "c because this term is small compared to the terms Mi                          " and MiR "c when Mi and
 MiR are small.




                                                           9
obesity:

                    X                                                                1
Externalityt =               RCS       RP AT EN T      (1     RM C )    Et;i
                     i
                                                                               NW ORLD
                         "                                             P                                       !
                              Et;i (obese)     Et;i (normal)             j (Et;j (obese)      Et;j (normal))
                                                                                      P
                                              Ei                                         j   Ej
                                P
                                   j   (Et;j (obese)        Et;j (normal))
                         "c +                     P                            " :                             (8)
                                                    i   Ej

   Consider now the e¤ect of a one percent increase in the pharmaceutical reward in every
disease category from the subpopulation of NU S individuals. This increases the total phar-
                           NU S
maceutical reward by      NW ORLD
                                        percent for all diseases. As the relative market sizes across
disease categories do not change, the rate of pharmaceutical innovation and the bene…t from
                                                        NU S
pharmaceutical innovation increase by "                NW ORLD
                                                                 percent for all diseases. By the de…nition
of RCS the average bene…t from pharmaceutical innovation is RCS times the pharmaceutical
reward. For the subpopulation of NU S individuals the cost of the one percent increase in
the pharmaceutical reward the subpopulation is therefore 1=RCS percent of the total bene…t
that the population of NU S individuals receives from pharmaceutical innovation.
   Because we assume that for a subpopulation of NU S individuals, where NU S < NW ORLD ,
the pharmaceutical reward system is privately optimal in the sense that a marginal increase
in the reward for pharmaceutical innovation from the subpopulation yields an equivalent
increase in the total consumer surplus for the subpopulation, the cost of the one percent
increase in the pharmaceutical reward from the subpopulation of NU S individuals (which is
 1
RCS
      percent of total bene…t from pharmaceutical innovation) must equal the bene…t of the
                                                                                 NU S
increase for the subpopulation of NU S individuals (which is "                  NW ORLD
                                                                                             percent of the total
bene…t from pharmaceutical innovation). That is, the equality

                                             1                  NU S
                                                ="                                                             (9)
                                            RCS               NW ORLD



                                                         10
must hold.
   Solving the expression (9) for RCS and substituting the resulting expression into the ex-
pression (8) yields the following expression for the induced innovation externality of obesity:

                                 1
             Externalityt =           RP AT EN T (1                   RM C )
                                NU S
                                 X        Et;i (obese)             Et;i (normal)       "c
                                     Et;i                                                            (10)
                                    i
                                                                  Ei                   "
                                    P                                                           #
                                        j (Et;j (obese)      Et;j (normal))                 "c
                                +                    P                            (1           )
                                                        j   Ej                              "


Substituting the average expenditures Ei for Et;i in the expression (10) for the externality
                             P                                     P
and denoting Et (normal)        i Et;i (normal) and Et (obese)       i Et;i (obese) gives the

externality on a person with average pharmaceutical expenditures:

                             1
 Externalityt (average) =           RP AT EN T     (1       RM C ) [Et (obese)         Et (normal)] : (11)
                            NU S

   The total induced innovation externality of obesity on the subpopulation of NU S individ-
uals is NU S times the average externality. The total externality is therefore given by


      Externalityt (total) = RP AT EN T      (1    RM C )        [Et (obese)     Et (normal)] :      (12)


   The expressions (11) and (12) for the average externality and total externality, respec-
tively, show that neither the average externality nor the total externality depend on the
prevalence of obesity in the population or the two innovation elasticities " and "c . In-
stead, both externalities depend only on the total e¤ect that the marginal increase in obe-
sity has on the reward that pharmaceutical companies receive for successful innovation.
This result is a consequence of the assumption that the reward system is optimal from
the consumers’ perspective: the share RP AT EN T                 (1     RM C ) of the additional revenue



                                                  11
[Et (obese)   Et (normal)] is reward for pharmaceutical innovation and the reward must
equal the total bene…t Externalityt (total) for the consumers from the associated increase in
innovation. In section 6 we calculate the total externality at each age after estimating Et;i ;
Et;i (normal) and Et;i (obese) and calibrating the parameters RP AT EN T and RM C :
   Because the pattern of disease incidence is di¤erent for the normal weight than it is for
the obese, the bene…t from the marginal increase in obesity varies by body weight. We
therefore also calculate the magnitude of the induced innovation externality by body weight.
Let Ei (normal) denote the average pharmaceutical expenditures of the normal weight for
disease i. Substituting Ei (normal) for Et;i in the expression (10) for the externality gives
the induced innovation externality of the marginal increase in obesity at age t on the average
normal weight person:

                                     1                                          X
       Externalityt (normal) =                 RP AT EN T         (1   RM C )          Ei (normal)
                                    NU S                                           i
                                        Et;i (obese)     Et;i (normal)          "c
                                                                                                      (13)
                                                        Ei                      "
                                        P                                                        #
                                            j (Et;j (obese)       Et;j (normal))             "c
                                    +                    P                              (1      ) :
                                                             j   Ej                          "


Similarly, letting Ei (obese) denote the average pharmaceutical expenditures of the obese for
disease i and substituting Ei (obese) for Et;i in the expression (10) for the externality gives
the induced innovation externality of the marginal increase in obesity at age t on an average
obese person:

                                     1                                          X
        Externalityt (obese) =                RP AT EN T         (1    RM C )          Ei (obese)
                                    NU S                                           i
                                        Et;i (obese)     Et;i (normal)          "c
                                                                                                      (14)
                                                        Ei                      "
                                        P                                                        #
                                           j (Et;j (obese)        Et;j (normal))             "c
                                    +                   P                              (1       ) :
                                                            j    Ej                          "



                                                 12
In section 6 we calculate the externality on the normal weight Externalityt (normal) and
                                                                                                "c
the externality on the obese Externalityt (obese) for di¤erent values of the ratio              "
                                                                                                   .



4         Data

We use the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) data from years 1996-2005 to estimate
disease incidence, pharmaceutical expenditures and total health care expenditures by age and
Body-Mass Index (BMI) group. Because MEPS from years 1996-2000 does not include BMI
information we use the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) data from years 1996-2000
and the match between the NHIS data and the MEPS data to …nd the BMI information
for individuals during years 1996-2000. In the data, each subject is followed for two years,
except in panel 10 which started in 2005. The data consists of 262,958 observations on
149,737 individuals.
        We estimate disease incidence from the self-reported data in the MEPS. In MEPS the dis-
eases are coded by the International Classi…cation of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9). We
use the MEPS data also to estimate total health care expenditures and total pharmaceutical
expenditures. To estimate pharmaceutical expenditures by the therapeutic category of drugs
we match the MEPS data on pharmaceutical expenditures by individual drugs (which are
reported by the subject and the subject’s pharmacy) to the National Ambulatory Medical
Care Survey (NAMCS) data by drug name. We use the NAMCS data from years 1995, 2000,
and 2005.7 We only match the drugs in NAMCS that have only one therapeutic category.
In some cases we combine therapeutic categories when the drugs in the original categories
    7
     For each drug mention in NAMCS we assign the therapeutic category in NAMCS from the 2005 NAMCS
if a therapeutic category exists for the active ingredient in the 2005 NAMCS. For active ingredients without
a therapeutic category in the 2005 NAMCS we assign the therapeutic category in NAMCS from the 2000
NAMCS if a therapeutic category exists for the active ingredient in the 2000 NAMCS. For active ingredients
without a therapeutic category in the 2005 NAMCS and in the 2000 NAMCS we assign the therapeutic
category in NAMCS from the 1995 NAMCS if a therapeutic category exists for the active ingredient in the
1995 NAMCS.




                                                    13
may be used to treat the same diseases.8



5          Obesity and Disease Incidence

In this section we report the association between obesity and disease incidence by disease as
well as the association between obesity and pharmaceutical expenditures by the therapeutic
category. The e¤ect of obesity varies greatly by age, race and sex. We therefore form a
composite measure of the association of obesity and disease incidence. Namely, for each
disease we estimate the association between obesity and the incidence of the disease for a
randomly chosen person.
        Let rt denote the share of individuals in the age group t, and let              t;i   (normal) and

 t;i    (obese) denote the incidence of disease i for the normal weight individuals in the age
group t and for obese individuals in the age group t, respectively. Within each age group
we also allow the disease incidence to vary by sex, race (black/non-black), insurance status
(private/non-private) and year (linear trend). However, for notational convenience we omit
these subscripts here.
                                                                                                   P
        The incidence of the disease i for a randomly chosen normal weight individual is             t rt

 t;i    (normal) and the incidence of the disease i for a randomly chosen obese individual is
P
    t rt      t;i   (obese). An estimate of the association between obesity and disease incidence
can therefore be obtained by calculating

                                  P                      P
                                    t rt     (obese)
                                           t;i                t rt   t;i   (normal)
                      Ef f ecti              P                                        100%             (15)
                                               t rt    t;i   (normal)

for each disease i. If the estimated associations are causal e¤ects, then the estimates measure
the e¤ect that the obesity of a randomly chosen individual has on the incidence of the disease
    8
   We combine therapeutic categories with less than 200 observations in MEPS to therapeutic category
"Other". We also assign unmatched drugs to the therapeutic category "Other". In total, approximately
15% of pharmaceutical expenditures in the MEPS data are assigned to the "Other" category.



                                                   14
i for that individual.
       We also construct an estimate of the share of disease incidence that is associated with
obesity by calculating

                                      P               P
                                        t rt   t;i         rt          t;i   (normal)
                         Sharei                      P t                                    100%;                        (16)
                                                      t rt       t;i



where      t;i   is the average incidence of the disease i in the age group t and is de…ned as


 t;i     sN
          t
            ORM AL
                          t;i   (normal) + sOV
                                            t
                                               ERW EIGHT
                                                                       t;i   (overweight) + sOBESE
                                                                                             t                 t;i   (obese) ;
                                                                                                                         (17)
where sN
       t
         ORM AL
                ; sOV
                   t
                      ERW EIGHT
                                and sOBESE
                                     t     denote the share of the normal weight, the
overweight, and the obese, respectively, in the age group t.
       We divide the population into the following age groups: 0-18, 18-35, 35-50, 50-65 and
65+. We classify individuals with BMI 18.5-25 as normal weight, individuals with BMI 25-30
as overweight, and individuals with BMI 30-50 as obese. For individuals in the age group
0-18 we do not construct separate estimates of the disease incidence by body weight.
       The estimated associations between obesity and disease incidence are calculated using
the MEPS data. The results are shown in Figures 1.1-1.18 (all …gures are in the Appendix).9
The ICD-9 disease classi…cation contains 18 disease classes. Each of the …gures shows the
results for all diseases within one disease class.10 We also calculate the e¤ect of obesity
on pharmaceutical expenditures by the therapeutic category of drugs using the matched
MEPS and NAMCS data. The e¤ects by the therapeutic category are calculated by replac-
ing the disease incidence parameters           i;j ;   i;j   (normal) ;         i;j   (overweight) and   i;j   (obese) in
the expressions (15), (16) and (17) with the corresponding measures of pharmaceutical ex-
penditures Et;i ; Et;i (normal) ; Et;i (overweight) and Et;i (obese) for each body weight group
   9
     The 99% con…dence intervals (CI) are calculated using cluster-robust standard errors with clustering at
the subject level.
  10
     For each disease class we combine diseases with less than 100 observations in the MEPS with other such
diseases to category "000 Other diseases in the disease class".

                                                         15
and age group combination. The estimated associations between obesity and pharmaceutical
expenditures are shown in Figure 2.11
       The results show signi…cant variation in the association between obesity and disease
incidence both across diseases within each disease class and across all diseases. The variation
in the association between obesity and disease incidence across diseases is important for two
reasons. First, in our companion paper (Bhattacharya and Packalen, 2008) this variation
enables us to identify the empirical e¤ect of obesity on pharmaceutical innovation. Second,
the variation implies that the induced innovation externality of obesity on the normal weight
may be negative. This is because an increase in obesity will change the relative potential
market sizes across diseases which in turn may shift resources toward diseases for which the
incidence among normal weight individuals is relatively low compared to the average disease
incidence across diseases for normal weight individuals.
       The results also suggest several interesting results that to our knowledge have not been
explored in the medical literature. We …nd that sexually transmitted diseases HIV, Herpes
Simplex and Chlamydia (in disease class 1) are negatively associated with obesity. Second,
malignant and non-malignant skin cancer (in disease class 2) are negatively associated with
obesity. Third, contraceptive use (in the disease class 18 and as a therapeutic category) is
negatively associated with obesity. We do not suggest that these are physiological conse-
quences of obesity but rather that they result from behavioral changes that are caused the
limiting e¤ect that obesity has on an individual’s choice set. Future work should explore
whether these associations are indeed causal.
  11
    Within each age group we again allow the disease incidence to vary by sex, race (black/non-black),
insurance status (private/non-private) and year (linear trend). To eliminate outliers we drop observations
where pharmaceutical expenditures in a particular therapeutic category exceed $10,000.




                                                   16
6        The Externality Calculations

We …rst calibrate the parameters RP AT EN T and RM C : Berndt (2001) reports that the share
of o¤-patent generics is approximately 50% of the dispensed drug units. Because brand-name
drugs cost more than generics we calibrate the share of the marginal pharmaceutical revenue
that goes to brand-name drugs at RP AT EN T = 0:80: Reinhardt (2001) cites estimates for the
pharmaceutical industry that place marketing and general administration costs at 35% of
revenue and manufacturing costs at 27% of revenue, but notes that …rms in the pharmaceu-
tical industry often manufacture also other goods than brand-name drugs. Estimating the
share 1      RM C of the marginal revenue from brand-name drugs that is in excess of marginal
costs is therefore di¢ cult. We calibrate it at 1          RM C = 0:66.
       Using the calibrated values of the parameters RP AT EN T and RM C we …rst estimate the
total induced innovation externality of obesity at each age using the expression (12) and
MEPS data on total pharmaceutical expenditures.12 As our later objective is to compare
the induced innovation externality of obesity with the Medicare-induced health insurance
externality of obesity for individuals who are covered by private insurance before old-age,
for ages 0-65 we construct the estimates of pharmaceutical expenditures using data on only
individuals who are covered by private insurance. For ages 65+ we construct the estimates
from data on individuals who are covered by either public or private insurance.
       The results are shown in Figure 3. Because the total externality is a …xed percentage of
the obesity-induced increase in a person’s annual pharmaceutical expenditures, the path of
the externality follows the path of the increase in annual pharmaceutical expenditures that
is due to obesity and thus increases sharply between ages 25 and 55. Overall, the estimate
  12
    To eliminate concern over possible time e¤ects in the pharmaceutical expenditures data we use only
MEPS data from years 2002-2005 in the analyses in this section.
  In the calculations in this section we use the following age groups: 0-18, 18-25, 25-30, 30-35, 35-40, 40-45,
45-50, 50-55, 55-60, 60-65, 65-70, 70-75, 75-80, 80+, and the following BMI groups: 18.5-25 (normal weight),
25-30 (overweight), and 30-50 (obese). In addition to allowing the expenditures to vary by age and body
weight, we allow the expenditures to vary by sex and race (black/non-black).




                                                      17
of the total induced innovation externality of obesity as a function of age shows that while
the magnitude of the externality that a marginal increase in obesity has on an individual
depends greatly on the age of the individual, on average the magnitude of the externality is
substantial.
          We next calculate the average externality, the externality on the normal weight and the
externality on the obese separately using the expressions (11), (13), and (14), respectively.13
For these calculations we use the matched MEPS and NAMCS data on pharmaceutical
expenditures by the therapeutic category of drugs.
          Figure 4.1 shows the results for the three externalities when the ratio of the reward-
elasticity of the composition of pharmaceutical innovation ("c ) and the reward-elasticity of
                                                      "c
total pharmaceutical innovation (") is set at         "
                                                           = 2: In this case the externality on other
obese people is approximately 50% higher than the average externality, and the externality
on the normal weight is positive and substantial at almost any age.14 Figure 4.2 shows the
results for the three externalities when the ratio of the two innovation elasticities is set at
"c
"
      = 4: Even when the ratio of elasticities is set this high the externality on the normal
weight is generally positive. Figure 4.3 shows the results for the three externalities when
                                                                             "c
the ratio of the two innovation elasticities is set at an extreme            "
                                                                                  = 8: In this seemingly
unrealistic case obesity now has a substantial negative externality on the normal weight.
          We next calculate the cumulative induced innovation externality of obesity and compare
it with the cumulative Medicare-induced health insurance externality of obesity. The present
value of the cumulative total induced innovation externality of obesity from the initial age
     13
    In these calculations calibrate the U.S. Population at NU S = 300; 000; 000:
     14
    A possibility that is not taken into account in these calculations is that obesity might shift resources
from research that potentially bene…ts everyone to obesity-speci…c research. We do not think that this
is a signi…cant issue for our purposes because while obesity accounts for roughly 10% of all health care
expenditures, in 2005 among all publications in the MEDLINE database of biomedical publications less than
2% mention the word "obesity", the word "obese", the words "body mass index" or the acronym "bmi" in
either the abstract or the title of the publication (and less than 1% if one considers only the title).




                                                    18
t0 to the terminal age T is

                                                       X
                                                       T
                                                              t t0
              CumulativeExternality (total) =                         Externalityt (total) ;        (18)
                                                       t=t0



where    is the discount factor and Externalityt (total) is the total externality at age t and is
calculated using the expression (12). The present value of the cumulative Medicare-induced
health insurance externality of obesity from the initial age t0 to the terminal age T is

                                          X
                                          T
                                                      t t0
         M edicareExternality =                               m      [Tt (obese)   Tt (normal)] ;   (19)
                                      t=minft0 ;65g



where m is the share of the marginal health care expenditures paid by Medicare, and
Tt (normal) and Tt (obese) are the average annual health care expenditures at age t for
the normal weight and for the obese, respectively, and are estimated from the MEPS data.
We also calculate the present value of the cumulative Medicare-induced insurance externality
of obesity from pharmaceutical expenditures alone.15
   We calibrate the discount factor at         = 0:97 and the initial age at t0 = 18: The share of
health care expenditures covered by Medicare for people aged 65 and over is approximately
50% in the MEPS data. While this average rate may not coincide with the marginal rate,
we assume that for people aged 65 and over medicare pays 50% of the increase in health care
expenditures that is caused by obesity by setting m = 0:5.16 We calculate the cumulative
externalities as a function of the terminal age T:
   The results are shown in Figure 5. For a person with terminal age 80, which roughly
equals life expectancy, the present value of the (positive) cumulative induced innovation ex-
ternality of obesity from pharmaceutical expenditures is much larger than the present value
  15
PT The Medicare-induced
                t t0
                            insurance expenditure for pharmaceutical expenditures alone is calculated as
  t=minft0 ;65g       m    [E t (obese) Et (normal)] ;
  16
     This proportion is presumably higher now since Medicare started in 2006 to cover pharmaceutical ex-
penditures through its Part D program.



                                                      19
of the (negative) Medicare-induced insurance externality from pharmaceutical expenditures
and is similar in magnitude as the present value of the (negative) cumulative Medicare-
induced public health insurance externality from all health care expenditures. Of course,
the exact value of the induced innovation externality of obesity is sensitive to the assump-
tions about the parameters. However, we suspect that the conclusion that the magnitudes
of the two opposing externalities of obesity are the same is robust. Moreover, we have ig-
nored the induced innovation externality of obesity from all other medical expenditures than
pharmaceutical expenditures.



7     Conclusion

In this paper we argue that an analysis of the ex-ante moral hazard should not stop at
the disincentive e¤ects of insurance on self-protective activities. To demonstrate that our
argument is also quantitatively important we examine the obesity epidemic as an empirical
example.
    While the e¤ects of obesity on the incidence of all individual diseases are not known,
obesity is known to increase the health care costs for a person. It is also well known that
given the health care costs of obesity and the existence of public health insurance programs
obesity has a negative externality. Moreover, another commonly held view is that since
obesity is at least to some degree the result of an individual’s decisions and an individual
does not bear the full costs of obesity, public policies aimed at increasing the costs of obesity
for an individual may be justi…ed. In this paper we have challenged this perspective on
obesity.
    Our analysis is based on the induced innovation hypothesis, which has broad empirical
support. Any increase in obesity that increases the incidence of a disease increases the po-
tential market size for new drug therapies for the disease and, by the induced innovation
hypothesis, also the rate of innovation of drug therapies for the disease. The induced inno-

                                               20
vation externality arises because this increase in innovation of drug therapies for the disease
bene…ts all people who are a- icted with the disease.
       Our results show that the magnitude of the induced innovation externality of obesity is
substantial. We show that the present value of the cumulative induced innovation externality
from pharmaceutical expenditures roughly coincides with the present value of the Medicare-
induced health insurance externality from total health care expenditures. We also show that,
while the externality on the normal weight is smaller than the average externality, it too is
likely to be positive.
       Our estimates of the associations between obesity and disease incidence replicate many
…ndings in the medical literature but also reveal several interesting associations that to
our knowledge have not been explored in the medical literature.17 Overall, the estimates
show considerable variation in the association between obesity and disease incidence across
diseases. We show that the average induced innovation externality of obesity is una¤ected
by this variation across diseases.
       Finally, because preference externalities in health care have direct policy implications,
identifying and quantifying other such externalities than the pharmaceutical innovation ex-
ternality examined here is an important topic for future research.




  17
    Namely, we show that obesity is associated with a decrease in the incidence of skin cancer, sexually
transmitted diseases and contraceptive use. These associations are likely consequences of behavioral responses
to obesity rather than direct physiological e¤ects.


                                                     21
References

Acemoglu, D. and J. Linn (2004), “Market Size in Innovation Theory and Evidence from
  the Pharmaceutical Industry.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1049–90.

Bajari, P., H. Hong, and A. Khwaja (2006), “Moral Hazard, Adverse Selection and Health
  Expenditures: A Semiparametric Analysis.” Working Paper 12445, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Berndt, E. R. (2001), “The U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry: Why Major Growth in Times of
  Cost Containment?” Health A¤airs, 20, 100–14.

Bertakis, K. D. and R. Azari (2005), “Obesity and the Use of Health Care Services.”Obesity
  Research, 13, 372–9.

Bhattacharya, J. and K. Bundorf (2005), “Incidence of the Health Care Costs of Obesity.”
  Working Paper 11303, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bhattacharya, J. and M. Packalen (2008), “Is Medicine an Ivory Tower? Induced Innovation,
  Technological Opportunity, and For-Pro…t vs. Non-Pro…t Innovation.” Working paper,
  Stanford University and University of Waterloo.

Bhattacharya, J. and N. Sood (2007), “Health Insurance and the Obesity Externality.”
  Advances In Health Economics And Health Services Research, 17, 279–318.

Bungam, T., M. Satterwhite, A. W. Jackson, and J. R. Morrow (2003), “The Relationship
  of Body Mass Index, Medical Costs, and Job Absenteeism.” American Journal of Health
  Behavior, 27, 456–62.

Burton, W. N., C. Y. Chen, A. B. Schultz, and D. W. Edington (1998), “The Economic
  Costs Associated with Body Mass Index in a Workplace.” Journal of Occupational and
  Environmental Medicine, 40, 786–92.

                                           22
Dixit, A. K. and J. E. Stiglitz (1977), “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
  Diversity.”American Economic Review, 67, 297–308.

Ehrlich, I. and G. S. Becker (1972), “Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-Protection.”
  Journal of Political Economy, 80, 623–48.

Elmer, P. J., J. B. Brown, G. A. Nichols, and G. Oster (2004), “E¤ects of Weight Gain on
  Medical Care Costs.” International Journal of Obesity Related Metabolic Disorders, 28,
  1365–73.

Finkelstein, A. (2007), “Static and Dynamic E¤ects of Health Policy: Evidence from the
  Vaccine Industry.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIX, 527–64.

Finkelstein, E. A., I. C. Flebelkorn, and G. Wang (2003), “National Medical Spending At-
  tributable to Overweight and Obesity: How Much, and Who’s Paying?” Health A¤airs,
  W3:219–26.

George, L. and J. Waldfogel (2003), “Who A¤ects Whom in Daily Newspaper Markets?”
  Journal of Political Economy, 111, 765–84.

Hicks, J. R. (1932), Theory of Wages. Macmillan, London.

Hotelling, H. (1929), “Stability in Competition.”Economic Journal, 39, 41–57.

Kasper, D. L., E. Braunwald, S. Hauser, D. Longo, J. L. Jameson, and A. S. Fauci (2004),
  Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16 edition. McGraw-Hill Professional, New
  York.

Katzmarzyk, P. T. and I. Janssen (2004), “The Economic Costs Associated with Physical
  Inactivity and Obesity in Canada: An Update.”Canadian Journal of Applied Physiology,
  29, 90–115.



                                              23
Lakdawalla, D. and N. Sood (2006), “Health Insurance as a Two-Part Pricing Contract.”
  Working Paper 12681, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lakdawalla, D. and N. Sood (2007), “The Welfare E¤ects of Public Drug Insurance.”Working
  Paper 13501, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lichtenberg, F. R. and J. Waldfogel (2003), “Does Misery Love Company? Evidence from
  Pharmaceutical Markets Before and After the Orphan Drug Act.” Working Paper 9750,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Manning, W. G., J. P. Newhouse, N. Duan, E. B. Keeler, and A. Leibowitz (1987), “Health
  Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.”
  American Economic Review, 77, 251–77.

Mokdad, A. H., E. S. Ford, B. A. Bowman, W. H. Dietz, F. Vinicor, V. S. Bales, and
  J. S. Markes (2003), “Prevalence of Obesity, Diabetes, and Obesity-Related Health Risk
  Factors, 2001.”JAMA, 289, 76–9.

Mokdad, A. H., M. K. Serdula, W. H. Dietz, B. A. Bowman, J. S. Marks, and J. P. Koplan
  (1999), “The Spread of the Obesity Epidemic in the United States, 1991-1998.” JAMA,
  282, 1519–22.

Musich, S., C. Lu, T. McDonald, L. J. Champagne, and D. W. Edington (2004), “Association
  of Additional Health Risks on Medical Charges and Prevalence of Diabetes within Body
  Mass Index Categories.”American Journal of Health Promotion, 18, 264–8.

National Institute on Health (1998), “Clinical Guidelines on the Identi…cation, Evaluation,
  and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The Evidence Report.” Report,
  National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Cooperation with The National Istitute of
  Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.



                                            24
Newell, R. A., A. Ja¤ee, and R. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and
  Energy-Saving Technological Change.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIV, 907–40.

Pauly, M. V. (1968), “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment.” American Economic
  Review, 58, 531–7.

Popp, D. (2002), “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices.” American Economics Review,
  XCII, 160–80.

Quesenberry, Jr., C. P., B. Caan, and A. Jacobson (1998), “Obesity, Health Services Use,
  and Health Care Costs among Members of a Health Maintenance Organization.”Archives
  of Internal Medicine, 158, 466–72.

Raebel, M. A., D. C. Malone, D. A. Conner, S. Xu, J. A. Porter, and F. A. Lanty
  (2004), “Health Services Use and Health Care Costs of Obese and Non-obese Individ-
  uals.”Archives of Internal Medicine, 164, 2135–40.

Rashad, I. and S. Markowitz (2006), “Incentives in Obesity and Health Insurance.”Working
  Paper 13113, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Reinhardt, U. E. (2001), “Perspectives on the Pharmaceutical Industry.”Health A¤airs, 20,
  136–49.

Sander, B. and R. Bergemann (2003), “Economic Burden of Obesity and its Complications
  in Germany.”European Journal of Health Economics, 4, 248–53.

Schmookler, J. (1966), Invention and Growth. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Spence, A. M. (1976a), “Product Di¤erentiation and Welfare.”American Economic Review,
  66, 407–14.

Spence, A. M. (1976b), “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition.”
  Review of Economic Studies, 43, 217–35.

                                            25
Sturm, R. (2002), “The E¤ects of Obesity, Smoking, and Drinking on Medical Problems and
  Costs.”Health A¤airs, 21, 245–53.

Thompson, D., J. B. Brown, G. A. Nichols, P. J. Elmer, and G. Oster (2001), “Body Mass
  Index and Future Healthcare Costs: A Retrospective Cohort Study.”Obesity Research, 9,
  210–18.

Thorpe, K. E., C. S. Florence, D.H. Howard, and P. Joski (2004), “The Impact of Obesity
  on Rising Medical Spending.”Health A¤airs, W4:480–6.

Waldfogel, J. (2003), “Preference Externalities: An Empirical Study of Who Bene…ts Whom
  in Di¤erentiated Product Markets.”Rand Journal of Economics, 34, 557–68.

Wang, F., A. B. Schultz, S. Musich, T. McDonald, D. Hirschland, and D. W. Edington (2003),
  “The Relationship between National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Weight Guidelines
  and Concurrent Medical Costs in a Manufacturing Population.” American Journal of
  Health Promotion, 17, 183–9.

Wang, Y. and M. A. Beydoun (2007), “The Obesity Epidemic in the United States–Gender,
  Age, Socioeconomic, Racial/Ethnic, and Geographic Characteristics: A Systematic Re-
  view and Meta-Regression Analysis.”Epidemiologic Reviews, 29, 6–28.




                                           26
Appendix

                                                             Figure 1.1: Associations between Obesity and Infections and Parasitic Diseases.


                                                                                                                                           Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                                              1. INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES
                                                                                                                                    042. Effect: -99% Share: -85%
                                                                                                    042 HIV/AIDS
                                                                                                                                                     054. Effect: -40% Share: -19%
                                                                                              054 Herpes simplex
                                                                                                                                                     070. Effect: -38% Share: -24%
                                                                                                070 Viral hepatitis
                                                                                                                                                      088. Effect: -36% Share: -20%
                                                                             088 Other arthropod-borne diseases
                                                                                                                                                          075. Effect: -22% Share: -8%
                                                                                   075 Infectious mononucleosis
                                                                                                                                                           011. Effect: -22% Share: -7%
                                                                                     011 Pulmonary tuberculosis
                                                                                                                                                              078. Effect: -11% Share: -5%
                                                             078 Other diseases due to viruses and Chlamydiae
    Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                                                               053. Effect: -7% Share: -2%
                                                                                               053 Herpes zoster
                                                                                                                                                                132. Effect: -4% Share: -2%
                                                                         132 Pediculosis and phthirus infestation
                                                                                                                                                                057. Effect: -4% Share: -4%
                                                                                     057 Other viral exanthemata
                                                                                                                                                                     052. Effect: 0% Share: 0%
                                                                                                  052 Chickenpox
                                                                                                                                                                     133. Effect: 1% Share: 0%
                                                                                                     133 Acariasis
                                                                                                                                                                     074. Effect: 1% Share: -2%
                                                                   074 Specific diseases due to Coxsackie virus
                                                                                                                                                                     000. Effect: 2% Share: 3%
                                                                            000 Other disease in disease class 1
                                                                                                                                                                      041. Effect: 3% Share: 2%
    041 Bacterial infection in conditions classified elsewhere and of unspecified site
                                                                                                                                                                      009. Effect: 3% Share: 2%
                                                                               009 Ill-defined intestinal infections
                                                                                                                                                                      079. Effect: 5% Share: 0%
                                     079 Viral infection in conditions classified elsewhere and of unspecified site
                                                                                                                                                                      034. Effect: 5% Share: 2%
                                                                  034 Streptococcal sore throat and scarlet fever
                                                                                                                                                                       111. Effect: 7% Share: 1%
                                                                     111 Dermatomycosis, other and unspecified
                                                                                                                                                                       008. Effect: 8% Share: 2%
                                                                 008 Intestinal infections due to other organisms
                                                                                                                                                                       005. Effect: 9% Share: 0%
                                                                             005 Other food poisoning (bacterial)
                                                                                                                                                                       110. Effect: 10% Share: 0%
                                                                                            110 Dermatophytosis
                                                                                                                                                                       117. Effect: 11% Share: 0%
                                                                                              117 Other mycoses
                                                                                                                                                                         112. Effect: 17% Share: 5%
                                                                                                  112 Candidiasis
                                                                                                                                                                                 136. Effect: 45% Share: 10%
                                                     136 Other and unspecified infectious and parasitic diseases
                                                                                                                                                                                          038. Effect: 77% Share: 16%
                                                                                                  038 Septicemia



                                                                                                                       -200                  -100                               0                        100                          200
                                                                                                                                                           Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                                          Point Estimate                            99% CI when significant                        99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                                       27
                                                                   Figure 1.2: Associations between Obesity and Neoplasms.


                                                                                                                        Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                                         2. NEOPLASMS
                                                                                                           172. Effect: -31% Share: -18%
                                                                172 Malignant melanoma of skin
                                                                                                           188. Effect: -28% Share: -22%
                                                             188 Malignant neoplasm of bladder
                                                                                                           232. Effect: -27% Share: -12%
                                                                   232 Carcinoma in situ of skin
                                                                                                             195. Effect: -21% Share: -5%
                                            195 Malignant neoplasm of other and ill-defined sites
                                                                                                             229. Effect: -18% Share: -7%
                                             229 Benign neoplasm of other and unspecified sites
                                                                                                             173. Effect: -18% Share: -6%
                                                          173 Other malignant neoplasm of skin
                                                                                                             238. Effect: -17% Share: -8%
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




238 Neoplasm of uncertain behavior of other and unspecified sites and tissues
                                                                                                             216. Effect: -16% Share: -8%
                                                                   216 Benign neoplasm of skin
                                                                                                              162. Effect: -14% Share: -7%
                                         162 Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus, and lung
                                                                                                                217. Effect: -3% Share: 7%
                                                                 217 Benign neoplasm of breast
                                                                                                                 180. Effect: 5% Share: -7%
                                                          180 Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri
                                                                                                                199. Effect: 6% Share: -12%
                                             199 Malignant neoplasm without specification of site
                                                                                                                 239. Effect: 6% Share: 1%
                                                            239 Neoplasm of unspecified nature
                                                                                                                 218. Effect: 7% Share: 3%
                                                                         218 Uterine leiomyoma
                                                                                                                 000. Effect: 12% Share: 2%
                                                            000 Other disease in disease class 2
                                                                                                                 208. Effect: 12% Share: 8%
                                                           208 Leukemia of unspecified cell type
                                                                                                                 153. Effect: 13% Share: 7%
                                                               153 Malignant neoplasm of colon
                                                                                                                 185. Effect: 13% Share: 8%
                                                             185 Malignant neoplasm of prostate
                                                                                                                 174. Effect: 17% Share: 13%
                                                       174 Malignant neoplasm of female breast
                                                                                                                 202. Effect: 18% Share: 22%
                                 202 Other malignant neoplasm of lymphoid and histiocytic tissue
                                                                                                                      215. Effect: 30% Share: 12%
                                  215 Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue
                                                                                                                        214. Effect: 53% Share: 10%
                                                                                     214 Lipoma
                                                                                                                         211. Effect: 62% Share: 20%
                                         211 Benign neoplasm of other parts of digestive system
                                                                                                                                         179. Effect: 218% Share: 45%
                                             179 Malignant neoplasm of uterus, part unspecified



                                                                                                    -200                      0                     200                   400   600                 800
                                                                                                                                         Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                     Point Estimate                             99% CI when significant          99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                  28
                                        Figure 1.3: Associations between Obesity and Endocrine, Nutritional and Metabolic Diseases.


                                                                                                               Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                               3. ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES, AND IMMUNITY DISORDERS
                                                                                                     279. Effect: -18% Share: 4%
                                         279 Disorders involving the immune mechanism

                                                                                                     277. Effect: -18% Share: -18%
                                      277 Other and unspecified disorders of metabolism

                                                                                                           259. Effect: 1% Share: 0%
                                                           259 Other endocrine disorders

                                                                                                           251. Effect: 1% Share: -3%
                                      251 Other disorders of pancreatic internal secretion

                                                                                                            000. Effect: 7% Share: -4%
                                                     000 Other disease in disease class 3
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                   244. Effect: 34% Share: 10%
                                                             244 Acquired hypothyroidism

                                                            246 Other disorders of thyroid                          246. Effect: 39% Share: 11%

                                                                                                                    242. Effect: 40% Share: 14%
                                                  242 Thyrotoxicosis with or without goiter

                                                                                                                          269. Effect: 59% Share: 6%
                                                         269 Other nutritional deficiencies

                                                                                                                          266. Effect: 61% Share: 19%
                                                266 Deficiency of B-complex components

                                                                                                                          240. Effect: 62% Share: 24%
                                                        240 Simple and unspecified goiter

                                                                                                                            272. Effect: 70% Share: 24%
                                                       272 Disorders of lipoid metabolism

                                                                                                                              256. Effect: 74% Share: 7%
                                                                 256 Ovarian dysfunction

                                                                                                                             275. Effect: 76% Share: 16%
                                                     275 Disorders of mineral metabolism

                                                                                                                                                          276. Effect: 179% Share: 38%
                                 276 Disorders of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance

                                                                                                                                                                               274. Effect: 262% Share: 48%
                                                                                 274 Gout

                                                                                                                                                                                                  250. Effect: 340% Share: 55%
                                                                    250 Diabetes mellitus



                                                                                              -100                    0                      100                           200                    300                       400
                                                                                                                                          Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                  Point Estimate                                 99% CI when significant                              99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                             29
                                        Figure 1.4: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of Blood and Blood-forming Organs.


                                                                                                                     Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                 4. DISEASES OF BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS
                                                                                                                 282. Effect: -29% Share: -25%
                                                    282 Hereditary hemolytic anemias




                                                                                                                        000. Effect: -16% Share: -1%
                                                 000 Other disease in disease class 4
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                            288. Effect: -9% Share: -3%
                                                     288 Diseases of white blood cells




                                                                                                                                      285. Effect: 8% Share: 0%
                                                  285 Other and unspecified anemias




                                                                                                                                          289. Effect: 17% Share: 1%
                                 289 Other diseases of blood and blood-forming organs




                                                                                                                                                                       280. Effect: 72% Share: 24%
                                                          280 Iron deficiency anemias



                                                                                         -100                    -50                         0                         50                     100                           150
                                                                                                                                       Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                Point Estimate                              99% CI when significant                                  99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                          30
                                                                    Figure 1.5: Associations between Obesity and Mental Disorders.


                                                                                                                     Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                                   5. MENTAL DISORDERS
                                                                                                                   294. Effect: -71% Share: -37%
                                             294 Other organic psychotic conditions (chronic)
                                                                                                                    303. Effect: -67% Share: -60%
                                                          303 Alcohol dependence syndrome
                                                                                                                              304. Effect: -26% Share: -9%
                                                                       304 Drug dependence
                                                                                                                                   306. Effect: -7% Share: 3%
                                     306 Physiological malfunction arising from mental factors
                                                                                                                                    314. Effect: -4% Share: -1%
                                                     314 Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood
                                                                                                                                      305. Effect: 1% Share: 5%
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                           305 Nondependent abuse of drugs
                                                                                                                                     298. Effect: 2% Share: -7%
                                                            298 Other nonorganic psychoses
                                                                                                                                       299. Effect: 9% Share: 4%
                                               299 Psychoses with origin specific to childhood
                                                                                                                                        312. Effect: 15% Share: 4%
                                         312 Disturbance of conduct, not elsewhere classified
                                                                                                                                         307. Effect: 16% Share: 7%
                                 307 Special symptoms or syndromes, not elsewhere classified
                                                                                                                                         308. Effect: 18% Share: 6%
                                                                 308 Acute reaction to stress
                                                                                                                                           000. Effect: 27% Share: 8%
                                                         000 Other disease in disease class 5
                                                                                                                                           300. Effect: 27% Share: 7%
                                                                       300 Neurotic disorders
                                                                                                                                           319. Effect: 28% Share: -3%
                                                           319 Unspecified mental retardation
                                                                                                                                              315. Effect: 36% Share: 8%
                                                          315 Specific delays in development
                                                                                                                                               302. Effect: 46% Share: 24%
                                                         302 Sexual deviations and disorders
                                                                                                                                                   311. Effect: 48% Share: 12%
                                            311 Depressive disorder, not elsewhere classified
                                                                                                                                                    309. Effect: 56% Share: 18%
                                                                     309 Adjustment reaction
                                                                                                                                                      301. Effect: 58% Share: 9%
                                                                    301 Personality disorders
                                                                                                                                                           296. Effect: 85% Share: 18%
                                                                     296 Affective psychoses



                                                                                                 -200                -100                           0                   100              200                   300
                                                                                                                                       Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                  Point Estimate                            99% CI when significant                       99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                       31
                                 Figure 1.6: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of the Nervous System and Sense Organs.


                                                                                                                     Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                              6. DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND SENSE ORGANS
                                                                                                  331. Effect: -47% Share: -18%
                                                         331 Other cerebral degenerations
                                                                                                       332. Effect: -29% Share: -13%
                                                                   332 Parkinson's disease
                                                                                                          373. Effect: -23% Share: -6%
                                                                373 Inflammation of eyelids
                                                                                                            344. Effect: -19% Share: -3%
                                                            344 Other paralytic syndromes
                                                                                                             375. Effect: -15% Share: -9%
                                                          375 Disorders of lacrimal system
                                                                                                               000. Effect: -10% Share: -10%
                                                      000 Other disease in disease class 6
                                                                                                                348. Effect: -10% Share: -5%
                                                              348 Other conditions of brain
                                                                                                                362. Effect: -10% Share: -6%
                                                                 362 Other retinal disorders
                                                                                                                 374. Effect: -8% Share: 2%
                                                             374 Other disorders of eyelids
                                                                                                                 367. Effect: -8% Share: -3%
                                            367 Disorders of refraction and accommodation
                                                                                                                 384. Effect: -8% Share: -5%
                                               384 Other disorders of tympanic membrane
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                 380. Effect: -7% Share: -3%
                                                              380 Disorders of external ear
                                                                                                                  360. Effect: -5% Share: -2%
                                                                 360 Disorders of the globe
                                                                                                                   379. Effect: -2% Share: 0%
                                                                 379 Other disorders of eye
                                                                                                                     378. Effect: 4% Share: 5%
                           378 Strabismus and other disorders of binocular eye movements
                                                                                                                      372. Effect: 5% Share: 2%
                                                               372 Disorders of conjunctiva
                                                                                                                      389. Effect: 7% Share: -2%
                                                                           389 Hearing loss
                                                                                                                       371. Effect: 7% Share: 1%
                                         371 Corneal opacity and other disorders of cornea
                                                                                                                        346. Effect: 9% Share: 2%
                                                                                346 Migraine
                                                                                                                       366. Effect: 10% Share: 2%
                                                                                366 Cataract
                                                                                                                       388. Effect: 10% Share: 3%
                                                                 388 Other disorders of ear
                                                                                                                       368. Effect: 11% Share: 1%
                                                                   368 Visual disturbances
                                                                                                                        381. Effect: 11% Share: 4%
                            381 Nonsuppurative otitis media and Eustachian tube disorders
                                                                                                                         382. Effect: 14% Share: 4%
                                              382 Suppurative and unspecified otitis media
                                                                                                                         369. Effect: 14% Share: -4%
                                                              369 Blindness and low vision
                                                                                                                          353. Effect: 20% Share: -2%
                                                       353 Nerve root and plexus disorders
                                                                                                                           386. Effect: 22% Share: 5%
                        386 Vertiginous syndromes and other disorders of vestibular system
                                                                                                                           343. Effect: 22% Share: 0%
                                                                 343 Infantile cerebral palsy
                                                                                                                            365. Effect: 23% Share: 7%
                                                                              365 Glaucoma
                                                                                                                             333. Effect: 27% Share: 8%
                       333 Other extrapyramidal disease and abnormal movement disorders
                                                                                                                             345. Effect: 28% Share: 10%
                                                                                345 Epilepsy
                                                                                                                                 340. Effect: 41% Share: -1%
                                                                      340 Multiple sclerosis
                                                                                                                                  361. Effect: 44% Share: 24%
                                                      361 Retinal detachments and defects
                                                                                                                                     336. Effect: 52% Share: -10%
                                                         336 Other diseases of spinal cord
                                                                                                                                      355. Effect: 53% Share: 19%
                                                             355 Mononeuritis of lower limb
                                                                                                                                            351. Effect: 71% Share: 21%
                                                                 351 Facial nerve disorders
                                                                                                                                                 349. Effect: 87% Share: 27%
                                349 Other and unspecified disorders of the nervous system
                                                                                                                                                  356. Effect: 89% Share: 20%
                                        356 Hereditary and idiopathic peripheral neuropathy
                                                                                                                                                     322. Effect: 100% Share: 17%
                                                       322 Meningitis of unspecified cause
                                                                                                                                                        354. Effect: 108% Share: 27%
                                 354 Mononeuritis of upper limb and mononeuritis multiplex



                                                                                                -100                           0                             100                       200                       300
                                                                                                                                            Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                    Point Estimate                                99% CI when significant                    99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                         32
                                                    Figure 1.7: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of the Circulatory System.


                                                                                                                             Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                               7. DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
                                                                                                          441. Effect: -32% Share: -13%
                                                           441 Aortic aneurysm and dissection
                                                                                                           433. Effect: -29% Share: -3%
                                            433 Occlusion and stenosis of precerebral arteries
                                                                                                           443. Effect: -26% Share: -16%
                                                         443 Other peripheral vascular disease
                                                                                                             442. Effect: -21% Share: -7%
                                                                          442 Other aneurysm
                                                                                                              435. Effect: -20% Share: 4%
                                                              435 Transcient cerebral ischemia
                                                                                                              424. Effect: -19% Share: -14%
                                                           424 Other diseases of endocardium
                                                                                                               458. Effect: -15% Share: -12%
                                                                              458 Hypotension
                                                                                                                438. Effect: -11% Share: -16%
                                                   438 Late effects of cerebrovascular disease
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                       426. Effect: 2% Share: -15%
                                                                     426 Conduction disorders
                                                                                                                        456. Effect: 4% Share: -3%
                                                              456 Varicose veins of other sites
                                                                                                                          436. Effect: 12% Share: 0%
                                             436 Acute but ill-defined cerebrovascular disease
                                                                                                                          455. Effect: 12% Share: 6%
                                                                              455 Hemorrhoids
                                                                                                                           427. Effect: 15% Share: 3%
                                                                     427 Cardiac dysrhythmias
                                                                                                                           454. Effect: 19% Share: 12%
                                                        454 Varicose veins of lower extremities
                                                                                                                              459. Effect: 24% Share: 1%
                                                      459 Other disorders of circulatory system
                                                                                                                                  412. Effect: 40% Share: 23%
                                                                  412 Old myocardial infarction
                                                                                                                                  440. Effect: 41% Share: 19%
                                                                           440 Atherosclerosis
                                                                                                                                      410. Effect: 49% Share: 15%
                                                               410 Acute myocardial infarction
                                                                                                                                      444. Effect: 51% Share: 18%
                                                         444 Arterial embolism and thrombosis
                                                                                                                                      447. Effect: 52% Share: 12%
                                                  447 Other disorders of arteries and arterioles
                                                                                                                                          000. Effect: 63% Share: 12%
                                                          000 Other disease in disease class 7
                                                                                                                                            429. Effect: 67% Share: 16%
                                 429 Ill-defined descriptions and complications of heart disease
                                                                                                                                            414. Effect: 68% Share: 18%
                                            414 Other forms of chronic ischemic heart disease
                                                                                                                                             453. Effect: 71% Share: 16%
                                                   453 Other venous embolism and thrombosis
                                                                                                                                              413. Effect: 74% Share: 22%
                                                                           413 Angina pectoris
                                                                                                                                                 451. Effect: 86% Share: 13%
                                                            451 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis
                                                                                                                                                                401. Effect: 134% Share: 33%
                                                                    401 Essential hypertension
                                                                                                                                                                            428. Effect: 165% Share: 28%
                                                                              428 Heart failure



                                                                                                   -100                           0                             100                             200                             300
                                                                                                                                                Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                      Point Estimate                                 99% CI when significant                               99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                               33
                                                 Figure 1.8: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of the Respiratory System.


                                                                                                                                    Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                                      8. DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
                                                                                                       492. Effect: -34% Share: -26%
                                                                                 492 Emphysema
                                                                                                                       462. Effect: -1% Share: 0%
                                                                            462 Acute pharyngitis
                                                                                                                        460. Effect: 1% Share: 0%
                                                       460 Acute nasopharyngitis [common cold]
                                                                                                                         487. Effect: 2% Share: 0%
                                                                                     487 Influenza
                                                                                                                            477. Effect: 10% Share: 3%
                                                                               477 Allergic rhinitis
                                                                                                                             464. Effect: 11% Share: 6%
                                                                464 Acute laryngitis and tracheitis
                                                                                                                                473. Effect: 12% Share: 4%
                                                                             473 Chronic sinusitis
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                                511. Effect: 12% Share: 4%
                                                                                      511 Pleurisy
                                                                                                                                 470. Effect: 15% Share: -1%
                                                                      470 Deviated nasal septum
                                                                                                                                 472. Effect: 15% Share: -1%
                                                    472 Chronic pharyngitis and nasopharyngitis
                                                                                                                                 519. Effect: 15% Share: 5%
                                                        519 Other diseases of respiratory system
                                                                                                                                   463. Effect: 20% Share: 5%
                                                                               463 Acute tonsillitis
                                                                                                                                    478. Effect: 21% Share: 7%
                                                    478 Other diseases of upper respiratory tract
                                                                                                                                     465. Effect: 23% Share: 7%
                            465 Acute upper respiratory infections of multiple or unspecified sites
                                                                                                                                     474. Effect: 26% Share: 15%
                                                     474 Chronic disease of tonsils and adenoids
                                                                                                                                       461. Effect: 27% Share: 6%
                                                                               461 Acute sinusitis
                                                                                                                                       518. Effect: 28% Share: 1%
                                                                       518 Other diseases of lung
                                                                                                                                        496. Effect: 31% Share: 0%
                                       496 Chronic airways obstruction, not elsewhere classified
                                                                                                                                          490. Effect: 36% Share: 11%
                                                 490 Bronchitis, not specified as acute or chronic
                                                                                                                                            486. Effect: 39% Share: 11%
                                                           486 Pneumonia, organism unspecified
                                                                                                                                            514. Effect: 40% Share: 10%
                                                       514 Pulmonary congestion and hypostasis
                                                                                                                                             000. Effect: 43% Share: 15%
                                                             000 Other disease in disease class 8
                                                                                                                                               466. Effect: 46% Share: 10%
                                                            466 Acute bronchitis and bronchiolitis
                                                                                                                                                     493. Effect: 60% Share: 16%
                                                                                      493 Asthma
                                                                                                                                                               485. Effect: 76% Share: 21%
                                                  485 Bronchopneumonia, organism unspecified
                                                                                                                                                                          491. Effect: 100% Share: 20%
                                                                           491 Chronic bronchitis



                                                                                                          -50                         0                      50                     100                  150               200
                                                                                                                                                      Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                               Point Estimate                                  99% CI when significant                     99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                                    34
                                                      Figure 1.9: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of the Digestive System.


                                                                                                                                      Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                                          9. DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
                                                                                                                     550. Effect: -35% Share: -27%
                                                                                          550 Inguinal hernia
                                                                                                                     555. Effect: -32% Share: -25%
                                                                                       555 Regional enteritis
                                                                                                                          556. Effect: -16% Share: 13%
                                                                                        556 Ulcerative colitis
                                                                                                                           526. Effect: -14% Share: -4%
                                                                                    526 Diseases of the jaws
                                                                                                                           524. Effect: -11% Share: -12%
                                                           524 Dentofacial anomalies, including malocclusion
                                                                                                                            527. Effect: -11% Share: -7%
                                                                         527 Diseases of the salivary glands
                                                                                                                              520. Effect: -6% Share: -2%
                                      520 Disorders of tooth development and eruption
                                                                                                                              528. Effect: -5% Share: -3%
528 Diseases of the oral soft tissues, excluding lesions specific for gingiva and tongue
                                                                                                                              523. Effect: -4% Share: -4%
                                                 523 Gingival and periodontal diseases
    Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                               577. Effect: -1% Share: -13%
                                                                                  577 Diseases of pancreas
                                                                                                                                 558. Effect: 2% Share: 2%
                                                             558 Other noninfective gastroenteritis and colitis
                                                                                                                                 521. Effect: 4% Share: -2%
                                                                        521 Diseases of hard tissues of teeth
                                                                                                                                 578. Effect: 4% Share: 0%
                                                                            578 Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
                                                                                                                                  541. Effect: 8% Share: -4%
                                                                                541 Appendicitis, unqualified
                                                                                                                                      569. Effect: 8% Share: 1%
                                                                              569 Other disorders of intestine
                                                                                                                                       564. Effect: 15% Share: 0%
                                                  564 Functional digestive disorders, not elsewhere classified
                                                                                                                                       536. Effect: 15% Share: 5%
                                                                       536 Disorders of function of stomach
                                                                                                                                       525. Effect: 17% Share: 3%
                                     525 Other diseases and conditions of the teeth and supporting structures
                                                                                                                                        000. Effect: 20% Share: 4%
                                                                       000 Other disease in disease class 9
                                                                                                                                        535. Effect: 22% Share: 10%
                                                                                  535 Gastritis and duodenitis
                                                                                                                                          560. Effect: 34% Share: -10%
                                                          560 Intestinal obstruction without mention of hernia
                                                                                                                                            522. Effect: 35% Share: 10%
                                                                 522 Diseases of pulp and periapical tissues
                                                                                                                                            537. Effect: 35% Share: 14%
                                                              537 Other disorders of stomach and duodenum
                                                                                                                                             531. Effect: 40% Share: 15%
                                                                                           531 Gastric ulcer
                                                                                                                                                  562. Effect: 58% Share: 21%
                                                                          562 Diverticula of intestine
                                                                                                                                                   553. Effect: 63% Share: 17%
                      553 Other hernia of abdominal cavity without mention of obstruction or gangrene
                                                                                                                                                     571. Effect: 66% Share: 11%
                                                                      571 Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
                                                                                                                                                       573. Effect: 74% Share: 22%
                                                                                573 Other disorders of liver
                                                                                                                                                         530. Effect: 81% Share: 23%
                                                                               530 Diseases of esophagus
                                                                                                                                                              533. Effect: 103% Share: 24%
                                                                            533 Peptic ulcer, site unspecified
                                                                                                                                                                           575. Effect: 144% Share: 33%
                                                                           575 Other disorders of gallbladder
                                                                                                                                                                            574. Effect: 154% Share: 34%
                                                                                            574 Cholelithiasis



                                                                                                                  -100                        0                          100                       200                       300
                                                                                                                                                       Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                                     Point Estimate                           99% CI when significant                      99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                              35
                                                 Figure 1.10: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of the Genitourinary System.


                                                                                                                                        Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                                        10.DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM
                                                                                                                                 622. Effect: -36% Share: -10%
                                                                       622 Noninflammatory disorders of cervix
                                                                                                                                    628. Effect: -30% Share: -10%
                                                                                          628 Infertility, female
                                                                                                                                         610. Effect: -22% Share: -18%
                                                                              610 Benign mammary dysplasias
                                                                                                                                            620. Effect: -16% Share: -9%
                                     620 Noninflammatory disorders of ovary, fallopian tube, and broad ligament
                                                                                                                                             601. Effect: -12% Share: -9%
                                                                         601 Inflammatory diseases of prostate
                                                                                                                                               627. Effect: -9% Share: -6%
                                                               627 Menopausal and postmenopausal disorders
                                                                                                                                                616. Effect: -7% Share: -8%
                                                          616 Inflammatory disease of cervix, vagina, and vulva
                                                                                                                                                623. Effect: -7% Share: -6%
                                                                      623 Noninflammatory disorders of vagina
    Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                                                 617. Effect: -6% Share: -2%
                                                                                            617 Endometriosis
                                                                                                                                                618. Effect: -6% Share: 10%
                                                                                          618 Genital prolapse
                                                                                                                                                 595. Effect: -6% Share: -4%
                                                                                                   595 Cystitis
                                                                                                                                                 614. Effect: -5% Share: -7%
614 Inflammatory disease of ovary, fallopian tube, pelvic cellular tissue, and peritoneum
                                                                                                                                                  625. Effect: -4% Share: -1%
                                           625 Pain and other symptoms associated with female genital organs
                                                                                                                                                   600. Effect: -2% Share: 4%
                                                                                   600 Hyperplasia of prostate
                                                                                                                                                   611. Effect: -1% Share: -1%
                                                                                  611 Other disorders of breast
                                                                                                                                                     599. Effect: 1% Share: 1%
                                                                599 Other disorders of urethra and urinary tract
                                                                                                                                                      000. Effect: 5% Share: -11%
                                                                         000 Other disease in disease class 10
                                                                                                                                                         602. Effect: 11% Share: 5%
                                                                                602 Other disorders of prostate
                                                                                                                                                          629. Effect: 16% Share: 11%
                                                                   629 Other disorders of female genital organs
                                                                                                                                                              607. Effect: 24% Share: -1%
                                                                                        607 Disorders of penis
                                                                                                                                                              626. Effect: 24% Share: 5%
   626 Disorders of menstruation and other abnormal bleeding from female genital tract
                                                                                                                                                              608. Effect: 25% Share: 10%
                                                                     608 Other disorders of male genital organs
                                                                                                                                                               621. Effect: 26% Share: 11%
                                                              621 Disorders of uterus, not elsewhere classified
                                                                                                                                                                 586. Effect: 30% Share: -1%
                                                                                 586 Renal failure, unspecified
                                                                                                                                                                         593. Effect: 45% Share: 10%
                                                                       593 Other disorders of kidney and ureter
                                                                                                                                                                               596. Effect: 55% Share: 14%
                                                                                596 Other disorders of bladder
                                                                                                                                                                                   590. Effect: 65% Share: 20%
                                                                                       590 Infections of kidney
                                                                                                                                                                                             592. Effect: 87% Share: 23%
                                                                             592 Calculus of kidney and ureter



                                                                                                                    -100                -50                      0                     50                    100                   150
                                                                                                                                                        Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                                       Point Estimate                          99% CI when significant                           99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                                36
 Figure 1.11: Associations between Obesity and Complications of Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the Puerperium.


                                                                                                                          Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                11.COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH, AND THE PUERPERIUM
                                                                                                                            650. Effect: -6% Share: 4%
                                                                                       650 Normal delivery




                                                                                                                                    644. Effect: 9% Share: 8%
                                                                              644 Early or threatened labor
    Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                                     634. Effect: 17% Share: 2%
                                                                                 634 Spontaneous abortion




                                                                                                                                     669. Effect: 18% Share: 13%
                                     669 Other complications of labor and delivery, not elsewhere classified




                                                                                                                                         000. Effect: 32% Share: 10%
                                                                     000 Other disease in disease class 11




                                                                                                                                                                   648. Effect: 130% Share: 32%
648 Other current conditions in the mother classifiable elsewhere but complicating pr...



                                                                                                               -100                         0                          100                        200                     300
                                                                                                                                                     Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                                   Point Estimate                           99% CI when significant                     99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                            37
                                      Figure 1.12: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue.


                                                                                                                       Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                   12.DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
                                                                                                          702. Effect: -34% Share: -18%
                                                                     702 Other dermatoses
                                                                                                               690. Effect: -25% Share: -10%
                                                     690 Erythematosquamous dermatosis
                                                                                                                   706. Effect: -18% Share: -10%
                                                        706 Diseases of sebaceous glands
                                                                                                                   700. Effect: -16% Share: -10%
                                                                  700 Corns and callosities
                                                                                                                     709. Effect: -14% Share: -9%
                                      709 Other disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue
                                                                                                                         693. Effect: -5% Share: 0%
                                          693 Dermatitis due to substances taken internally
                                                                                                                         692. Effect: -5% Share: -3%
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                  692 Contact dermatitis and other eczema
                                                                                                                           704. Effect: -2% Share: -1%
                                                     704 Diseases of hair and hair follicles
                                                                                                                            000. Effect: 0% Share: 7%
                                                     000 Other disease in disease class 12
                                                                                                                             691. Effect: 3% Share: 0%
                                               691 Atopic dermatitis and related conditions
                                                                                                                             684. Effect: 4% Share: -4%
                                                                              684 Impetigo
                                                                                                                               695. Effect: 6% Share: 6%
                                                              695 Erythematous conditions
                                                                                                                                 701. Effect: 14% Share: 5%
                                     701 Other hypertrophic and atrophic conditions of skin
                                                                                                                                    708. Effect: 21% Share: 6%
                                                                              708 Urticaria
                                                                                                                                    696. Effect: 21% Share: 5%
                                                        696 Psoriasis and similar disorders
                                                                                                                                       686. Effect: 28% Share: 6%
                                 686 Other local infections of skin and subcutaneous tissue
                                                                                                                                          705. Effect: 34% Share: 14%
                                                            705 Disorders of sweat glands
                                                                                                                                            698. Effect: 37% Share: 1%
                                                        698 Pruritus and related conditions
                                                                                                                                           707. Effect: 38% Share: 10%
                                                                  707 Chronic ulcer of skin
                                                                                                                                                    681. Effect: 54% Share: 13%
                                                681 Cellulitis and abscess of finger and toe
                                                                                                                                                      703. Effect: 57% Share: 17%
                                                                       703 Diseases of nail
                                                                                                                                                                             682. Effect: 108% Share: 27%
                                                           682 Other cellulitis and abscess
                                                                                                                                                                               680. Effect: 113% Share: 28%
                                                               680 Carbuncle and furuncle



                                                                                               -100                                    0                                           100                                         200
                                                                                                                                           Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                  Point Estimate                                   99% CI when significant                                  99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                            38
Figure 1.13: Associations between Obesity and Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue.


                                                                                                                      Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                         13.DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
                                                                                                           733. Effect: -37% Share: -19%
                                                          733 Other disorders of bone and cartilage
                                                                                                                737. Effect: -18% Share: -10%
                                                                            737 Curvature of spine
                                                                                                                      738. Effect: -5% Share: -4%
                                                                      738 Other acquired deformity
                                                                                                                       723. Effect: -2% Share: 1%
                                                              723 Other disorders of cervical region
                                                                                                                           000. Effect: 10% Share: 0%
                                                             000 Other disease in disease class 13
                                                                                                                             735. Effect: 17% Share: 9%
                                                                    735 Acquired deformities of toe
 Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                             727. Effect: 19% Share: 9%
                                               727 Other disorders of synovium, tendon, and bursa
                                                                                                                               718. Effect: 25% Share: 2%
                                                                    718 Other derangement of joint
                                                                                                                               736. Effect: 26% Share: 12%
                                                            736 Other acquired deformities of limbs
                                                                                                                                710. Effect: 27% Share: 9%
                                                         710 Diffuse diseases of connective tissue
                                                                                                                                 714. Effect: 30% Share: 4%
                                  714 Rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory polyarthropathies
                                                                                                                                 728. Effect: 30% Share: 7%
                                                      728 Disorders of muscle, ligament, and fascia
                                                                                                                                724. Effect: 30% Share: 11%
                                                       724 Other and unspecified disorders of back
                                                                                                                                   734. Effect: 38% Share: 7%
                                                                                       734 Flat foot
                                                                                                                                    726. Effect: 43% Share: 15%
                                               726 Peripheral enthesopathies and allied syndromes
                                                                                                                                      719. Effect: 48% Share: 13%
                                                         719 Other and unspecified disorder of joint
                                                                                                                                           729. Effect: 60% Share: 16%
                                                                 729 Other disorders of soft tissues
                                                                                                                                           722. Effect: 62% Share: 20%
                                                                   722 Intervertebral disc disorders
                                                                                                                                                     715. Effect: 93% Share: 24%
                                                            715 Osteoarthrosis and allied disorders
                                                                                                                                                          716. Effect: 110% Share: 29%
                                                           716 Other and unspecified arthropathies
                                                                                                                                                                721. Effect: 129% Share: 32%
                                                              721 Spondylosis and allied disorders
                                                                                                                                                                  717. Effect: 138% Share: 28%
                                                                 717 Internal derangement of knee



                                                                                                       -100                        0                             100                             200                       300
                                                                                                                                                Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                          Point Estimate                              99% CI when significant                          99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                              39
                                                            Figure 1.14: Associations between Obesity and Congenital Anomalies.


                                                                                                               Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                          14.CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
                                                                                             746. Effect: -5% Share: 1%
                                        746 Other congenital anomalies of heart




                                                                                                759. Effect: 5% Share: -1%
                                 759 Other and unspecified congenital anomalies
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                 000. Effect: 8% Share: 3%
                                          000 Other disease in disease class 14




                                                                                                      755. Effect: 30% Share: 10%
                                        755 Other congenital anomalies of limbs




                                                                                                          756. Effect: 44% Share: 15%
                                 756 Other congenital musculoskeletal anomalies




                                                                                                              753. Effect: 53% Share: 9%
                                     753 Congenital anomalies of urinary system




                                                                                                                                              758. Effect: 172% Share: 31%
                                                   758 Chromosomal anomalies



                                                                                  -100                    0                         100                           200        300                         400
                                                                                                                                 Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                         Point Estimate                                 99% CI when significant              99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                       40
                                 Figure 1.15: Associations between Obesity and Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period.


                                                                                                               Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                        15.CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD
                                                                                                                            765. Effect: -5% Share: 0%
                   765 Disorders relating to short gestation and unspecified low birthweight
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                                                 000. Effect: 12% Share: 4%
                                                     000 Other disease in disease class 15



                                                                                               -40                    -20                    0                         20     40                    60
                                                                                                                                       Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                     Point Estimate                          99% CI when significant           99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                      41
                                      Figure 1.16: Associations between Obesity and Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-De…ned Conditions.


                                                                                                                            Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                          16.SYMPTOMS, SIGNS, AND ILL-DEFINED CONDITIONS
                                                                                                                     797. Effect: -39% Share: -32%
                                                                  797 Senility without mention of psychosis

                                                                                                                              795. Effect: -16% Share: -7%
                                          795 Nonspecific abnormal histological and immunological findings

                                                                                                                                  793. Effect: -10% Share: -6%
793 Nonspecific abnormal findings on radiological and other examination of body structure
                                                                                                                                          785. Effect: 9% Share: 2%
                                                            785 Symptoms involving cardiovascular system

                                                                                                                                          781. Effect: 13% Share: -1%
                                            781 Symptoms involving nervous and musculoskeletal systems
     Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                                                                                           784. Effect: 14% Share: 5%
                                                                   784 Symptoms involving head and neck

                                                                                                                                            789. Effect: 16% Share: 5%
                                                        789 Other symptoms involving abdomen and pelvis
                                                                                                                                             783. Effect: 19% Share: 0%
                                         783 Symptoms concerning nutrition, metabolism, and development

                                                                                                                                               780. Effect: 25% Share: 6%
                                                                                   780 General symptoms

                                                                                                                                                 787. Effect: 29% Share: 8%
                                                                 787 Symptoms involving digestive system

                                                                                                                                                  788. Effect: 32% Share: 6%
                                                                   788 Symptoms involving urinary system
                                                                                                                                                   799. Effect: 35% Share: 9%
                                        799 Other ill-defined and unknown causes of morbidity and mortality

                                                                                                                                                     786. Effect: 40% Share: 10%
                                      786 Symptoms involving respiratory system and other chest symptoms

                                                                                                                                                      782. Effect: 43% Share: 12%
                                               782 Symptoms involving skin and other integumentary tissue

                                                                                                                                                       000. Effect: 45% Share: -6%
                                                                     000 Other disease in disease class 16
                                                                                                                                                                 794. Effect: 75% Share: 30%
                                                       794 Nonspecific abnormal results of function studies

                                                                                                                                                                         791. Effect: 90% Share: 20%
                                                          791 Nonspecific findings on examination of urine

                                                                                                                                                                            796. Effect: 102% Share: 28%
                                                                   796 Other nonspecific abnormal findings

                                                                                                                                                                             790. Effect: 103% Share: 25%
                                                          790 Nonspecific findings on examination of blood



                                                                                                              -100                                0                                  100                                 200
                                                                                                                                                 Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                                 Point Estimate                          99% CI when significant                        99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                        42
                                                         Figure 1.17: Associations between Obesity and Injury and Poisoning.


                                                                                                                            Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                                                       17.INJURY AND POISONING
                                                                                                     820. Effect: -62% Share: -32%
                                                                820 Fracture of neck of femur               952. Effect: -45% Share: -30%
                                952 Spinal cord injury without evidence of spinal bone injury                      810. Effect: -33% Share: -15%
                                                                       810 Fracture of clavicle                     808. Effect: -31% Share: -23%
                                                                         808 Fracture of pelvis                     802. Effect: -30% Share: -12%
                                                                   802 Fracture of face bones                        933. Effect: -30% Share: -6%
                                                     933 Foreign body in pharynx and larynx                           930. Effect: -26% Share: -9%
                                                            930 Foreign body on external eye                            921. Effect: -21% Share: -11%
                                                            921 Contusion of eye and adnexa                             884. Effect: -20% Share: -10%
                                     884 Multiple and unspecified open wound of upper limb                                 918. Effect: -15% Share: -3%
                                                     918 Superficial injury of eye and adnexa                               999. Effect: -15% Share: 4%
                                999 Complications of medical care, not elsewhere classified                                 873. Effect: -14% Share: -7%
                                                               873 Other open wound of head                                  816. Effect: -12% Share: -6%
                                             816 Fracture of one or more phalanges of hand                                   807. Effect: -12% Share: -2%
                                          807 Fracture of rib(s), sternum, larynx, and trachea                              977. Effect: -12% Share: -11%
                              977 Poisoning by other and unspecified drugs and medicinals                                     854. Effect: -10% Share: -7%
                                       854 Intracranial injury of other and unspecified nature                                871. Effect: -10% Share: -8%
                                                                   871 Open wound of eyeball                                   850. Effect: -8% Share: -9%
                                                                               850 Concussion                                   842. Effect: -7% Share: -1%
                                                   842 Sprains and strains of wrist and hand                                     831. Effect: -6% Share: -3%
Disease by ICD-9 Code and Name




                                                                   831 Dislocation of shoulder                                   814. Effect: -6% Share: -6%
                                                                814 Fracture of carpal bone(s)                                     919. Effect: -3% Share: 4%
                               919 Superficial injury of other, multiple, and unspecified sites                                   813. Effect: -3% Share: -11%
                                                              813 Fracture of radius and ulna                                      891. Effect: -2% Share: -4%
                                      891 Open wound of knee, leg [except thigh], and ankle                                        922. Effect: -2% Share: -1%
                                                                        922 Contusion of trunk                                     805. Effect: -1% Share: -1%
                      805 Fracture of vertebral column without mention of spinal cord lesion                                         818. Effect: 2% Share: 1%
                                                        818 Ill-defined fractures of upper limb                                      910. Effect: 3% Share: -7%
                                   910 Superficial injury of face, neck, and scalp except eye                                        927. Effect: 3% Share: -6%
                                                            927 Crushing injury of upper limb                                        879. Effect: 3% Share: -6%
                               879 Open wound of other and unspecified sites, except limbs                                            848. Effect: 4% Share: 3%
                                                 848 Other and ill-defined sprains and strains                                        892. Effect: 4% Share: -2%
                                                 892 Open wound of foot except toe(s) alone                                           920. Effect: 4% Share: -1%
                                       920 Contusion of face, scalp, and neck except eye(s)                                           841. Effect: 5% Share: -7%
                                                841 Sprains and strains of elbow and forearm                                           882. Effect: 5% Share: 5%
                                             882 Open wound of hand except finger(s) alone                                            812. Effect: 5% Share: -4%
                                                                      812 Fracture of humerus                                          815. Effect: 6% Share: -5%
                                                          815 Fracture of metacarpal bone(s)                                           000. Effect: 6% Share: 4%
                                                       000 Other disease in disease class 17                                            883. Effect: 7% Share: 2%
                                                                  883 Open wound of finger(s)                                            826. Effect: 8% Share: 2%
                                               826 Fracture of one or more phalanges of foot                                             917. Effect: 11% Share: 5%
                                                      917 Superficial injury of foot and toe(s)                                          881. Effect: 12% Share: -7%
                                                881 Open wound of elbow, forearm, and wrist                                               989. Effect: 14% Share: 5%
                     989 Toxic effect of other substances, chiefly nonmedicinal as to source                                               923. Effect: 15% Share: 7%
                                                                  923 Contusion of upper limb                                              893. Effect: 15% Share: 4%
                                                                     893 Open wound of toe(s)                                              995. Effect: 16% Share: 7%
                                        995 Certain adverse effects, not elsewhere classified                                               916. Effect: 17% Share: 9%
                                            916 Superficial injury of hip, thigh, leg, and ankle                                            839. Effect: 17% Share: 7%
                                              839 Other, multiple, and ill-defined dislocations                                             847. Effect: 17% Share: 3%
                             847 Sprains and strains of other and unspecified parts of back                                                994. Effect: 18% Share: 13%
                                                         994 Effects of other external causes                                                959. Effect: 18% Share: 6%
                                                             959 Injury, other and unspecified                                               840. Effect: 19% Share: 8%
                                          840 Sprains and strains of shoulder and upper arm                                                   924. Effect: 21% Share: 6%
                             924 Contusion of lower limb and of other and unspecified sites                                                   843. Effect: 22% Share: 10%
                                                     843 Sprains and strains of hip and thigh                                                  943. Effect: 22% Share: 7%
                                               943 Burn of upper limb, except wrist and hand                                                   992. Effect: 23% Share: 6%
                                                                  992 Effects of heat and light                                                825. Effect: 23% Share: 7%
                                   825 Fracture of one or more tarsal and metatarsal bones                                                      945. Effect: 24% Share: 3%
                                                                      945 Burn of lower limb(s)                                                  996. Effect: 28% Share: 7%
                                 996 Complications peculiar to certain specified procedures                                                        845. Effect: 32% Share: 9%
                                                    845 Sprains and strains of ankle and foot                                                      949. Effect: 33% Share: 20%
                                                                         949 Burn, unspecified                                                      944. Effect: 34% Share: 7%
                                                             944 Burn of wrist(s) and hand(s)                                                        844. Effect: 37% Share: 14%
                                                     844 Sprains and strains of knee and leg                                                         822. Effect: 38% Share: 14%
                                                                        822 Fracture of patella                                                        998. Effect: 43% Share: 17%
                           998 Other complications of procedures, not elsewhere classified                                                                  823. Effect: 52% Share: 20%
                                                                823 Fracture of tibia and fibula                                                            846. Effect: 52% Share: 13%
                                                  846 Sprains and strains of sacroiliac region                                                                824. Effect: 56% Share: 19%
                                                                          824 Fracture of ankle                                                                       827. Effect: 74% Share: 23%
                                   827 Other, multiple, and ill-defined fractures of lower limb                                                                        836. Effect: 78% Share: 18%
                                                                       836 Dislocation of knee                                                                           835. Effect: 81% Share: 30%
                                                                         835 Dislocation of hip



                                                                                                   -100                                        0                                        100                                200
                                                                                                                                                Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                                         Point Estimate                                99% CI when significant                         99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                            43
Figure 1.18: Associations between Obesity and Factors In‡uencing Health Status and Contact with Health Services.


                                                                                                         Associations between Obesity and Disease Incidence
                                                                                                 18. SUPPLEMENTARY CLASSIFICATION OF FACTORS INFLUENCING
                                                                                                      HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES
                                                                                                              V25. Effect: -29% Share: -13%
                                       V25 Encounter for contraceptive management
                                                                                                               V74. Effect: -27% Share: -15%
           V74 Special screening examination for bacterial and spirochetal diseases
                                                                                                                 V82. Effect: -22% Share: -17%
                                          V82 Special screening for other conditions
                                                                                                                  V53. Effect: -20% Share: -10%
                                           V53 Fitting and adjustment of other device
                                                                                                                    V76. Effect: -17% Share: -7%
                                     V76 Special screening for malignant neoplasms
                                                                                                                     V26. Effect: -15% Share: -9%
                                                        V26 Procreative management
                                                                                                                        V61. Effect: -10% Share: -8%
                                                      V61 Other family circumstances
                                                                                                                           V71. Effect: -6% Share: -2%
                           V71 Observation and evaluation for suspected conditions
                                                                                                                            V30. Effect: -6% Share: -3%
                                                                   V30 Single liveborn
                                                                                                                              V20. Effect: -3% Share: 0%
                                              V20 Health supervision of infant or child
                                                                                                                             V48. Effect: -2% Share: -6%
                                            V48 Problems with head, neck, and trunk
                                                                                                                              V57. Effect: -2% Share: 4%
                                  V57 Care involving use of rehabilitation procedures
                                                                                                                              V41. Effect: -1% Share: -2%
                       V41 Problems with special senses and other special functions
                                                                                                                               000. Effect: 0% Share: -6%
                                                000 Other disease in disease class 18
                                                                                                                                V52. Effect: 2% Share: 4%
                                      V52 Fitting and adjustment of prosthetic device
                                                                                                                                 V62. Effect: 4% Share: -5%
                                               V62 Other psychosocial circumstances
                                                                                                                                  V58. Effect: 6% Share: -2%
                                                 V58 Other and unspecified aftercare
                                         V10 Personal history of malignant neoplasm                                                V10. Effect: 7% Share: 0%
                                                                                                                                   V70. Effect: 8% Share: 4%
                                                     V70 General medical examination
                                                                                                                                   V24. Effect: 9% Share: 14%
                                                V24 Postpartum care and examination
                                                                                                                                    V05. Effect: 11% Share: 4%
  V05 Need for other prophylactic vaccination and inoculation against single diseases
                                                                                                                                     V68. Effect: 14% Share: 4%
                                         V68 Encounters for administrative purposes
                                                                                                                                      V54. Effect: 15% Share: 5%
                                                       V54 Other orthopedic aftercare
                                                                                                                                      V65. Effect: 15% Share: -1%
              V65 Other persons seeking consultation without complaint or sickness
                                                                                                                                       V07. Effect: 16% Share: 4%
                             V07 Need for isolation and other prophylactic measures
                                                                                                                                       V72. Effect: 16% Share: 7%
                                        V72 Special investigations and examinations
                                                                                                                                      V22. Effect: 17% Share: 10%
                                                                V22 Normal pregnancy
                                                                                                                                        V47. Effect: 18% Share: 6%
                                             V47 Other problems with internal organs
                                                                                                                                        V67. Effect: 18% Share: 2%
                                                           V67 Follow-up examination
                                                                                                                                        V12. Effect: 20% Share: 16%
                                       V12 Personal history of certain other diseases
                                                                                                                                         V40. Effect: 20% Share: 8%
                                                 V40 Mental and behavioral problems
                                                                                                                                          V04. Effect: 20% Share: 3%
  V04 Need for prophylactic vaccination and inoculation against certain viral diseases
                                                                                                                                           V45. Effect: 24% Share: 6%
                                                        V45 Other postsurgical states
                                                                                                                                               V15. Effect: 32% Share: 8%
                             V15 Other personal history presenting hazards to health
                                                                                                                                               V43. Effect: 33% Share: 10%
                                       V43 Organ or tissue replaced by other means
                                                                                                                                                             V49. Effect: 60% Share: 21%
                                        V49 Problems with limbs and other problems
                                                                                                                                                              V77. Effect: 63% Share: 20%
   V77 Special screening for endocrine, nutritional, metabolic, and immunity disorders
                                                                                                                                                                            V81. Effect: 90% Share: 24%
    V81 Special screening for cardiovascular, respiratory, and genitourinary diseases



                                                                                          -100                 -50                        0                      50                     100                    150
                                                                                                                                  Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                             Point Estimate                              99% CI when significant                            99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                          44
                       Figure 2: Associations between Obesity and Pharmaceutical Expenditures by Therapeutic Category.


                                                                                                          Associations of Obesity and Pharmaceutical Expenditures
                                                                               1. Effect: -67% Share:-28%
                                       1. Alzheimer-type dementia               2. Effect: -61% Share:-31%
                                            2. Calcium metabolism                 3. Effect: -50% Share:-36%
                                                        3. Antivirals                4. Effect: -34% Share:-16%
                                                  4. Contraceptives                  5. Effect: -31% Share:-15%
                                                  5. Acne products                    6. Effect: -25% Share:-17%
                                              6. Antiarrhytmics/CG                    7. Effect: -24% Share:-10%
                                           7. Estrogens/progestins                      8. Effect: -17% Share:-4%
                                                        8. Laxatives                    9. Effect: -17% Share:-3%
                                                 9. Antispasmodics                       10. Effect: -11% Share:-6%
                              10. Miscellaneous gastrointestinals                          11. Effect: -8% Share:3%
                                                      11. Oncolytics                        12. Effect: -2% Share:1%
                                                   12. Topics Otics                         13. Effect: -1% Share:-2%
                                          13. Other Dermatologics                            14. Effect: 2% Share:0%
                                                      14. Glaucoma                           15. Effect: 5% Share:4%
                                                          15. Ocular                          16. Effect: 9% Share:0%
                                                     16. Antifungals                          17. Effect: 14% Share:4%
                                         17. Topical Anti-Infectives                          18. Effect: 14% Share:5%
                                                      18. Antibiotics                         19. Effect: 15% Share:3%
                                 19. Androgens/Anabolic steroids                               20. Effect: 17% Share:6%
Therapeutic Category




                                          20. Nasal decongestants                             21. Effect: 17% Share:-1%
                                                  21. Immunologics                             22. Effect: 17% Share:4%
                                         22. Vasodilators/Vascular                            23. Effect: 18% Share:-1%
                                                  23. Antiparasitics                           24. Effect: 20% Share:5%
                                               24. Topical Steroids                            25. Effect: 21% Share:7%
                                                 25. Antihistamines                            26. Effect: 21% Share:1%
                                                     26. Antianxiety                           27. Effect: 22% Share:12%
                                              27. Vitamins/minerals                             28. Effect: 24% Share:5%
                                        28. Adrenal corticosteroids                            29. Effect: 25% Share:13%
                            29. Relaxants/stimulants, urinary tract                             30. Effect: 26% Share:10%
                                                    30. Antianginals                             31. Effect: 28% Share:3%
                                                         31. Anemia                             32. Effect: 28% Share:12%
                                                  32. Antidiarrheals                             33. Effect: 30% Share:9%
                                             33. Thyroid/antithyroid                              34. Effect: 32% Share:9%
                                          34. Sedatives/Hypnotics                                 35. Effect: 36% Share:9%
                                                           35. Other                              36. Effect: 40% Share:11%
                                 36. Anticoagulants/thrombolytics                                  37. Effect: 47% Share:16%
                            37. Vertigo/Motion sickness/Vomiting                                    38. Effect: 51% Share:13%
                                 38. Antiasthmatics/bronchillators                                   39. Effect: 59% Share:17%
                                               39. Antidepressants                                     40. Effect: 67% Share:25%
                                                 40. Hyperlipidemia                                     41. Effect: 74% Share:20%
                                          41. CNS, miscellaneous                                        42. Effect: 75% Share:24%
                                         42. Acid/Peptic Disorders                                      43. Effect: 76% Share:20%
                                 43. Skeletal muscle hyperactivity                                       44. Effect: 77% Share:21%
                                  44. Anorexiants/CNS stimulants                                         45. Effect: 78% Share:18%
                                               45. Anticonvulsants                                        46. Effect: 84% Share:13%
                                            46. Topical Analgesics                                        47. Effect: 87% Share:23%
                                                     47. Pain Relief                                        48. Effect: 103% Share:22%
                         48. Extrapyramidal movement disorders                                                49. Effect: 116% Share:30%
                                                  49. Hypertension                                                       50. Effect: 179% Share:38%
                       50. Repl/regs of electrolytes/water balance                                                                          51. Effect: 312% Share:50%
                                   51. Antipsychotics/Antimanics                                                                             52. Effect: 316% Share:59%
                                                        52. Antigout                                                                                      53. Effect: 398% Share:59%
                                       53. Blood glucose regulator



                                                                        -200                          0                          200                            400                    600                         800
                                                                                                                                Estimated Percentage Effect

                                                                                     Point Estimate                                  99% CI when significant                           99% CI when insignificant




                                                                                                                        45
                                    Figure 3: Total Induced Innovation Externality of Obesity.



                                         Total Induced Innovation Externality of Obesity by Age
                         500
                         400
Externality in Dollars
                         300
                         200
                         100
                         0




                               20                    40                             60            80
                                                          Age of Obese Person




                                                               46
                                                                                                                            "c
                         Figure 4.1: Induced Innovation Externalities when the Ratio of Innovation Elasticities is set at   "
                                                                                                                                 = 2:



                         2.50e-06        Induced Innovation Externality of Obesity on an Obese and a Normal Weight Person

                                              Externality on an Obese Person
                                              Average Externality
                                              Externality on a Normal Weight Person
                         2.00e-06
Externality in Dollars
                         1.50e-06
                         1.00e-06
                         5.00e-07
                         0




                                    20                              40                         60                                   80
                                                                         Age of Obese Person




                                                                               47
                                                                                                                            "c
                         Figure 4.2: Induced Innovation Externalities when the Ratio of Innovation Elasticities is set at   "
                                                                                                                                 = 4:



                         4.00e-06        Induced Innovation Externality of Obesity on an Obese and a Normal Weight Person

                                              Externality on an Obese Person
                                              Average Externality
                                              Externality on a Normal Weight Person
                         3.00e-06
Externality in Dollars
                         2.00e-06
                         1.00e-06
                         0




                                    20                              40                         60                                   80
                                                                         Age of Obese Person




                                                                               48
                                                                                                                            "c
                         Figure 4.3: Induced Innovation Externalities when the Ratio of Innovation Elasticities is set at   "
                                                                                                                                 = 8:



                         6.00e-06         Induced Innovation Externality of Obesity on an Obese and a Normal Weight Person

                                               Externality on an Obese Person
                                               Average Externality
                                               Externality on a Normal Weight Person
                         4.00e-06
Externality in Dollars
                         2.00e-06
                         0
                         -2.00e-06




                                     20                              40                         60                                  80
                                                                          Age of Obese Person




                                                                                49
Figure 5: Comparison of the Total Induced Innovation Externality and the Medicare-Induced Health Insurance Externality.



                                                           Present Value of Cumulative Induced Innovation and Health Insurance Externalities of Obesity
                                1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
       Externality in Dollars
                                0




                                                           20                            40                            60                             80
                                                                                         Terminal Age of Obese Person

                                                                       Cumulative Induced Innovation Externality from Pharmaceutical Expenditures
                                                                       Cumulative Medicare Insurance Externality from all Health Care Expenditures
                                                                       Cumulative Medicare Insurance Externality from Pharmaceutical Expenditures




                                                                                                    50
