                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    IS MEDICINE AN IVORY TOWER? INDUCED INNOVATION, TECHNOLOGICAL
         OPPORTUNITY, AND FOR-PROFIT VS. NON-PROFIT INNOVATION

                                          Jay Bhattacharya
                                          Mikko Packalen

                                        Working Paper 13862
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13862


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2008




We thank Raphael Godefrey, Neeraj Sood, and Darius Lakdawalla for helpful comments. Bhattacharya
thanks the National Institute on Aging for funding his work on this project. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jay Bhattacharya and Mikko Packalen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Is Medicine an Ivory Tower? Induced Innovation, Technological Opportunity, and For-Profit
vs. Non-Profit Innovation
Jay Bhattacharya and Mikko Packalen
NBER Working Paper No. 13862
March 2008
JEL No. I1,L31,O33

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines whether the composition of medical research responds to changes in disease incidence
and research opportunities. The paper also provides new evidence on induced pharmaceutical innovation.
In both cases we use the change in the demographic structure of the market (measured by age structure
and obesity prevalence) to test the induced innovation hypothesis. Technological opportunity is calculated
from estimates of structural productivity parameters. The extent of inventive activity is measured from
the MEDLINE database on 16 million biomedical publications. We match these data with data on
disease incidence. We show that medical research responds to changes in disease incidence and research
opportunities. We also find that pharmaceutical innovation responds to aging- and obesity-induced
changes in potential market size.


Jay Bhattacharya
117 Encina Commons
Center for Primary Care
and Outcomes Research
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu

Mikko Packalen
University of Waterloo
Department of Economics
200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1
Canada
packalen@uwaterloo.ca
1     Introduction

One key virtue of for-pro…t allocation is that decisions made by for-pro…t …rms must nec-
essarily respond to changes in the market. That is, for-pro…t producers must shape their
products to …t the demands of their consumers or clients, or else risk failure. There is
abundant evidence that for-pro…t producers (for instance in the pharmaceutical industry)
innovate according to market demand (see Acemoglu and Linn, 2004).
    Non-pro…t allocation, on the other hand, imposes looser budget constraints on …rms
(Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2006). In principle at least, loose constraints could insulate
non-pro…t producers from the raw demand of the market, and hence divorce production
decisions from demand. This sort of reasoning has often been applied to academic publishing,
and is a good working de…nition of an academic ivory tower. While there may be good
reasons to insulate some markets with non-pro…t production from the vagaries of the market,
academic medicine is not such a market. Despite the evident importance that the non-pro…t
producers of academic medicine respond to the market (that is, the epidemiology of patient
health), there is little extant evidence that they do. In fact, to our knowledge there is little
extant evidence on whether non-pro…t allocation induces a link between market demand and
innovation in any market.
    We show that the direction of medical research does respond to changes in the expected
number of people who bene…t from the research and changes in technological opportunity.
The identi…cation of the technological opportunity e¤ect relies on our analysis of a formal
model of optimal allocation of research e¤ort. The analysis enables us to estimate the struc-
tural productivity parameters that govern technological opportunity. The disease incidence
e¤ect is identi…ed using aging- and obesity-driven exogenous variation in disease incidence.
To our knowledge our study is the …rst study on non-pro…t innovation that identi…es the tech-
nological opportunity e¤ect and the …rst study on non-pro…t innovation that uses exogenous
variation to identify the induced innovation e¤ect. We also present evidence on aging- and


                                               1
obesity-induced pharmaceutical innovation. While the …nding of aging-induced pharmaceu-
tical innovation replicates a …nding in the existing literature the …nding of obesity-induced
pharmaceutical innovation is new.
    The empirical analysis is facilitated by the construction of a match between a medical
vocabulary and data on disease incidence. This match enables us to use the massive indexed
MEDLINE database on 16 million biomedical publications to measure innovation in medi-
cine. To our knowledge our study is the …rst to take advantage of the panel nature of this
database which is rich in its information content and thereby has great potential for future
innovation research.



2     Background

The literature on the determinants of non-pro…t innovation is near non-existent. Lichtenberg
(1999) and Lichtenberg (2006) are exceptions. Lichtenberg (1999) …nds a positive correlation
between public biomedical funding and both the disease prevalence and the disease severity.
Lichtenberg (2006) …nds a positive correlation between cancer incidence and the number of
biomedical publications. Unlike these studies, we use panel data and exogenous variation
in the disease incidence to identify the induced innovation e¤ect, and we also determine the
technological opportunity e¤ect.
    Our contribution builds on two connected strands of literature on for-pro…t innovation.
The induced innovation hypothesis originated in Hicks (1932) and Schmookler (1966). Recent
empirical studies of the induced innovation hypothesis in the pharmaceutical industry include
Acemoglu and Linn (2004), which we discuss below, Finkelstein (2004) and Lichtenberg
and Waldfogel (2003). Technological opportunity was examined …rst by Scherer (1965) and
Schmookler (1966), and more recently by Popp (2002) which we discuss below.
    The studies most closely related to ours are Popp (2002) and Acemoglu and Linn (2004).
Popp (2002) uses data on energy prices and patenting activity across energy technologies

                                             2
over time and …nds a positive relationship between innovation and both energy prices and
technological opportunity.1 We too examine both induced innovation and the technologi-
cal opportunity e¤ect. But in contrast with Popp (2002) our main focus is on non-pro…t
innovation and we use data on biomedical publications to measure inventive activity.
       Acemoglu and Linn (2004) use the change in age demographics to identify the e¤ect of
market size on pharmaceutical innovation and …nd a positive empirical relationship.2 In
comparison, we use changes in both age demographics and obesity prevalence to identify the
induced innovation e¤ect. Also, whereas Acemoglu and Linn (2004) measure the extent of
pharmaceutical innovation from new drug introductions, which re‡ects for-pro…t production,
we measure it from biomedical publications, which re‡ects non-pro…t production. An addi-
tional di¤erence between our work and Acemoglu and Linn (2004) is that our main focus is
not on induced pharmaceutical innovation but on the determinants of medical research.
       The methodology we use to estimate technological opportunity builds on the methodology
developed in the studies on patenting by Caballero and Ja¤e (1993) and Ja¤e and Trajtenberg
(1996). In comparison with these studies we derive the estimating equation from a model of
optimal allocation of research e¤ort. This enables us to estimate the structural productivity
parameters. Moreover, the probability that a given knowledge cohort is used in research
depends also on the quality of other existing knowledge cohorts.
       Our …nding of obesity-induced innovation is also related to the empirical studies on
preference externalities by Waldfogel (2003) and George and Waldfogel (2003). In these
studies the preference externality arises from racial characteristics whereas in our case the
preference externality is determined by the consumers’ decisions about body weight (to
the extent it is a decision). In a companion paper (Bhattacharya and Packalen, 2008) we
calculate the welfare e¤ect of the induced innovation externality of obesity.
   1
     Newell, Ja¤ee and Stavins (1999) exploit the changes in energy prices and changes in the cost and energy
e¢ ciency of air conditioners to examine the e¤ect of energy prices on the direction of technological change.
   2
     DellaVigna and Pollet (2007) exploit the changes in the age demographics to study stock market returns.




                                                     3
3     Theory

We …rst present a model of medical research. In the second subsection we discuss why
technological opportunity in medical research is also a measure of pharmaceutical innovation.


3.1    A Model of Medical Research

We distinguish between two types of medical research: drug-related medical research and
other medical research. In both cases, following the induced innovation hypothesis, the op-
timal research e¤ort is increasing in disease incidence. In the case of drug-related medical
research the research e¤ort is also in part determined by technological opportunity as new
research opportunities are presented by the discovery of new active ingredients. The phar-
maceutical research that leads to the discovery of new active ingredients precedes the type
of medical research examined here. The model of allocation of other medical research is a
special case of the model of allocation of drug-related medical research. Therefore, we only
consider the allocation of drug-related medical research in the formal analysis.
    We divide drug-related medical research into mutually exclusive categories by the disease
examined in the research and by the active ingredient used in the research. We also lump
together the ingredients by their year of discovery (cohort), denoted by f . We …rst consider
the optimal allocation of drug-related research e¤ort in the disease i in year t across cohorts
f . We assume that the bene…t of research on disease i that uses ingredients from a cohort f
depends on a measure of the baseline productivity of the cohort of ingredients f in research
on the disease i, denoted by aif , on the elapsed time t   f since the initial discovery of the
ingredients, on the extent of the research e¤ort in year t that uses an ingredient from the
cohort f in research on the in disease i, denoted Nitf , on the expected number of people
with the disease i in year t; denoted by Mit , and on other factors, denoted by "itf :
    Speci…cally, we assume that the bene…t from research on the disease i in year t that uses



                                               4
an ingredient from the cohort of ingredients f is


                                       Mit                      e         1 (t      f)
                                                                                                 1      e        2 (t     f)
                                                                                                                                    + "itf               ln (Nitf ) :                  (1)
                                                        if




In this expression the factor 1                                                e         2 (t    f)
                                                                                                        represents the lag after the discovery of the
ingredients in the cohort f before the full potential of this cohort of ingredients in medical
research on the disease i is revealed. The factor e                                                                         1 (t     f)
                                                                                                                                          represents the eventual decay in
the usefulness of the cohort of ingredients f in medical research as the properties of this
cohort of ingredients become established knowledge.3 We assume that the variable "itf is
observable to the medical researchers and satis…es E ["itf ] = 0.
             The range of cohorts f is ff0 ; f0 + 1; :::; tg in year t. The total bene…t from research on
the disease i in year t is the sum of the bene…t (1) over all cohorts:

                                              X
                                              t
                                       Mit                       e           1 (t    f)
                                                                                                  1         e     2 (t       f)
                                                                                                                                       + "itf             ln (Nitf ) :                 (2)
                                                         if
                                              f =f0


We assume that the allocation of research across cohorts of ingredients within a disease is
                                                              Nitf
optimal. Denoting pitf                                  Pf
                                                                     Nitk
                                                                                 the …rst-order conditions for the optimum imply that4
                                                             f =f0




                                                                                 e       1 (t    f)
                                                                                                             1          e          2 (t   f)
                                                                                                                                                 + "itf
                                                                     if
                                             pitf = Pt                                                                                                             :                   (3)
                                                                                                 1 (t   f)                                2 (t   f )]
                                                              f =f0 f         if          e                          [1            e                    + "itf g

             We now consider the optimal allocation of research e¤ort across diseases. We assume
         3
     We do not model explicitly the e¤ect that the amount of research in the preceeding years may have on
the bene…t from research in a given year. This assumption is innocuous if marginal research in each year
does not in‡uence the quality of research opportunities in future years.
   4
     Denoting the optimal level of e¤ort by Nitf , the …rst-order condition for the optimum is Mit   if
                                                                                                        h                           i
                                                                                          1 (t   f0)                 2 (t    f0)
e        1 (t   f)
                     [1   e     2 (t   f)
                                            ]+"itf                                   e                   1 e                         +"itf 0
                        Nitf                          = Mit           if 0                                  Nitf 0                               for all (i; t; f; f 0 ) : Denoting citf
         e           1 (t f )
                        1 e 2 (t f ) + "itf this condition can be rewritten as citf Nitf 0 = Nitf citf 0 for all
    if
(i; t; f; f ) : Taking the sum of both sides of the equation citf Nitf 0 = Nitf citf 0 over all f 0 2 ff0 ; :::; tg
           0
                Pt                  Pt
gives citf        f =f0 Nitf = Nitf   f =f0 citf for all (i; t; f ) : Rearranging and using the de…nitions of citf and
pitf gives the relationship (3) in the text.




                                                                                                        5
that the overall bene…t from research in year t is the sum of the bene…t from research in
each disease (see the expression (2)) over all diseases. The overall bene…t is therefore

                  X          X
                             t
                       Mit                           e      1 (t   f)
                                                                                1       e           2 (t   f)
                                                                                                                + "itf               ln (Nitf ) :           (4)
                                           if
                   i         f =f0


If the allocation of resources across cohorts of ingredients within a disease is optimal, using
                                                 Pt
the de…nition of pitf and the de…nition Nit         f =f0 Nitf the expression (4) for the overall

bene…t from research can be rewritten as

             X           X
                         t
                   Mit                          e    1 (t    f)
                                                                        1           e       2 (t     f)
                                                                                                            + "itf            ln Nit              pitf :    (5)
                                     if
              i          f =f0


If also the allocation of resources across diseases is optimal we have

                                                     Pt
                       X                    Mit   f =f    if                        e       1 (t     f)
                                                                                                                1     e       2 (t   f)
                                                                                                                                            + "itf
             Nit =           Nit          P      Pt 0                                                                                                       (6)
                                                                                                   1 (t    f)                    2 (t     f )]
                         i                 i Mit    f =f0 f if                          e                        [1       e                      + "itf g

for all (t; i) by the …rst-order conditions for the optimum.
                  P
    The factor tf =f0 f if e 1 (t f )       1 e 2 (t f ) + "itf g in the equation (6) is a mea-
sure of technological opportunity in research on the disease i in year t: Denoting this
measure of technological opportunity by Kit we can rewrite the equation (6) as Nit =
P         P      Pt
  i Nit =  i Mit  f =f0 Kit  Mit Kit : Assuming that Nit > 0 and Kit > 0 for all (i; t)
this can be rewritten as
                                                    ln Nit = ln Kit + ln Mit +                                  t;                                          (7)
                   hP              P                Pt                      i
where   t   = ln       i Nit =            i Mit          f =f0 Kit              :
   The empirical predictions of this model are two-fold. First, by the equation (7) the model
predicts a proportional relationship between research e¤ort in a disease and technological
opportunity for research on the disease and a proportional relationship between the research
e¤ort in a disease and the disease incidence. With a di¤erent functional form for the overall

                                                                                6
bene…t from research both relationships would still be positive but non-proportional. We
allow for this possibility in our empirical framework. Second, the model predicts the rela-
tionship (3) between the parameters         if ;   1   and      2   that govern technological opportunity
Kit and the probability that a cohort of ingredients is used in research. We use this pre-
dicted relationship to estimate the parameters             if   and the parameters    1   and   2   in order to
construct an estimate of technological opportunity Kit .
      As we can only construct a measure of technological opportunity for drug-related medical
research, the relevant empirical prediction of the corresponding analysis for the case of other
medical research is simply a proportional relationship between the disease incidence and the
research e¤ort in the disease. As in the case of drug-related research, di¤erent assumptions
about the preferences would imply that the relationship is positive but non-proportional.
We allow for this possibility in the empirical analysis.


3.2      Pharmaceutical Innovation

Acemoglu and Linn (2004) present a formal analysis of induced innovation that predicts
a positive relationship between the extent of pharmaceutical innovation and the potential
market size for new drugs. While their focus is on the e¤ect of market size on the ‡ow
of pharmaceutical innovation, Acemoglu and Linn (2004) also note a positive empirical
relationship between the stock of drugs and potential market size.
      Our measure of research opportunity in drug-related medical research is determined by
the extent of past pharmaceutical innovation. We can therefore examine the relationship
between the extent of pharmaceutical innovation and the potential market size indirectly by
comparing the changes in the relative potential market sizes across diseases and the changes
in technological opportunity across diseases. The induced innovation hypothesis predicts a
positive relationship between these variables.5
  5
    An advantage of our indirect approach over the direct approach of Acemoglu and Linn (2004) is that
variations in the measure of technological opportunity capture di¤erences in the relative importance of


                                                       7
4       Empirical Strategy

We …rst discuss in turn the estimation of technological opportunity, the identi…cation of
the technological opportunity e¤ect, and the identi…cation of the market size e¤ects. The
regression models that we use to estimate the e¤ects are then presented in the last subsection.


4.1      Estimation of Technological Opportunity

In the model of medical research a measure of technological opportunity in drug-related
medical research on the disease i in year t is given by the expression

                                  X
                                  t
                       Kit                       e   1 (t   f)
                                                                 1   e   2 (t   f)
                                                                                     + "itf ;         (8)
                                            if
                                  f =f0


where the parameters         if   specify the baseline productivity of each cohort, the parameter       1

governs the eventual decay in the research potential of a cohort of ingredients, the parameter

 2   governs the rate at which the full potential of a cohort of ingredients for research is revealed
to researchers, and "itf denotes other factors that in‡uence the productivity of research that
uses ingredients from the cohort f . We assume that E["itf ] = 0 and that "itf is independent
and identically distributed.
     The model also predicts the relationship (3) between the probability pitf that an ingre-
dient from the cohort f is used in research on the disease i in year t and the parameters
                                     hP                                                  i
                                         t             1 (t f )         2 (t f ) + "
 if ; 1  and  2 . Denoting   it   1=     f =f0 if  e            1   e                itf   the
relationship (3) may be rewritten as


                         pitf =         =        e   1 (t   f)
                                                                 1   e   2 (t   f)
                                                                                     + "itf :         (9)
                                   it       if

di¤erent drugs. A possible disadvantage of our approach is that the timing of the e¤ect that the discovery
of a new ingredient has on the measure of the technological opportunity does not necessarily coincide with
the timing of the stream of pro…ts from the discovery of the new ingredient.




                                                             8
                                                                        Pt
When t             f0 is large, we have that                                     f =f0       "itf          0. Applying this simpli…cation modi…es the
de…nition of            it   as follows:
                                                                 "                                                                                 #
                                                                     X
                                                                     t
                                                            1=                               e      1 (t    f)
                                                                                                                      1       e     2 (t    f)
                                                                                                                                                                                (10)
                                               it                                if
                                                                     f =f0



and also modi…es the relationship (3) as follows:

                                                                             e        1 (t    f)
                                                                                                           1     e     2 (t   f)
                                                                                                                                     + "itf
                                                                 if
                                              pitf = Pt                                                                                                                         (11)
                                                                                              e      1 (t f )         [1      e      2 (t   f )]
                                                                     f =f0        if



       The econometric challenge is to estimate the parameters                                                                     if ,     1   and         2.   We …rst estimate
the parameters                  1       and         2   using non-linear least squares applied to the equation (9) while
                                                                                                                                      6
assuming arbitrary …xed values for the parameters                                                                if   and         it :     To estimate the parameters

 if    we then use the following iterative procedure:


             We start by calculating initial estimates of                                                        it   by plugging in the estimates of the
             parameters             1       and         2   as well as arbitrary (starting) values of                                                  if   into the expression
             (10).7

             Using the estimates of the parameters                                                  it     and the estimates of the parameters                              1   and

              2,   we estimate the parameters                                          if    by least squares applied to the equation (9) and
             holding     it ;           1   and         2   …xed.

             We recompute the estimates of                                       it    by plugging in the estimates of                                      if   and the estimates
             of    1   and          2       into the expression (10). If the new value of the estimate of                                                                       it   is
             su¢ ciently close to the old value, we declare convergence. If not, we iterate the previous
             step until convergence.
   6
      We assume that if = 1 and it = 1 for all i; t; f: The estimating equation therefore becomes pitf =
e     1 (t
        f)
             1 e 2 (t f ) + "itf : Omitting a multiplicative constant in this speci…cation is both innocuous
and necessary because the true value of the parameter 2 is typically very small and the variation in t f
is limited which make the factor 1 e 2 (t f ) approximately equal to 2 (t f ) in the sample.
    7
      We assume that if = 1 for all i; f:


                                                                                                    9
   This iterative procedure yields estimates of the parameters                         if .   We then generate our
estimate of technological opportunity using the estimates ^ if ; ^ 1 and ^ 2 and the formula


                                                 X
                                                 t                             h                         i
                                                                    ^ (t f )                  ^ (t f )
              K^it   E[Kit j^ if ; ^ 1 ; ^ 2 ]           ^ if   e    1             1    e      2             :   (12)
                                                 f =f0



4.2    Identi…cation of the Technological Opportunity E¤ect

As the variation in technological opportunity over time is likely to be correlated with the
variation in the unobserved determinants of medical research over time, we employ …xed
e¤ects approaches in which the technological opportunity e¤ect is identi…ed by comparing the
changes in technological opportunity with the changes in the research e¤ort across diseases
over time.
   The model of medical research predicts that within a disease the distribution of research
across cohorts of ingredients is independent of the total amount of research on the disease.
With a di¤erent functional form for the overall bene…t from medical research this would
not hold. Consequently, changes in the level of drug-related research on a disease could be
correlated with changes in the estimated technological opportunity in research on the disease
even if there was no causal relationship from technological opportunity to the level of the
drug-related research e¤ort.
   However, the unobserved e¤ects that in‡uence the level of drug-related research e¤ort
and the unobserved e¤ects that in‡uence the level of other medical research e¤ort are likely
to be correlated. Therefore, if there is indeed reverse causality from the level of research
e¤ort to the measure of technological opportunity, there will be a positive relationship also
between the estimated technological opportunity and the level of other medical research. In
contrast, if there is no reverse causality from the level of research e¤ort to the measure of
technological opportunity, there will not be a positive relationship between the estimated
technological opportunity and the level of other medical research. We can therefore test for


                                                         10
the presence of the reverse causality by including the estimate of technological opportunity
also into the analyses of the determinants of other medical research.


4.3    Identi…cation of Market Size E¤ects

As is well recognized in the literature on induced innovation, the causal e¤ect of the poten-
tial market size on the extent of innovation cannot be inferred from the relationship between
observed innovation and the observed market size due to the endogeneity of the observed
market size. Acemoglu and Linn (2004) circumvent this problem by examining the rela-
tionship between the changes in pharmaceutical innovation and the changes in the potential
market size that are caused by the exogenous changes in the age demographics of the popu-
lation. The key conditions to the success of this identi…cation strategy are that the e¤ect of
aging on disease incidence varies across diseases, that the age demographics of the population
have changed over time, and that the changes in the age demographics are mostly caused by
changes in fertility and are therefore exogenous to the rate of pharmaceutical innovation.
   We follow this general identi…cation strategy in our analyses of induced pharmaceutical
innovation but in constructing the potential market size we take into account both the e¤ect
that the change in the age demographics has had on the disease incidence over time and the
e¤ect that the obesity epidemic has had on the disease incidence over time. As the potential
market size is measured by the disease incidence, we naturally use the same methodology in
the analyses of induced innovation in medical research.
   The e¤ect that an obesity-induced change in the potential market size has had on the
extent of innovation may be di¤erent than the e¤ect that an aging-induced change in the
potential market size has had on the extent of innovation if one type of e¤ect has been better
understood than the other or if the change in the age demographics was more expected than
the obesity epidemic. We allow for this possibility by decomposing the changes in the
potential market size into aging-induced changes and obesity-induced changes.


                                             11
4.4       The Empirical Models

We use two types of …xed e¤ects approaches. In one case we include disease …xed e¤ects and
year …xed e¤ects. Using this strategy the identifying variation comes from the variation in
the regressor (either technological opportunity or potential market size) relative to all other
diseases. In the other case we include disease …xed e¤ects and the interactions of disease
class …xed e¤ects and year …xed e¤ects. Using this strategy the identifying variation comes
from the variation in the regressor (either technological opportunity or potential market
size) relative to all other diseases in the same disease class. The parameters of interest will
be di¤erent in these two speci…cations if the elasticity of substitution of research e¤ort is
di¤erent between diseases within each disease class than it is between diseases in di¤erent
disease classes.
       The …rst empirical speci…cation that we use to examine induced pharmaceutical innova-
tion is
                            ln K^it =   M   ln MitT OT AL + …xed e¤ects + "it :                         (13)

Here Kit is the estimated measure of technological opportunity for drug-related research on
the disease i in year t.8 The variable MitT OT AL is the potential market size for the disease i
in year t. We measure the potential market size by the incidence of the disease i in year t:

                                             X
                                             5 X
                                               3
                              MitT OT AL                  i;j;k   sAGE
                                                                   j;t   sBM   I
                                                                          j;k;t :                       (14)
                                             j=1 k=1



In the expression (14) the parameter           i;j;k   is the incidence of the disease i among people in
the age group j who are in the Body-Mass-Index (BMI) group i, the parameter sAGE
                                                                             j;t is the
share of people in the age group j in year t; and the parameter sBM   I
                                                                 j;k;t is the share people in

   8
     See the subsection 3.2 for why the measure of technological opportunity in drug-related medical research
is also a measure of pharmaceutical innovation.




                                                        12
the age group j who are in the BMI group k in year t:9;10 The age groups are 0-18, 18-35,
35-50, 50-65 and 65+. The BMI groups are 18.5-25, 25-30 and 30-50.11
       In the second empirical speci…cation for induced pharmaceutical innovation we decompose
the changes in the potential market size into aging-induced changes and obesity-induced
changes. This second empirical speci…cation is


                  ln K^it =   A   ln MitAGIN G +    O   ln MitOBESIT Y + …xed e¤ects + "it ;                 (15)


where
                                               X
                                               5 X
                                                 3
                                  MitAGIN G                i;j;k      sAGE
                                                                       j;t    sBM   I
                                                                               j;k;t0                        (16)
                                               j=1 k=1

is the potential market size in year t for the disease i when the body weight distribution in
year t is set to be the same as the body weight distribution is in the initial year t0 in the
sample and only the age distribution varies across time, and where

                                                X
                                                5 X
                                                  3
                              MitOBESIT Y                     i;j;k   sAGE
                                                                       j;t0    sBM   I
                                                                                j;k;t :                      (17)
                                                j=1 k=1


is the potential market size in year t for the disease i when the age distribution in year t is
set to be the same as the age distribution is in the initial year t0 in the sample and only the
body weight distribution varies across time.12 A positive estimate of the parameter                           A   is
   9
     The parameters i;j;k ; sAGE
                               j;t  and sBM    I
                                          j;k;t are estimated from data on the disease incidence and from data
on demographics prior to the estimation of the induced innovation model. The data sources are discussed in
the next section. As we use disease and year …xed e¤ects we can ignore population and population growth
in estimating the potential market size.
  10
     In estimating the disease incidence we allow for the parameter to vary by sex, race (black/non-black),
insurance status (private/not private) and year but for expositional simplicity we omit these issues in the
text. As we don’t measure changes in the insurance rates across time we do not examine the e¤ect that
changes in the insurance rates across time may have on potential market size and innovation.
  11
     For the age group 0-18 we do not distinguish the disease incidence by body weight and therefore assume
that sBM    I      BM I            BM I
       1;1;t = 1; s1;2;t = 0 and s1;3;t = 0 for all t:
  12
     The decomposition arises as follows. Let Mit0 denote the incidence of the disease i in the initial year t0 :
       AGIN G
Let Rit        denote the e¤ect of aging alone on the incidence of the disease i so that if only aging a¤ected the
                                                                 AGIN G
incidence of the disease i the disease incidence would be Mit0 Rit                       ~ OBESIT Y denote the ad-
                                                                          in year t: Let R it
ditional e¤ect of the obesity epidemic on the incidence of the disease i so that if only aging and obesity a¤ected
                                                                                 AGIN G ~ OBESIT Y
the incidence of the disease i the disease incidence would be Mit = Mit0 Rit             Rit         in year t: Let


                                                         13
therefore evidence of aging-induced innovation and a positive estimate of the parameter                          O

is evidence of obesity-induced innovation.
      The empirical model that we use to analyze of the e¤ect of technological opportunity and
the e¤ect of the disease incidence on the level of medical research e¤ort is13


           ln Nit =       K   ln K^it +   A   ln MitAGIN G +        O   ln MitOBESIT Y + …xed e¤ects + "it :   (18)


The variable Nit is a measure of medical research e¤ort on the disease i in year t: As was
discussed in the subsection 4.2, we include the technological opportunity variable also in the
analyses of other medical research because if in the analyses of other medical research the
estimate of the parameter             K   is close to zero it is an indication that a positive estimate of
the coe¢ cient        K   for drug-related research is not a result of reverse causality.



5       Data

We postpone the discussion of the descriptive statistics until the beginning of the next
section. To estimate the disease incidence for each age and BMI group we use the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) data from years 1996-2005.14 Each subject is followed in
MEPS for two years. For each subject we aggregate the observations in each year into one
  OBESIT Y
Rit         denote the e¤ect of obesity alone on the incidence of disease i so that if only obesity a¤ected the
                                                                OBESIT Y                        AGIN G
incidence of the disease i the disease incidence would be Mit0 Rit        in year t: Because Rit       is small,
R OBESIT Y      ~
                R OBESIT Y
                            . Therefore, ln Mit R   AGIN G ~ OBESIT Y
                                                           R                ln Mit R   AGIN G OBESIT Y
                                                                                              R            : We
 it              it                                   0   it            it                   0 it      it
                                                                                           AGIN G  OBESIT Y
can therefore decompose the aging and obesity e¤ects by using the variables ln            Rit
                                                                                          and ln Rit
as regressors. Because the empirical speci…cations include disease and year …xed e¤ects we can replace these
                                        AGIN G                 OBESIT Y
variables with the variables ln Mit0 Rit         and ln Mit0 Rit           which in the text are denoted by
      AGIN G              OBESIT Y
ln Mit         and ln Mit           ; respectively.
  13
     Because the empirical results show that for medical research the e¤ect of aging-induced changes in the
disease incidence and the e¤ect of obesity-induced changes in the disease incidence are so di¤erent we do not
show the results for the speci…cation in which the two e¤ects are restricted to be the same (the speci…cation
in which the disease incidence is measured by MitT OT AL ).
  14
     Because the trends in the changes in the age and body weight distributions have been similar across the
developed nations we do not believe that using data on disease incidence, age demographics and obesity for
the United States but data on world-wide publications is a signi…cant concern.



                                                               14
observation. MEPS includes a list of self-reported diseases that are coded by the International
Classi…cation of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9). MEPS does not include BMI information
for years 1996-2000. We therefore use the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) data
from years 1996-2000 and the match between NHIS and MEPS to obtain BMI information
for the observations in those years. The resulting MEPS data includes 262,958 observations
on 149,737 subjects.15
       We use the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data from years 1975-
2004 to estimate the share of people in each age group in each year.16 For each age group we
use the NHIS data from years 1976-2005 to estimate the share of people in each BMI group
in each year.17
       To measure medical research e¤ort as well as technological opportunity in drug-related
medical research we use the MEDLINE database on approximately 16 million biomedical
publications, generally from 1950 to the present. Publications in the database are indexed
by the 2007 version of the Medical Subject Headings (MESH) vocabulary. MESH is a
hierarchical medical vocabulary of over 20000 di¤erent terms.
       Because the MEPS data on the disease incidence is indexed by the ICD-9 classi…cation
system and the publications are indexed by the MESH vocabulary we construct a match
between the ICD-9 codes and the MESH vocabulary. We limit the match e¤ort to diseases
for which the MEPS data includes at least 100 observations.18 We do not match ICD-9
codes that include either the word "Other" or the word "Unspeci…ed" in the title because
these ICD-9 codes typically include a variety of di¤erent diseases and are therefore di¢ cult
to match to the MESH vocabulary. Neither do we match diseases in the pregnancy category
  15
     Except for subjects in the age group 0-18 we exclude subjects without either age or BMI information.
  16
     We impute the values for 2005 by assuming that the change in the population in each age group from
2004 to 2005 was the same as it was from 2003 to 2005.
  17
     We impute the values for 1975 by assuming the the body weight distribution was the same in 1975 as it
was in 1976.
  18
     We exclude HIV/AIDS because the disease does not appear in the publications database until the early
1980s and because the variations in the incidence of HIV/AIDS are obviously not mainly driven by aging or
the obesity epidemic.



                                                   15
(class 11), in the congenital category (class 14), in the perinatal category (class 15), in the
symptoms category (class 16), in the injuries category (class 17) or in the services category
(class V). These classes are excluded from the match e¤ort both in order to limit the scope
of our match e¤ort and because of the di¢ culty of matching diseases in these categories. If
a match from an individual disease to a MESH entry/entries is not possible we try to match
a group of ICD-9 codes to a MESH entry/entries.
       The matched diseases and their matched MESH entry/entries as well as the unmatched
diseases are listed in the Appendix 1. The match yields 127 separate matches between a
disease or a group of diseases and a MESH entry/entries.19 The 127 diseases belong to 12
disease classes. Because MESH is a hierarchical vocabulary, we also count all research that is
indexed to any subnode of a matched MESH term as research that is related to the matched
disease or group of diseases.20
       As the MESH vocabulary has changed over the years we make an e¤ort to check that
the MESH terms for the matched diseases have not changed in a way that would in‡uence
the estimate of the research e¤ort. For the diseases for which the related publications from
a year during the sample period are likely to have been indexed by terms other than the
matched MESH entry/entries we exclude the observations from such years and from any
of the preceding years. In the Appendix 1 the match for such diseases is marked with an
asterisk and the year prior to which any observations are excluded.
       To measure the extent of the research e¤ort related to a disease we count the number
of publications that are matched to the disease. A publication may be indexed to multiple
diseases among the 127 matched diseases. We allow for this possibility by counting publi-
cations that are matched to more than one disease the same we would count the matches if
  19
    The matched diseases account for 377,482 of the 745,355 disease mentions in the MEPS data.
  20
    We manually remove several matches of ICD-9 diseases to terms for neoplasms in MESH when the same
neoplasm term is also mapped to a disease in the ICD-9 disease class 2 (neoplasms). MESH has 4982 disease
terms. The match maps 1338 terms in MESH to the 127 diseases. 51 of the matched terms are mapped to
2 diseases and one term in MESH is mapped to 3 diseases. All other terms are mapped to only 1 disease.




                                                   16
each match was from a separate publication.
   We identify active ingredients from the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) data on drug
approvals during 1939-2006. As we generally cannot distinguish between active ingredients
and their derivatives in the biomedical publications data, we consider the …rst word in the
list of approved active ingredients to be the ingredient name that we use in our study. This
yields a list of 1448 ingredients.
   We search both the title and the abstract of every publication in the MEDLINE database
for each ingredient in the list of ingredients. We set the cohort (year of discovery) of an
ingredient to equal the year prior to the year in which the ingredient is …rst mentioned either
in the abstract or in the title of a publication. In estimating technological opportunity, we
measure the research e¤ort in the disease i in year t that is related to the cohort f by the
number of publications in year t which are matched to the disease i and mention an ingredient
from the cohort f either in the title or in the abstract of the publication. A publication may
be associated with multiple cohorts of ingredients. We allow for this possibility by counting
publications which are matched to more than one cohort of ingredients the same way we
would count the matches if each match was from a separate publication.
   We use several strategies to identify and measure drug-related medical research. The
…rst is to classify all publications that are matched to an ingredient as being drug-related
medical research and count a publication that is matched to n di¤erent cohorts of ingredients
as n units of research. The second is to classify all publications that are matched to an
ingredient as being drug-related medical research and count each such publication as one
unit of research. The third is to classify all publications that have a MESH term indexed
together with the "major topic" ‡ag and the MESH quali…er term "drug therapy", "drug
e¤ects" or "pharmacology" as being drug-related research and count each such publication
as one unit of research. We call these three measures as DRUG 1, DRUG 2, and DRUG 3,
respectively.



                                              17
         We also use several strategies to identify and measure other medical research. The …rst
is to classify all publications that are not matched to an ingredient as being other medical
research and count each such publication as one unit of research. The second is to classify
all publications that are not matched to an ingredient, that are not indexed are indexed with
any of the MESH quali…er terms "drug therapy", "drug e¤ects" or "pharmacology", and that
are also not indexed with the MESH term "Chemicals and Drugs" as being other medical
research and count each such publication as one unit of research. The third is to classify
all research that is indexed with the MESH quali…er term "surgery" or "transplantation" as
being other medical research and count each such publication as one unit of research. We
call these three measures as OTHER 1, OTHER 2, and OTHER 3, respectively.
         As the descriptive statistics discussed in the next section show there is a discontinuous
jump in the share of publications with abstracts in the database from 1974 to 1975. Also, a
number of diseases are indexed with di¤erent MESH terms before 1975 and especially before
1970 than they are after 1975. For these reasons we choose 1975-2005 as our sample period.
When we determine the cohort of an ingredient we use the publications from years 1906-
2005. In estimating the parameters that govern technological opportunity we limit the limit
the range cohorts f to years 1960-2001 because there is a discontinuous jump in 1950 in the
number of publications that are indexed in MEDLINE and because there is a discontinuous
fall in the number of ingredients in a cohort from 2001 to 2002 due to the lag between the
year in which an ingredient is …rst mentioned in the publications database and the year of
FDA approval of the ingredient.21 Because of this lag, because many of the diseases are
indexed with di¤erent terms before 1970, and because in the subsequent analysis our focus is
on the sample period 1975-2005, in estimating technological opportunity we limit the range
of the years t to 1970-2002.
    21
    We multiply the initially estimated technological opportunity by a factor that compensates for trunca-
tion. We assume that the average baseline productivity is the same before and after any truncation point.
                                           P1         ^                ^          Pt 1960 ^
That is, the estimates are multiplied by f t f =1 e 1 (t f ) [1 e 2 (t f ) ]g=f t f =1 e 1 (t f ) [1
    ^ (t f )
e    2         ]g for all years t   2001. For t > 2001 we also compensate for truncation due to the upper bound.


                                                           18
6     Results

We start with the descriptive statistics. All …gures and tables are in the Appendix 2. Fig-
ure 1a shows the age and body weight distributions during the sample period. For both
distributions the change has been gradual but the change in the body weight distribution
began more recently than the change in the age distribution. Figure 1b shows the e¤ect that
the changes in the two distributions have had on the disease incidence for each disease from
the beginning of the sample period (1975) to the end of the sample period (2005). For both
variables there is considerable variation in the e¤ect (from -10% to +20%). These identifying
variations are also not too correlated for the e¤ects to be separately identi…ed in most cases.
    Figure 2a depicts the count of all publications (All Publications) and the count of pub-
lications with an abstract (Publications with an Abstract) by the year of publication. The
graph also shows the count of publications that are indexed to a disease (Publications In-
dexed with a Disease) and the count of publications that are indexed to a disease that is
matched to an ICD-9 disease by our match (Publications Matched). A publication may be
indexed to more than one disease and, consequently, our match may match a publication to
more than one ICD-9 disease. Therefore, the count of matches of publications to a disease
(Publication-Disease Matches) is higher than the number of publications matched to at least
one disease (Publications Matched).
    Figure 2b depicts the count of matches to one of the 127 diseases for the three measures
of drug-related medical research in each year and Figure 2c depicts the count of matches to
one of the 127 diseases for the three measures of other medical research in each year. The
count of publications for each measure is an important determinant of the precision of our
estimates because the variance of the share of publications that are related to a disease is
expected to be inversely related to the count of publications that are related to the disease
and the estimated e¤ects are identi…ed from the e¤ects on the share of publications that are
related to each disease.


                                              19
       We …rst estimate the parameters       if   and the parameters       1   and   2   that govern the mea-
sure of technological opportunity using the iterative procedure described in the subsection
4.1. The estimates of the parameters          1   and    2   are ^ 1 = 0:0628 (s.e. 0:0045) and ^ 2 = 0:003
(s.e. 0:0004): Figure 2d shows that the predicted probability that is calculated based on
the estimates ^ 1 and ^ 2 as a function of the ingredient age t                  f tracks the mean of the
observed probability closely except for when the ingredient age is 35 and over. The share
of publications that use ingredients aged 35 and over is arti…cially in‡ated by the fact that
the MEDLINE database consists mostly of publications published after 1950 and therefore
our methodology of assigning the year of discovery of each ingredient assigns the year of
discovery between 1950 and 1965 for a disproportionate number of ingredients as can be
seen from Figure 2e.22
       We …rst use the constructed measure of technological opportunity in drug-related med-
ical research as a proxy for pharmaceutical innovation to examine the induced innovation
hypothesis for pharmaceutical innovation. Because we expect the variance of the dependent
variable to be inversely related to the count of publications on the disease the observations
are weighted by the total count of matches to an ingredient cohort (measure DRUG 1 ) for
the disease during the sample period.23 The results are shown in Table 1.
       Columns 1 and 2 show that when the potential market size e¤ect is identi…ed from
changes relative to diseases within each disease class there is strong evidence for the induced
innovation hypothesis both when the e¤ects of aging and obesity are identi…ed jointly and
when the e¤ects are identi…ed separately.24 Columns 3 and 4 show that when the potential
market size e¤ect is identi…ed from changes relative to all other diseases the induced inno-
  22
     Moreover, the precision of the estimates for ingredient ages 35 and over is in‡uenced by the small number
of observations in the data on ingredients aged 35 and over.
  23
                                               P2005
     That is, each observation is weighted by t=1975 NitDRU G 1 .
  24
     The interpretation of the point estimates is straightforward. For example, the point estimate in the
column 1 implies that a one percent increase in potential market size increases pharmaceutical innovation
by three percent. The point estimates are consistent with the …ndings in Acemoglu and Linn (2004) who
focus on aging-induced pharmaceutical innovation.




                                                        20
vation hypothesis is supported when the e¤ects are identi…ed jointly but the coe¢ cients are
no longer statistically signi…cant when the e¤ects are identi…ed separately. Figures 3a and
3b depict the empirical relationship for the speci…cation analyzed in column 1. The positive
relationship is clearly not a result of outliers. The relationship is even more robust when we
only consider the 50% of the diseases with the most publications. This supports the use of
weighted regressions in the analysis.
       Before we examine drug-related medical research and other medical research separately,
we …rst examine the determinants of all medical research. The count of all publications,
denoted by NitALL , that is used in this analysis corresponds to the measure Publication-
Disease Matches in Figure 2a. The results are shown in Table 2.25
       Columns 1 and 2 show that aging-induced increases in the disease incidence have increased
the medical research e¤ort in the disease. In contrast, there is no evidence of a corresponding
e¤ect for obesity-induced changes in the disease incidence. Columns 3 and 4 show at best a
weak relationship between technological opportunity for drug-related research on a disease
and the amount of total research on the disease. Columns 3 and 4 also show that the
inclusion of technological opportunity variable renders the e¤ect of aging-induced changes
in the disease incidence statistically insigni…cant. However, as can be seen from Figure 3c,
which depicts the …xed e¤ects speci…cation analyzed in column 3, with the exception of the
outlier disease 299 there is a robust positive relationship between aging-induced changes in
the disease incidence and the changes in the overall research e¤ort in the disease. Columns
5 and 6 show that when the disease 299 and the two other children’s mental health diseases
(314 and 315) are excluded, the relationship between aging-induced changes in the disease
incidence and the overall research e¤ort in the disease is again statistically signi…cant.
       Because the change in the age distribution has had such an unusual e¤ect on the predicted
  25
    The observations are weighted by the total count of Ppublications    matched to the disease during the
                                                           2005
sample period. That is, each observation is weighted by t=1975 NitALL . The number of observations varies
                                                           ^ it = 0 or N ALL = 0:
across columns because an observation is omitted if either K            it




                                                   21
disease incidence for the disease 299 (see Figure 1b) and because the dramatic increases in the
number of diagnoses and research interest in the children’s mental health diseases have been
well recognized but without agreement over the causes of this, in the subsequent analyses
we exclude the children’s mental health diseases.26
    The results for drug-related research are shown in Table 3.27 There is robust evidence
across the three measures of drug-related research and the two …xed e¤ects speci…cations both
for the hypothesis that technological opportunity is a determinant of the allocation of drug-
related research e¤ort across diseases and for aging-induced changes in the composition of
research. The robustness of the technological opportunity estimate presented in the column
1 is illustrated in Figure 3d. In contrast, there is no evidence in any of the speci…cations
for a positive relationship between obesity-induced changes in the disease incidence and the
amount of drug-related research on the disease. If anything, the results suggest that there
may be a negative relationship between obesity-induced changes in the disease incidence and
the extent of drug-related research on a disease. We return to this issue after discussing the
corresponding results for other research.
    The results for other medical research are shown in Table 4.28 For all speci…cations
the estimate of the coe¢ cient on the technological opportunity is much smaller than the
corresponding estimate was for the three measures of drug-related research, and except for
  26
     Research on children’s mental health diseases has increased dramatically since the early 1990s and this
increase is undoubtedly tied with the increase in the number of diagnoses for these diseases during the same
period. While the unusual increase in the interest in these diseases is well known there is no agreement on
why the increase has occurred. One explanation is that the increase in the diagnoses and the increase in
research to the children’s mental health diseases are consequences of the availability of dramatically better
treatment options for these diseases, especially in the form of better knowledge of the e¤ects of several
drugs such as methylphenidate (ritalin). Methylphenidate was discovered in the 1950s and our measure of
technological opportunity is unable to predict the increase in research to these diseases because the increase
happens 40 years after the discovery of the drug.
  An alternative explanation for why the disease 299 and to a lesser extent also the two other children’s
mental health diseases (314 and 315) are outliers is that during the sample period there may have been a
general disproportional increase in research to diseases that primarily a¤ect the children. We plan to explore
this possibility in future research.
  27
                                                                                      P2005
     For the measure DRUG k, where k 2 f1; 2; 3g, each observation is weighted by t=1975 NitDRU G k .
  28
                                                                                        P2005
     For the measure OTHER k, where k 2 f1; 2; 3g, each observation is weighted by t=1975 NitOT HER k .




                                                     22
…rst …xed e¤ects speci…cation for the most inclusive measure of other research OTHER 1
(see column 1), which is the most likely of the three measures to include also some drug-
related publications, the relationship is also statistically insigni…cant. As was discussed in
the subsection 4.2, the …nding of no relationship between the level of other research and the
technological opportunity in drug-related research is evidence against the possibility that
reverse causality is the reason for the observed positive relationship between the measure of
technological opportunity and the extent of drug-related research.
      The results for the measures OTHER 1 and OTHER 2 that are reported in columns 1 and
2 and in columns 3 and 4 also provide evidence of aging-induced changes in the composition
of other medical research across diseases but show no evidence of obesity-induced changes
in the composition of other medical research across diseases. The results for surgery-related
research (the measure OTHER 3 ) in columns 5 and 6 show that the relationship between
aging-induced changes in the incidence of a disease and the extent of surgery-related research
on the disease is positive but not statistically signi…cant. As was the case for drug-related-
research, the results for surgery-related research suggest a possible negative relationship
between obesity-induced changes in the incidence of a disease and the extent of surgery-
related research on the disease. We now examine these relationships with additional analyses
that are reported in Table 5.
      In the analyses that are reported in columns 1 and 2 the logarithm of the ratio of the
most restrictive measure of drug-related research and all research is set as the dependent
variable.29 As expected, the results indicate a positive relationship between technological
opportunity in drug-related research on a disease and the share of research on the disease
that is drug-related. Because aging-induced changes are expected to in‡uence drug-related
research and all research the same way, the …nding that there is no statistically signi…cant
relationship between aging-induced changes in the disease incidence and changes in the share
 29
                                        P2005
      Each observation is weighted by    t=1975   NitDRU G 3 .




                                                          23
of research on a diseases that is drug-related research is as expected. However, the point
estimate still leaves open the possibility that drug-related research reacts to changes in the
disease incidence more strongly than all medical research. As in the earlier analyses of
drug-related research the obesity-induced changes in the disease incidence have a negative
but statistically insigni…cant relationship with the changes in the dependent variable. This
suggests that an obesity-induced increase in the incidence of a disease may decrease the share
of research on the disease that is drug-related. A likely explanation is that for the diseases for
which the disease incidence is higher for the obese than it is for the normal weight research
e¤ort is substituted from general research on the disease to obesity-speci…c research on the
disease as the obesity rate increases.
      In the analyses reported in columns 3 and 4 the logarithm of the ratio of surgery-related
research and all research is set as the dependent variable.30 The results show a negative and
statistically signi…cant relationship between the share of surgery-related research on a disease
and the measure of technological opportunity in drug-related research on the disease. This
is both evidence against the aforementioned reverse causality explanation for the positive
relationship between drug-related research and the measure of technological opportunity
and evidence that an increase in technological opportunity in drug-related research shifts
research e¤ort away from other types research to drug-related research. The …nding of no
relationship between aging-induced changes in the disease incidence and the ratio of research
that is surgery-related is as expected. The negative relationship between obesity-induced
changes in the disease incidence and the share of research on the disease that is surgery-
related again suggests the possibility that an obesity-induced increase in the incidence of a
disease shifts resources away from general research on the disease to obesity-speci…c research
on the disease.
 30
                                        P2005
      Each observation is weighted by    t=1975   NitOT HER 3 .




                                                         24
7     Conclusion

We present evidence on how non-pro…t innovation and for-pro…t innovation respond to
changes in the observable determinants of the optimal allocation of inventive activities. Our
results show that the composition of medical research across diseases responds to changes in
technological opportunity and aging-induced changes in the disease incidence. While we …nd
that obesity-induced changes in the disease incidence have not changed the composition of
medical research across diseases, the results suggest that an obesity-induced increase in the
incidence of a disease may have shifted research away from drug-related research and surgery-
related research on the disease and likely toward obesity-speci…c research on the disease. Our
results also show that the composition of pharmaceutical innovation across diseases responds
to both aging- and obesity-induced changes in the relative disease incidence.
    The empirical analysis was in part facilitated by our analysis of a formal model of optimal
allocation of medical research e¤ort. The analysis enabled us to identify the structural pro-
ductivity parameters that govern technological opportunity. Our research has also demon-
strated the research potential of the massive and information rich MEDLINE biomedical
publications database for future research on the economics of innovation.
    Our results on medicine and pharmaceuticals and the existing research on induced in-
novation and technological opportunity in for-pro…t innovation suggest that there does not
exist a fundamental di¤erence between for-pro…t and non-pro…t allocation mechanisms in
terms of how the allocation of inventive activity responds to changes in the characteristics
that determine the optimal allocation: academic medicine is not an ivory tower. Outcomes
under decentralized non-pro…t allocation mechanisms are therefore not necessarily inferior
to the outcomes under for-pro…t allocation mechanisms. We believe that this …nding is im-
portant for its implications to economic policy and is certainly worthy of closer attention in
future research.




                                              25
References

Acemoglu, D. and J. Linn, 2004, "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the
    Pharmaceutical Industry," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, pp. 1049-90.

Bhattacharya, J. and M. Packalen, 2008, "The Other Ex-Ante Moral Hazard in Health,"
    Working Paper, Stanford University and University of Waterloo.

Caballero, R. J. and A. B. Ja¤e, 1993, "How High are The Giants’Shoulders: An Empirical
    Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic
    Growth," in Blanchard O. J. and S. Fisher, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993.
    Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 15-74.

Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B. and D. L. Miller, 2007, "Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
    Inference with Clustered Errors," NBER Technical Working Paper No. 344.

DellaVigna, S., and J. M. Pollet, 2007, "Demographics and Industry Returns," American
    Economic Review, 97, pp. 1667-702.

Finkelstein, A., 2004, "Static and Dynamic E¤ects of Health Policy: Evidence from the
    Vaccine Industry," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, pp. 527-64.

George, L. and J. Waldfogel, 2003, "Who A¤ects Whom in Daily Newspaper Markets?"
    Journal of Political Economy, 111, pp. 765-84.

Ja¤e A. B. and M. Trajtenberg, 1996, "Flows of Knowledge from Universities and Fed-
    eral Labs: Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations Over Time and Across Institutional
    and Geographic Boundaries," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93, pp.
    12671-7.

Hicks, J. R., 1932, Theory of Wages. London: Macmillan.



                                           26
Lakdawalla, D. and T. Philipson, 2006, "The Nonpro…t Sector and Industry Performance,"
    Journal of Public Economics, 90, pp. 1681-98.

Lichtenberg, F. R., 1999, "The Allocation of Publicly Funded Biomedical Research," in
    Medical Care Output and Productivity: Studies in Income and Wealth, LXIII, Berndt,
    E. and D. Cutler, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lichtenberg, F. R., 2006, "Importation and Innovation," NBER working paper No. 12539.

Lichtenberg, F. R. and J. Waldfogel, 2003, "Does Misery Love Company? Evidence from
    Pharmaceutical Markets Before and After the Orphan Drug Act," NBER working paper
    No. 9750.

Newell, R. A., Ja¤ee, A. and R. Stavins, 1999, "The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and
    Energy-Saving Technological Change," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp. 907-
    40.

Popp, D., 2002, "Induced Innovation and Energy Prices," American Economics Review, 92,
    pp. 160-80.

Scherer, F. M., 1965, "Firm Size, Market Structure, Opportunity, and the Output of Patented
    Inventions," American Economic Review, 55, pp. 1097-125.

Schmookler, J., 1966, Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge: Harvard University
    Press.

Waldfogel, J. 2003, "Preference Externalities: An Empirical Study of Who Bene…ts Whom
    in Di¤erentiated Product Markets," Rand Journal of Economics, 34, pp. 557-68.




                                            27
Appendix 1: ICD-9/MESH Match


 1.        INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES
  GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                 MESH entry/entries
  011            011   Pulmonary tuberculosis                        Tuberculosis, Pulmonary [C01.252.410.040.552.846.899]
  034            034   Streptococcal sore throat and scarlet fever   Scarlet Fever [C01.252.410.890.823]
  052            052   Chickenpox                                    Chickenpox [C02.256.466.175]
  053            053   Herpes zoster                                 Herpes Zoster [C02.256.466.423]
  054            054   Herpes simplex                                Herpes Simplex [C02.256.466.382] *1982-
  070            070   Viral hepatitis                               Hepatitis [C06.552.380]
  075            075   Infectious mononucleosis                      Infectious Mononucleosis [C15.604.515.516]
                 110   Dermatophytosis                               Tinea [C17.800.838.208.883]
  110
                 111   Dermatomycosis, other and unspeci…ed          Tinea Versicolor [C01.703.295.936]
  112            112   Candidiasis                                   Candidiasis [C01.703.160]
  132            132   Pediculosis and phthirus infestation          Lice Infestations [C03.858.211.300]
  133            133   Acariasis                                     Mite Infestations [C03.858.211.394]
                 038   Septicemia
  N O M AT C H
                 074   Speci…c diseases due to Coxsackie virus




                                                                          28
2.        NEOPLASMS
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                                              MESH entry/entries
                                                                                                 Digestive System Neoplasms [C04.588.274]
                150-159    Malignant neoplasm of digestive organs and peritoneum
 150                                                                                             Abdominal Neoplasms [C04.588.033]
                211     Benign neoplasm of other parts of digestive system
                                                                                                 Anal Gland Neoplasms [C04.588.083]
                162       Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus, and lung
 162                                                                                             Respiratory Tract Neoplasms [C04.588.894.797]
                163       Malignant neoplasm of pleura
                171       Malignant neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue
 171            214       Lipoma                                                                 Soft Tissue Neoplasms [C04.588.839] *1976-
                215       Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue
                172       Malignant melanoma of skin
 172            173       Other malignant neoplasm of skin                                       Skin Neoplasms [C04.588.805]
                216       Benign neoplasm of skin
                174       Malignant neoplasm of female breast
 174            175       Malignant neoplasm of male breast                                      Breast Neoplasms [C04.588.180]
                217       Benign neoplasm of breast
                179       Malignant neoplasm of uterus, part unspeci…ed
                180       Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri
                181       Malignant neoplasm of placenta
                182       Malignant neoplasm of body of uterus
                183       Malignant neoplasm of ovary and other uterine adnexa
                184       Malignant neoplasm of other and unspeci…ed female genital organs
                218       Uterine leiomyoma
                219       Other benign neoplasm of uterus                                        Genital Neoplasms, Female [C13.351.937.418]
 179            220       Benign neoplasm of ovary                                               Genital Neoplasms, Male [C04.588.945.440]
                221       Benign neoplasm of other female genital organs                         Urologic Neoplasms [C12.758.820]
                185       Malignant neoplasm of prostate
                186       Malignant neoplasm of testis
                187       Malignant neoplasm of penis and other male genital organs
                222       Benign neoplasm of male genital organs
                188       Malignant neoplasm of bladder
                189       Malignant neoplasm of kidney and other and unspeci…ed urinary organs
                223       Benign neoplasm of kidney and other urinary organs
                                                                                                 Leukemia [C04.557.337]
 200            200-208      Malignant neoplasm of lymphatic and hematopoietic tissue
                                                                                                 Lymphoma [C04.557.386]
 230            230-234      Carcinoma in situ                                                   Carcinoma in Situ [C04.557.470.200.240]
 N O M AT C H   (none)



                                                                            29
3.        ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES, AND IMMUNITY DISORDERS

 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                                MESH entry/entries
                240   Simple and unspeci…ed goiter
 240                                                                               Goiter [C19.874.283]
                241   Nontoxic nodular goiter
 242            242   Thyrotoxicosis with or without goiter                        Hyperthyroidism [C19.874.397]
                243   Congenital hypothyroidism
 243                                                                               Hypothyroidism [C19.874.482]
                244   Acquired hypothyroidism
 250            250   Diabetes mellitus                                            Diabetes Mellitus [C18.452.394.750]
                265   Thiamine and niacin de…ciency states
 265                                                                               Vitamin B De…ciency [C18.654.521.500.133.699]
                266   De…ciency of B-complex components
 272            272   Disorders of lipoid metabolism                               Lipid Metabolism Disorders [C18.452.584]
 274            274   Gout                                                         Gout [C05.550.114.423]
                                                                                   Hemochromatosis [C18.452.565.500.480]
                                                                                   Hepatolenticular Degeneration [C18.452.648.618.403]
 275            275   Disorders of mineral metabolism                              Hypophosphatemia, Familial [C18.452.750.400.500]
                                                                                   Hypercalcemia [C18.452.174.451]
                                                                                   Hypocalcemia [C18.452.174.509]
                                                                                   Hypokalemia [C18.452.950.565]
                                                                                   Hypernatremia [C18.452.950.452]
 276            276   Disorders of ‡uid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance
                                                                                   Acidosis [C18.452.076.176]
                                                                                   Alkalosis [C18.452.076.354]
                                                                                   Agammaglobulinemia [C15.378.147.142]
                                                                                   DiGeorge Syndrome [C16.131.300]
 279            279   Disorders involving the immune mechanism                                                                     *1977-
                                                                                   Dysgammaglobulinemia [C15.378.147.333]
                                                                                   Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome [C15.378.100.100.970]
 N O M AT C H   256   Ovarian dysfunction




                                                                              30
4.        DISEASES OF BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                      MESH entry/entries
                280      Iron de…ciency anemias
                281      Other de…ciency anemias
                282      Hereditary hemolytic anemias
 280                                                     Anemia [C15.378.071]
                283      Acquired hemolytic anemias
                284      Aplastic anemia
                285      Other and unspeci…ed anemias
                                                         Agranulocytosis [C15.378.553.546.184]
                                                         Granulomatous Disease, Chronic [C15.378.553.774.535]
 288            288      Diseases of white blood cells
                                                         Eosinophilia [C15.378.553.231]
                                                         Leukocytosis [C15.378.553.475]
 N O M AT C H   (none)




                                                                         31
5.        MENTAL DISORDERS
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                            MESH entry/entries
 295            295   Schizophrenic psychoses                                  Schizophrenia [F03.700.750]
                296   A¤ective psychoses                                       Mood Disorders [F03.600]
 296
                309   Adjustment reaction                                      Adjustment Disorders [F03.075]
 299            299   Psychoses with origin speci…c to childhood               Child Development Disorders, Pervasive [F03.550.325] *1981-
                                                                               Anxiety Disorders [F03.080]
                                                                               Dissociative Disorders [F03.300]
 300            300   Neurotic disorders                                                                        *1981-
                                                                               Factitious Disorders [F03.400]
                                                                               Somatoform Disorders [F03.875]
 301            301   Personality disorders                                    Personality Disorders [F03.675]
 302            302   Sexual deviations and disorders                          Sexual and Gender Disorders [F03.800]
                303   Alcohol dependence syndrome
 303            304   Drug dependence                                          Substance-Related Disorders [F03.900]
                305   Nondependent abuse of drugs
 314            314   Hyperkinetic syndrome of childhood                       Attention De…cit Disorder with Hyperactivity [F03.550.150.150]
                                                                               Developmental Disabilities [F03.550.362]
 315            315   Speci…c delays in development
                                                                               Communication Disorders [F03.550.350]
                308   Acute reaction to stress
 N O M AT C H
                306   Physiological malfunction arising from mental factors




                                                                          32
6.        DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND SENSE ORGANS
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                                           MESH entry/entries
                320     Bacterial meningitis
                                                                                              Meningitis [C10.228.228.507]
                321     Meningitis due to other organisms
 320                                                                                          Encephalitis [C10.228.228.245]
                322     Meningitis of unspeci…ed cause
                                                                                              Myelitis [C10.228.228.618]
                323     Encephalitis, myelitis, and encephalomyelitis
 332            332     Parkinson’s disease                                                   Parkinsonian Disorders [C10.228.662.600]
 340            340     Multiple sclerosis                                                    Multiple Sclerosis [C10.114.375.500]
 343            343     Infantile cerebral palsy                                              Cerebral Palsy [C10.228.140.140.254]
 345            345     Epilepsy                                                              Epilepsy [C10.228.140.490]
 346            346     Migraine                                                              Migraine Disorders [C10.228.140.546.399.750]
 350            350-359     Disorders of the peripheral nervous system                        Peripheral Nervous System Diseases [C10.668.829]
                361     Retinal detachments and defects
 361                                                                                          Retinal Diseases [C11.768]
                362     Other retinal disorders
                360     Disorders of the globe
 363            363     Chorioretinal in‡ammations and scars and other disorders of choroid   Uveal Diseases [C11.941]
                364     Disorders of iris and ciliary body
 365            365     Glaucoma                                                              Glaucoma [C11.525.381]
 366            366     Cataract                                                              Cataract [C11.510.245]
 367            367     Disorders of refraction and accommodation                             Refractive Errors [C11.744]
                368     Visual disturbances
 368                                                                                          Vision Disorders [C23.888.592.763.941]
                369     Blindness and low vision
 371            371     Corneal opacity and other disorders of cornea                         Corneal Diseases [C11.204]
 372            372     Disorders of conjunctiva                                              Conjunctival Diseases [C11.187] *1981-
                373     In‡ammation of eyelids
 373                                                                                          Eyelid Diseases [C11.338]
                374     Other disorders of eyelids
 375            375     Disorders of lacrimal system                                          Lacrimal Apparatus Diseases [C11.496]
 380            380     Disorders of external ear                                             Otitis Externa [C09.218.705.496]
                381     Nonsuppurative otitis media and Eustachian tube disorders
 381            382     Suppurative and unspeci…ed otitis media                               Otitis Media [C09.218.705.663]
                383     Mastoiditis and related conditions
 386            386     Vertiginous syndromes and other disorders of vestibular system        Labyrinth Diseases [C09.218.568]
 389            389     Hearing loss                                                          Hearing Loss [C10.597.751.418.341]
 N O M AT C H   (none)




                                                                           33
7.        DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                     MESH entry/entries
 401            401-405     Hypertensive disease                        Hypertension [C14.907.489]
                410     Acute myocardial infarction
 410                                                                    Myocardial Infarction [C14.280.647.500]
                412     Old myocardial infarction
 413            413     Angina pectoris                                 Angina Pectoris [C14.907.553.470.250.125]
                414     Other forms of chronic ischemic heart disease
                440     Atherosclerosis                                 Arteriosclerosis [C14.907.137.126]
 414
                441     Aortic aneurysm and dissection                  Aneurysm [C14.907.055]
                442     Other aneurysm
                426     Conduction disorders
 426                                                                    Arrhythmia [C14.280.067]
                427     Cardiac dysrhythmias
 428            428     Heart failure                                   Heart Failure, Congestive [C14.280.434]
 430            430-438     Cerebrovascular disease                     Cerebrovascular Disorders [C14.907.253]
                444     Arterial embolism and thrombosis
                451     Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis                  Embolism and Thrombosis [C14.907.355]
 444
                452     Portal vein thrombosis                          Phlebitis [C14.907.681]
                453     Other venous embolism and thrombosis
                454     Varicose veins of lower extremities
 454                                                                    Varicose Veins [C14.907.927]
                456     Varicose veins of other sites
 455            455     Hemorrhoids                                     Hemorrhoids [C14.907.449]
 458            458     Hypotension                                     Hypotension [C14.907.514]
 N O M AT C H   (none)




                                                                          34
8.        DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                                 MESH entry/entries
                460   Acute nasopharyngitis [common cold]
                                                                                    Nasopharyngitis [C07.550.350.700]
 460            462   Acute pharyngitis
                                                                                    Pharyngitis [C07.550.781]
                472   Chronic pharyngitis and nasopharyngitis
                461   Acute sinusitis
 461                                                                                Sinusitis [C08.460.692.752]
                473   Chronic sinusitis
                463   Acute tonsillitis
 463                                                                                Tonsillitis [C08.730.817]
                474   Chronic disease of tonsils and adenoids
                                                                                    Laryngitis [C08.360.535]
                464   Acute laryngitis and tracheitis                               Tracheitis [C08.907.763]
 464
                476   Chronic laryngitis and laryngotracheitis                      Epiglottitis [C08.730.368.351]
                                                                                    Croup [C08.360.535.365]
                466   Acute bronchitis and bronchiolitis
 466            490   Bronchitis, not speci…ed as acute or chronic                  Bronchitis [C08.381.495.146]
                491   Chronic bronchitis
 477            477   Allergic rhinitis                                             Rhinitis [C08.460.799]
                480   Viral pneumonia
                481   Pneumococcal pneumonia [Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia]
                482   Other bacterial pneumonia
                483   Pneumonia due to other speci…ed organism
 480                                                                                Pneumonia [C08.381.677]
                484   Pneumonia in infectious diseases classi…ed elsewhere
                485   Bronchopneumonia, organism unspeci…ed
                486   Pneumonia, organism unspeci…ed
                514   Pulmonary congestion and hypostasis
 487            487   In‡uenza                                                      In‡uenza, Human [C08.730.310]
 492            492   Emphysema                                                     Emphysema [C23.550.325]
 493            493   Asthma                                                        Asthma [C08.127.108]
 511            511   Pleurisy                                                      Pleurisy [C08.528.735]
 N O M AT C H   470   Deviated nasal septum




                                                                     35
9.  DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
 GROUP ICD-9 entry/entries                                                                                   MESH entry/entries
                                                                                                             Tooth Abnormalities [C07.650.800]
               520     Disorders of tooth development and eruption
                                                                                                             Tooth Erosion [C07.793.763]
520            521     Diseases of hard tissues of teeth
                                                                                                             Tooth Abrasion [C07.793.707]
               524     Dentofacial anomalies, including malocclusion
                                                                                                             Malocclusion [C07.793.494]
                                                                                                             Periapical Diseases [C07.320.830]
               522     Diseases of pulp and periapical tissues                                               Dental Pulp Diseases [C07.793.237]
522                                                                                                                                              *1980-
               523     Gingival and periodontal diseases                                                     Periodontitis [C07.465.714.533]
                                                                                                             Gingival Diseases [C07.465.714.258]
                                                                                                             Jaw Cysts [C04.182.089.530]
526            526     Diseases of the jaws                                                                                                        *1980-
                                                                                                             Granuloma, Giant Cell [C05.500.368]
527            527     Diseases of the salivary glands                                                       Salivary Gland Diseases [C07.465.815]
                                                                                                             Stomatitis [C07.465.864]
528            528     Diseases of the oral soft tissues, excluding lesions speci…c for gingiva and tongue
                                                                                                             Noma [C07.465.604]
530            530     Diseases of esophagus                                                                 Esophageal Diseases [C06.405.117]
               531     Gastric ulcer
               532     Duodenal ulcer                                                                        Peptic Ulcer [C06.405.608]
531            533     Peptic ulcer, site unspeci…ed                                                         Peptic Ulcer Hemorrhage [C06.405.227.700]
               534     Gastrojejunal ulcer                                                                   Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage [C23.550.414.788]
               578     Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
                                                                                                             Gastritis [C06.405.205.697]
               535     Gastritis and duodenitis                                                              Duodenitis [C06.405.469.275.600]
535                                                                                                                                            *1980-
               555-558    Noninfective enteritis and colitis                                                 Enteritis [C06.405.205.462]
                                                                                                             Colitis [C06.405.205.265]
                                                                                                             Achlorhydria [C06.405.748.045]
536            536     Disorders of function of stomach                                                      Gastric Dilatation [C06.405.748.300]
                                                                                                             Dyspepsia [C23.888.821.236]
               540     Acute appendicitis
540            541     Appendicitis, unquali…ed                                                              Appendicitis [C06.405.205.099]
               542     Other appendicitis
550            550-553     Hernia of abdominal cavity                                                        Hernia [C23.300.707]
560            560     Intestinal obstruction without mention of hernia                                      Intestinal Obstruction [C06.405.469.531]
                                                                                                             Diverticulum, Colon [C23.300.415.124]
562            562     Diverticula of intestine
                                                                                                             Diverticulum, Stomach [C23.300.415.500]
574            574     Cholelithiasis                                                                        Cholelithiasis [C06.130.409]
                                                                                                             Pancreatitis [C06.689.750]
577            577     Diseases of pancreas
                                                                                                             Pancreatic Cyst [C06.689.500]
N O M AT C H   571     Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis


                                                                             36
10.         DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                                                          MESH entry/entries
 590            590   Infections of kidney                                                                   Nephritis [C12.777.419.570]
                                                                                                             Nephrolithiasis [C12.777.419.600]
 592            592   Calculus of kidney and ureter
                                                                                                             Ureterolithiasis [C12.777.725.938]
 595            595   Cystitis                                                                               Cystitis [C12.777.829.495]
                600   Hyperplasia of prostate
 600            601   In‡ammatory diseases of prostate                                                       Prostatic Diseases [C12.294.565]
                602   Other disorders of prostate
 607            607   Disorders of penis                                                                     Penile Diseases [C12.294.494]
                610   Benign mammary dysplasias
 610                                                                                                         Breast Diseases [C17.800.090]
                611   Other disorders of breast
                614   In‡ammatory disease of ovary, fallopian tube, pelvic cellular tissue, and peritoneum
 614                                                                                                         Adnexal Diseases [C13.351.500.056]
                620   Nonin‡ammatory disorders of ovary, fallopian tube, and broad ligament
                615   In‡ammatory diseases of uterus, except cervix
                616   In‡ammatory disease of cervix, vagina, and vulva
                618   Genital prolapse
                                                                                                             Uterine Diseases [C13.351.500.852]
                621   Disorders of uterus, not elsewhere classi…ed
 615                                                                                                         Vaginal Diseases [C13.351.500.894]
                622   Nonin‡ammatory disorders of cervix
                                                                                                             Vulvar Diseases [C13.351.500.944]
                623   Nonin‡ammatory disorders of vagina
                624   Nonin‡ammatory disorders of vulva and perineum
                625   Pain and other symptoms associated with female genital organs
 617            617   Endometriosis                                                                          Endometriosis [C13.351.500.163]
 628            628   Infertility, female                                                                    Infertility, Female [C13.351.500.365.700]
 N O M AT C H   627   Menopausal and postmenopausal disorders




                                                                           37
12.         DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                   MESH entry/entries
 680            680   Carbuncle and furuncle                          Furunculosis [C01.252.410.868.820.270]
                681   Cellulitis and abscess of …nger and toe
 681                                                                  Cellulitis [C01.539.800.130]
                682   Other cellulitis and abscess
 684            684   Impetigo                                        Impetigo [C01.252.410.868.820.504]
                690   Erythematosquamous dermatosis                   Dermatitis, Seborrheic [C17.800.174.580]
 690
                706   Diseases of sebaceous glands                    Acne Vulgaris [C17.800.794.111]
                691   Atopic dermatitis and related conditions        Dermatitis, Atopic [C17.800.174.193]
 691
                692   Contact dermatitis and other eczema             Dermatitis, Contact [C17.800.174.255]
                                                                      Psoriasis [C17.800.859.675]
 696            696   Psoriasis and similar disorders                 Pityriasis [C17.800.859.600]
                                                                      Parapsoriasis [C17.800.859.575]
                                                                      Pruritus [C17.800.685]
 698            698   Pruritus and related conditions                 Prurigo [C17.800.674]
                                                                      Neurodermatitis [C17.800.174.660]
 700            700   Corns and callosities                           Callosities [C17.800.428.200]
 703            703   Diseases of nail                                Nail Diseases [C17.800.529] *1979-
 704            704   Diseases of hair and hair follicles             Hair Diseases [C17.800.329] *1980-
 705            705   Disorders of sweat glands                       Sweat Gland Diseases [C17.800.946] *1976-
 708            708   Urticaria                                       Urticaria [C17.800.862.945]
                707   Chronic ulcer of skin
 N O M AT C H   695   Erythematous conditions
                693   Dermatitis due to substances taken internally




                                                                        38
13.         DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE
 GROUP          ICD-9 entry/entries                                    MESH entry/entries
                                                                       Sjogren’s Syndrome [C05.550.114.154.774]
                                                                       Scleroderma, Systemic [C17.300.799]
                710   Di¤use diseases of connective tissue
 710                                                                   Scleroderma, Localized [C17.300.787]
                728   Disorders of muscle, ligament, and fascia
                                                                       Dermatomyositis [C05.651.594.297]
                                                                       Myositis [C05.651.594]
                715   Osteoarthrosis and allied disorders
 715                                                                   Osteoarthritis [C05.550.114.606]
                721   Spondylosis and allied disorders
 722            722   Intervertebral disc disorders                    Intervertebral Disk Displacement [C05.116.900.307]
 726            726   Peripheral enthesopathies and allied syndromes   Bursitis [C05.550.251]
 734            734   Flat foot                                        Flatfoot [C05.330.448]
                                                                       Hallux Valgus [C05.330.610]
 735            735   Acquired deformities of toe
                                                                       Hallux Varus [C05.330.612]
 737            737   Curvature of spine                               Spinal Curvatures [C05.116.900.800]
 N O M AT C H   717   Internal derangement of knee




                                                                       39
Appendix 2. Figures and Tables
                                                          Figure 1a.
                                            Age and body weight distributions by year.




           1
                       Age Distribution 1975-2005                                        Body Weight Distribution 1975-2005




                                                                                    1
           .8




                                                                                    .8
           .6




                                                                                    .6
           .4




                                                                                    .4
           .2




                                                                                    .2
           0




                                                                                    0

                1975   1980    1985      1990           1995   2000    2005              1975   1980      1985    1990 1995        2000   2005
                                         Year                                                                     Year
                        0-18     18-35          35-50          50-65     65+                      Normal Weight       Overweight          Obese




                                                                               40
                                                                Figure 1b.
                               E¤ect of changes in age and body weight distributions on potential market size.



                                       Effect of Change in Age Distribution and Effect of Change in Body Weight Distribution
                                                      During 1975-2005 on Potential Market Size By Disease



               30
                                                                                                                                                                                    274
Percentage Effect of Obesity


                                                                                                                                                                              250
                        20


                                                                                                                                                           680

                                                                                                                                                    574
                                                                                                                                                  592              276      715
                                                                                                                                                                              302
                                                                                      315                                                                                  428 401
                                                                                133                                                                              288
                                                                  463
                                                                                                                                                                        530
                                                                                                                                                                       350
                                                                                                                                  295
            10




                                                            684                                                     320                                                   444 722
                                                                                                                                493                                      275   562
                                                                                                                    381                 681                               413 726272
                                                                                                                                                                         550                240
                                                                                                                                          466
                                                                                                                                            696             296 454
                                                                                                                                                        703 480               698         607
                                                                                        343 617               112                   590
                                                                                                                                                                      279
                                                                                                                                                                        365      735
                                                            34                                                                            363         531      710 150366 410                     171
                                                                                                   372                                                               243 414
                                                                                                               464        708        461    371 511
                                                                                                                          734       345
                                                                                                                                      477    522     300
                                                                                                                                               110
                                                                                                                                               301          242     265
                                                                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                                                                        361  174
                                                                                            614                     615487         346             280 368 386
                                                                                                                         737               536                527 600
                                                                                                        520                                             380 610179 53
  0




                                                                                                              460                                      200
                                                                          132                                                   367
                                                                                                                                  528                                389
                                                                                                                                  595                          455 426
                                                                                                                                               535                       430
                                 299                                                                                             691       705                  526 700
                                              52                                                                11                                         458230        162
                                                                                                                                                          373
                                                                                              628                                                               560
                                                                                                                              303                           172
                                                                        314                       540           704                                                               70
                                                                                                                                                                  340
                                                                                 690
                                                                                                                                                                    375
                                                                                                                                                                       492
                                                                                                                                                                      332
               -10




                                                                                                                           54

                                                   75



                               -10                                0                     10                                                                                                  20
                                                                  Percentage Effect of Aging




                                                                                       41
                                                  Figure 2a.
                              Publications in the MEDLINE database by year.



                                       Publications by Year
200000 400000 600000
0




                       1945   1955        1965         1975             1985      1995   2005
                                                     Year
                                            All Publications
                                            Publications with an Abstract
                                            Publications Indexed with a Disease
                                            Publications Matched
                                            Publication-Disease Matches




                                                    42
                                                                      Figure 2b.
                                       Matches to drug-related publications in the MEDLINE database by year.



                                         3 Measures of Drug-Related Research by Year

20000 40000 60000 80000100000
0




                                1975                       1985                          1995                  2005
                                                                          Year
                                                             (DRUG 1) Matches to an Ingredient Cohort
                                                             (DRUG 2) Matches to at Least One Ingredient
                                                             (DRUG 3) Drugs Indexed as a Major Topic




                                                                         43
                                                                     Figure 2c.
                                          Matches to other publications in the MEDLINE database by year.



                                         3 Measures of Other Medical Research by Year
                         120000
20000400006000080000100000




                                  1975                     1985                           1995                           2005
                                                                           Year
                                            (OTHER 1) No Matches to Ingredients, Drugs Not Indexed as a Major Topic
                                            (OTHER 2) No Matches to Ingredients, Drugs Not a Major Topic, No Indexed Drugs
                                            (OTHER 3) Surgery




                                                                          44
                                                                Figure 2d.
                               Predicted probabilities from stage 1 and the mean of observed probabilities.




                                           Ingredient Age and Probability of Use

            .02     .015
   Probability of Use
.005     .010




                           0                    10                   20                  30                   40
                                                                      Age

                                   Mean of Observed Probabilities            Predicted values from Stage 1




                                                                    45
                                                              Figure 2e.
                                          Number of ingredients by assigned year of discovery.



                                               Ingredients Discovered by Year

                 40
Number of Ingredients Discovered
   10          200        30




                                   1900   1920            1940         1960               1980   2000
                                                        Assigned Year of Discovery




                                                                   46
                                                                              Figure 3a.
                                                                          ^ it on Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects vs.
                                          Residuals from regression of ln K
                                           residuals from regression of ln MitT OT AL on Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects
                                                                          for all 127 diseases.



                                                                                       Residuals for All Diseases
                                      2
   Technological Opportunity Residual


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               302
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  302
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   302
                                                                                                                                                                     11                                                               302
                             1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      302
                                                                                                                                                                       11                                                                  302
                                                                                                                                                             34              11
                                                                                                                                                                    11735                                                          302
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    75
                                                                                                                                                                    735
                                                                                                                                                                  34 735                                                        302
                                                                                                                                              346                735 11  361
                                                                                                                                                                       361
                                                                                                                                                                      34
                                                                                                                                                                       361
                                                                                                                                                                      361600 600600600 600 696
                                                                                                                                                                            600                                                         75
                                                                                                                                    722
                                                                                                                                      487        346         73511600 361
                                                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                                                       34
                                                                                                                                                                     600 361272              696
                                                                                                                                                                                               696365365
                                                                                             680                                        487          346          600    361
                                                                                                                                                                          272
                                                                                                                                                                        272361           696
                                                                                                                                                                                          444 365                    302   70 250  75
                                                                                           680680 680
                                                                                            680
                                                                                           680                                       722487 346
                                                                                                                                   722                  346 600   600 272
                                                                                                                                                                     272
                                                                                                                                                                    27273534
                                                                                                                                                                        386 361
                                                                                                                                                                            386386 628
                                                                                                                                                                              361 444  444
                                                                                                                                                                                        696
                                                                                                                                                                                          628   365               540250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70 250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        250
                                                                                             680680                        550
                                                                                                                            562
                                                                                                                          550
                                                                                                                          562
                                                                                                                        562  550
                                                                                                                              562340
                                                                                                                                    722
                                                                                                                                   722     487
                                                                                                                                         511
                                                                                                                                         511
                                                                                                                                          511511
                                                                                                                                             487  70    346386  272
                                                                                                                                                               386
                                                                                                                                                              600
                                                                                                                                                             110
                                                                                                                                                              272
                                                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                                                   386
                                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                                    477
                                                                                                                                                                  272
                                                                                                                                                                    386
                                                                                                                                                                    477
                                                                                                                                                                     477
                                                                                                                                                                    477132
                                                                                                                                                                     110
                                                                                                                                                                     132
                                                                                                                                                                    132   110361
                                                                                                                                                                             34110696
                                                                                                                                                                                  444
                                                                                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                                                                                     696
                                                                                                                                                                                      444
                                                                                                                                                                                        365
                                                                                                                                                                                      110
                                                                                                                                                                                     343
                                                                                                                                                                                      343
                                                                                                                                                                                    343
                                                                                                                                                                                      365
                                                                                                                                                                                            365
                                                                                                                                                                                            628
                                                                                                                                                                                          343343
                                                                                                                                                                                                628
                                                                                                                                                                                              628
                                                                                                                                                                                             110
                                                                                                                                                                                              628   110
                                                                                                                                                                                                      250
                                                                                                                                                                                                    303
                                                                                                                                                                                                     303
                                                                                                                                                                                                         250
                                                                                                                                                                                                          110
                                                                                                                                                                                                               250
                                                                                                                                                                                                              684
                                                                                                                                                                                                              110
                                                                                                                                                                                                             684 7070
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      110110540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            110 540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               530110530 3147575
                                                                                                    680680                  562
                                                                                                                          562 550
                                                                                                                              550  722
                                                                                                                                    340
                                                                                                                                   722 340681
                                                                                                                                         681
                                                                                                                                          726315
                                                                                                                                             511
                                                                                                                                           511681
                                                                                                                                              315
                                                                                                                                              511110   346
                                                                                                                                                        110
                                                                                                                                                        386
                                                                                                                                                         315272
                                                                                                                                                           700
                                                                                                                                                           240 132
                                                                                                                                                               700  477
                                                                                                                                                                    132
                                                                                                                                                                   735
                                                                                                                                                                 132
                                                                                                                                                                   477
                                                                                                                                                                  477
                                                                                                                                                                  700
                                                                                                                                                                 477
                                                                                                                                                                477700  531
                                                                                                                                                                      531132
                                                                                                                                                                         531
                                                                                                                                                                       700
                                                                                                                                                                       531703
                                                                                                                                                                          700  703
                                                                                                                                                                             361
                                                                                                                                                                            703
                                                                                                                                                                             487 703
                                                                                                                                                                                 343
                                                                                                                                                                                 703
                                                                                                                                                                               703
                                                                                                                                                                               696
                                                                                                                                                                             700
                                                                                                                                                                              332
                                                                                                                                                                               444703
                                                                                                                                                                                   703
                                                                                                                                                                                   703
                                                                                                                                                                                  614
                                                                                                                                                                                    365
                                                                                                                                                                                  614
                                                                                                                                                                                  527  343
                                                                                                                                                                                      614
                                                                                                                                                                                      332
                                                                                                                                                                                    332    527
                                                                                                                                                                                         527
                                                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                                                      250 332
                                                                                                                                                                                          332
                                                                                                                                                                                        343   250
                                                                                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                                                                                              332
                                                                                                                                                                                            242   628
                                                                                                                                                                                                  303
                                                                                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                                                                                                               303   628
                                                                                                                                                                                                    684
                                                                                                                                                                                                      684684
                                                                                                                                                                                                       684        70 530
                                                                                                                                                                                                                530        530540540 314 314314  75
                                                                                                           274
                                                                                                           274
                                                                                                          274 592
                                                                                                              274171
                                                                                                               171
                                                                                                               680171   562
                                                                                                                      171715350550
                                                                                                                             133    340
                                                                                                                                      722
                                                                                                                                     340
                                                                                                                                   133
                                                                                                                                     734  681
                                                                                                                                        681
                                                                                                                                       734 536
                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                            536
                                                                                                                                          681  315
                                                                                                                                             110
                                                                                                                                              734
                                                                                                                                              536 240
                                                                                                                                                  315
                                                                                                                                                 511
                                                                                                                                                  315
                                                                                                                                                   734386
                                                                                                                                                     240
                                                                                                                                                     511 700
                                                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                                                        346
                                                                                                                                                         389
                                                                                                                                                         240
                                                                                                                                                         700
                                                                                                                                                        734
                                                                                                                                                       386
                                                                                                                                                       389  700
                                                                                                                                                            700
                                                                                                                                                          272
                                                                                                                                                           708
                                                                                                                                                          389
                                                                                                                                                        389389
                                                                                                                                                           132
                                                                                                                                                          708
                                                                                                                                                            389477
                                                                                                                                                              132
                                                                                                                                                               734 577
                                                                                                                                                                  734
                                                                                                                                                                 705
                                                                                                                                                               522
                                                                                                                                                               477   11
                                                                                                                                                                     577
                                                                                                                                                                     577
                                                                                                                                                                    577
                                                                                                                                                                    454
                                                                                                                                                                  705
                                                                                                                                                                  703   531
                                                                                                                                                                      735
                                                                                                                                                                      703
                                                                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                                                                     705 703
                                                                                                                                                                          700
                                                                                                                                                                          734
                                                                                                                                                                        531
                                                                                                                                                                          487
                                                                                                                                                                        577
                                                                                                                                                                         705
                                                                                                                                                                         700
                                                                                                                                                                          361487
                                                                                                                                                                            361
                                                                                                                                                                             527
                                                                                                                                                                            734
                                                                                                                                                                              132
                                                                                                                                                                              444
                                                                                                                                                                               34
                                                                                                                                                                             365
                                                                                                                                                                            52527 365
                                                                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                                                                                                  734
                                                                                                                                                                                  332
                                                                                                                                                                                  303
                                                                                                                                                                                 343
                                                                                                                                                                                 426
                                                                                                                                                                                   52343  614
                                                                                                                                                                                          614
                                                                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                                                                          734
                                                                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                                                                           52 242
                                                                                                                                                                                               332
                                                                                                                                                                                             302
                                                                                                                                                                                             737
                                                                                                                                                                                             614
                                                                                                                                                                                           332  52
                                                                                                                                                                                              614
                                                                                                                                                                                                684 242628
                                                                                                                                                                                                      52
                                                                                                                                                                                                       530   70
                                                                                                                                                                                                            52
                                                                                                                                                                                                             530
                                                                                                                                                                                                           112  112        540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          690690540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                690           314
                                                                                    525252 525252      52 171592
                                                                                                            52592
                                                                                                              592274
                                                                                                                  171
                                                                                                                  274
                                                                                                                   52
                                                                                                                 274
                                                                                                                350
                                                                                                                 592
                                                                                                                350 350
                                                                                                                  698
                                                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                       562
                                                                                                                       734
                                                                                                                     171
                                                                                                                     350
                                                                                                                    274
                                                                                                                   350
                                                                                                                  698   350
                                                                                                                        562
                                                                                                                      133
                                                                                                                      734
                                                                                                                    375
                                                                                                                    698
                                                                                                                      53366
                                                                                                                           350
                                                                                                                           171
                                                                                                                         366
                                                                                                                              133
                                                                                                                             52
                                                                                                                            734
                                                                                                                            680
                                                                                                                          698
                                                                                                                          112
                                                                                                                        274562
                                                                                                                           715
                                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                                                 372
                                                                                                                                  734
                                                                                                                                 550
                                                                                                                                  372
                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                171
                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                                                 274  372
                                                                                                                                    300
                                                                                                                                     52
                                                                                                                                    162
                                                                                                                                  562
                                                                                                                                  274
                                                                                                                                 680
                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                                       372
                                                                                                                                     299
                                                                                                                                    550
                                                                                                                                    691 372
                                                                                                                                      691
                                                                                                                                    691
                                                                                                                                     171
                                                                                                                                   562
                                                                                                                                    162
                                                                                                                                     301
                                                                                                                                      691
                                                                                                                                           315
                                                                                                                                         315
                                                                                                                                         726
                                                                                                                                         110
                                                                                                                                         726
                                                                                                                                       550
                                                                                                                                        726
                                                                                                                                       301
                                                                                                                                       301
                                                                                                                                            300300
                                                                                                                                          300
                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                          133
                                                                                                                                          300
                                                                                                                                        722
                                                                                                                                        300681
                                                                                                                                         340
                                                                                                                                           52
                                                                                                                                            133
                                                                                                                                          372
                                                                                                                                          726
                                                                                                                                        726372
                                                                                                                                           722
                                                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                                                          301
                                                                                                                                          726
                                                                                                                                          171
                                                                                                                                         296
                                                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                536
                                                                                                                                               487
                                                                                                                                              315
                                                                                                                                              413
                                                                                                                                              413
                                                                                                                                              681
                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                                 536
                                                                                                                                                 389
                                                                                                                                                315
                                                                                                                                               315
                                                                                                                                               413
                                                                                                                                               681
                                                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                                                              372
                                                                                                                                               340
                                                                                                                                               372
                                                                                                                                                386
                                                                                                                                              301301
                                                                                                                                                 372
                                                                                                                                                301
                                                                                                                                               722
                                                                                                                                             340
                                                                                                                                              296
                                                                                                                                              171
                                                                                                                                                    52
                                                                                                                                                    240
                                                                                                                                                   536
                                                                                                                                                 413
                                                                                                                                                 133 300
                                                                                                                                                   389
                                                                                                                                                    386
                                                                                                                                                     536
                                                                                                                                                   162
                                                                                                                                                 162
                                                                                                                                                   389
                                                                                                                                                  299
                                                                                                                                                  413240
                                                                                                                                                   413
                                                                                                                                                 463 132
                                                                                                                                                   296
                                                                                                                                                 4134372
                                                                                                                                                      63
                                                                                                                                                         708
                                                                                                                                                         132
                                                                                                                                                       300511
                                                                                                                                                          272
                                                                                                                                                          708
                                                                                                                                                        600
                                                                                                                                                         132
                                                                                                                                                         536
                                                                                                                                                        162
                                                                                                                                                       133300
                                                                                                                                                        315
                                                                                                                                                        346
                                                                                                                                                        240
                                                                                                                                                       296
                                                                                                                                                        708
                                                                                                                                                       590
                                                                                                                                                       708703
                                                                                                                                                        272
                                                                                                                                                        381
                                                                                                                                                        530
                                                                                                                                                        371
                                                                                                                                                        463
                                                                                                                                                          279
                                                                                                                                                              52
                                                                                                                                                            389
                                                                                                                                                            477
                                                                                                                                                          536511
                                                                                                                                                             315
                                                                                                                                                             296
                                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                                           536
                                                                                                                                                             315
                                                                                                                                                             536
                                                                                                                                                            477
                                                                                                                                                            133
                                                                                                                                                             240
                                                                                                                                                             380
                                                                                                                                                           464
                                                                                                                                                           371
                                                                                                                                                           279
                                                                                                                                                           477
                                                                                                                                                                522
                                                                                                                                                              477
                                                                                                                                                             389
                                                                                                                                                             703 522
                                                                                                                                                                  454
                                                                                                                                                                300
                                                                                                                                                                454
                                                                                                                                                                410
                                                                                                                                                              511
                                                                                                                                                              464
                                                                                                                                                            380
                                                                                                                                                              380
                                                                                                                                                            428  464
                                                                                                                                                                 299
                                                                                                                                                                 373
                                                                                                                                                               536
                                                                                                                                                               315
                                                                                                                                                             464
                                                                                                                                                             133389
                                                                                                                                                              530522
                                                                                                                                                               240
                                                                                                                                                               454
                                                                                                                                                               279
                                                                                                                                                             112
                                                                                                                                                             371363
                                                                                                                                                              240
                                                                                                                                                              275
                                                                                                                                                                522
                                                                                                                                                                     52
                                                                                                                                                                     705
                                                                                                                                                                   454
                                                                                                                                                                   735
                                                                                                                                                                 522
                                                                                                                                                               389  296
                                                                                                                                                                    373
                                                                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                                                                373705
                                                                                                                                                                 46411
                                                                                                                                                                    531
                                                                                                                                                                    162
                                                                                                                                                                    531
                                                                                                                                                                  373
                                                                                                                                                                  300
                                                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                                                112428
                                                                                                                                                                   531
                                                                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                                                                   527
                                                                                                                                                                 536
                                                                                                                                                                  389
                                                                                                                                                                 315
                                                                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                                                                  345
                                                                                                                                                                  511
                                                                                                                                                                       410
                                                                                                                                                                     410
                                                                                                                                                                     373
                                                                                                                                                                     527
                                                                                                                                                                      464
                                                                                                                                                                      705
                                                                                                                                                                      530
                                                                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                                                                     345
                                                                                                                                                                    345
                                                                                                                                                                  363162
                                                                                                                                                                     373
                                                                                                                                                                     112
                                                                                                                                                                   279
                                                                                                                                                                   250
                                                                                                                                                                   150
                                                                                                                                                                          696
                                                                                                                                                                        705
                                                                                                                                                                        531
                                                                                                                                                                      531
                                                                                                                                                                        373
                                                                                                                                                                      705
                                                                                                                                                                      373
                                                                                                                                                                    373 345
                                                                                                                                                                        700
                                                                                                                                                                      363
                                                                                                                                                                      464
                                                                                                                                                                      380
                                                                                                                                                                      705
                                                                                                                                                                      361
                                                                                                                                                                      303
                                                                                                                                                                     300
                                                                                                                                                                     373
                                                                                                                                                                     380
                                                                                                                                                                           577
                                                                                                                                                                          577
                                                                                                                                                                         700
                                                                                                                                                                       531
                                                                                                                                                                       527
                                                                                                                                                                         361
                                                                                                                                                                         296
                                                                                                                                                                       531
                                                                                                                                                                       373
                                                                                                                                                                       303
                                                                                                                                                                       301
                                                                                                                                                                       410
                                                                                                                                                                        162
                                                                                                                                                                        303
                                                                                                                                                                      301
                                                                                                                                                                       250
                                                                                                                                                                         345
                                                                                                                                                                         428
                                                                                                                                                                       303
                                                                                                                                                                       112428
                                                                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                                                                                        464
                                                                                                                                                                      444
                                                                                                                                                                      615
                                                                                                                                                                      279
                                                                                                                                                                             250
                                                                                                                                                                            444
                                                                                                                                                                             487
                                                                                                                                                                           303
                                                                                                                                                                         705
                                                                                                                                                                          530365
                                                                                                                                                                              577
                                                                                                                                                                            301
                                                                                                                                                                            487
                                                                                                                                                                          444
                                                                                                                                                                            428
                                                                                                                                                                          112
                                                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                                                         243
                                                                                                                                                                        401
                                                                                                                                                                         365
                                                                                                                                                                         133 363
                                                                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                                                                            345
                                                                                                                                                                            426
                                                                                                                                                                            487
                                                                                                                                                                            595
                                                                                                                                                                          595
                                                                                                                                                                          464
                                                                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                                                                                                 243
                                                                                                                                                                               303
                                                                                                                                                                             296
                                                                                                                                                                              595
                                                                                                                                                                               530
                                                                                                                                                                             577
                                                                                                                                                                            34   172
                                                                                                                                                                                301
                                                                                                                                                                               332
                                                                                                                                                                                363
                                                                                                                                                                               426
                                                                                                                                                                              577
                                                                                                                                                                              242
                                                                                                                                                                               345
                                                                                                                                                                             112
                                                                                                                                                                              595
                                                                                                                                                                             243
                                                                                                                                                                             343
                                                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                                                           150
                                                                                                                                                                            577
                                                                                                                                                                            401
                                                                                                                                                                           162 299
                                                                                                                                                                               295
                                                                                                                                                                             345
                                                                                                                                                                                    426
                                                                                                                                                                                  426
                                                                                                                                                                                  426
                                                                                                                                                                                   426
                                                                                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                                                                                   595
                                                                                                                                                                                   243
                                                                                                                                                                                 343332
                                                                                                                                                                                     530
                                                                                                                                                                                   301
                                                                                                                                                                                   595
                                                                                                                                                                                   243
                                                                                                                                                                                 363
                                                                                                                                                                               343426
                                                                                                                                                                                  174
                                                                                                                                                                                  242
                                                                                                                                                                                  595595
                                                                                                                                                                                   426
                                                                                                                                                                                    363
                                                                                                                                                                                    595
                                                                                                                                                                                    174
                                                                                                                                                                                   132
                                                                                                                                                                                   684
                                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                                 595
                                                                                                                                                                                 174
                                                                                                                                                                                  243
                                                                                                                                                                                  265428
                                                                                                                                                                                        242
                                                                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                                                                      174
                                                                                                                                                                                    174
                                                                                                                                                                                     301
                                                                                                                                                                                      242
                                                                                                                                                                                    243
                                                                                                                                                                                      112
                                                                                                                                                                                    332
                                                                                                                                                                                    375
                                                                                                                                                                                 265265
                                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                                                                               684
                                                                                                                                                                               174455
                                                                                                                                                                                  455  172
                                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                                                                                   265
                                                                                                                                                                                    375
                                                                                                                                                                                    455 265
                                                                                                                                                                                      295
                                                                                                                                                                                      265
                                                                                                                                                                                       455
                                                                                                                                                                                      172
                                                                                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                                                                           243
                                                                                                                                                                                           243
                                                                                                                                                                                            614
                                                                                                                                                                                           112
                                                                                                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                                                                                                         428
                                                                                                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                                                                                                          614
                                                                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                                                                        401
                                                                                                                                                                                          296
                                                                                                                                                                                               530
                                                                                                                                                                                               734
                                                                                                                                                                                              614
                                                                                                                                                                                              428
                                                                                                                                                                                            428
                                                                                                                                                                                             295
                                                                                                                                                                                            265
                                                                                                                                                                                          265
                                                                                                                                                                                           520737
                                                                                                                                                                                               265
                                                                                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                                                                                             458  112
                                                                                                                                                                                                112
                                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                                                                                                401
                                                                                                                                                                                               458
                                                                                                                                                                                                 690295
                                                                                                                                                                                                  428
                                                                                                                                                                                                  295
                                                                                                                                                                                                  458
                                                                                                                                                                                                  299628
                                                                                                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                                                                                                      690
                                                                                                                                                                                                    628
                                                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                                                                                                                                                                        628
                                                                                                                                                                                                         112
                                                                                                                                                                                                        112
                                                                                                                                                                                                        428
                                                                                                                                                                                                        428
                                                                                                                                                                                                       734
                                                                                                                                                                                                        560
                                                                                                                                                                                                      150
                                                                                                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                                                                                                      560
                                                                                                                                                                                                      401
                                                                                                                                                                                                            112
                                                                                                                                                                                                           690
                                                                                                                                                                                                           295
                                                                                                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                                                                                                           295
                                                                                                                                                                                                         540
                                                                                                                                                                                                          401
                                                                                                                                                                                                                52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 295
                                                                                                                                                                                                               540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 295
                                                                                                                                                                                                               314
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 607
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    690
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     295
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     314
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      52607314 690
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               314
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              607
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  690
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  314
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  607690607    75 7575
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             75592   592
                                                                        314 299 299 299 520 520       520
                                                                                                       704 520
                                                                                                          704
                                                                                                           704520
                                                                                                                520
                                                                                                               704
                                                                                                               704
                                                                                                                 5353
                                                                                                                 592299
                                                                                                                    734
                                                                                                                  704 520
                                                                                                                     704
                                                                                                                    350
                                                                                                                     574  520
                                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                                          698
                                                                                                                          53
                                                                                                                          375
                                                                                                                          350 715
                                                                                                                               366
                                                                                                                              280
                                                                                                                              366
                                                                                                                               280
                                                                                                                               704
                                                                                                                               698
                                                                                                                              53
                                                                                                                               296520
                                                                                                                                715715
                                                                                                                                  280
                                                                                                                                   715110
                                                                                                                                    480
                                                                                                                                    715562
                                                                                                                                      296
                                                                                                                                       274
                                                                                                                                     280
                                                                                                                                     366
                                                                                                                                       366
                                                                                                                                      280
                                                                                                                                      366
                                                                                                                                    698
                                                                                                                                      562  726
                                                                                                                                         691550
                                                                                                                                          301
                                                                                                                                          520
                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                          301
                                                                                                                                        698
                                                                                                                                         288
                                                                                                                                         366  726
                                                                                                                                            704
                                                                                                                                          691
                                                                                                                                          715 132
                                                                                                                                               460
                                                                                                                                               301
                                                                                                                                               520386
                                                                                                                                                550
                                                                                                                                                 54
                                                                                                                                                 530
                                                                                                                                                 367
                                                                                                                                                 279
                                                                                                                                                 301
                                                                                                                                               36754
                                                                                                                                                  54132
                                                                                                                                                   413
                                                                                                                                                    171
                                                                                                                                                  463
                                                                                                                                                  460
                                                                                                                                                401
                                                                                                                                                 288  381
                                                                                                                                                      381
                                                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                                                      112
                                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                                      703
                                                                                                                                                    301
                                                                                                                                                  367
                                                                                                                                                  722
                                                                                                                                                   54  381
                                                                                                                                                      401
                                                                                                                                                    610
                                                                                                                                                    288272
                                                                                                                                                       381
                                                                                                                                                       346
                                                                                                                                                     413  428
                                                                                                                                                          371
                                                                                                                                                         464
                                                                                                                                                        381
                                                                                                                                                        464
                                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                                      460
                                                                                                                                                      288
                                                                                                                                                      464381
                                                                                                                                                         171
                                                                                                                                                       708
                                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                                       150  527
                                                                                                                                                          401
                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                                                          372
                                                                                                                                                          179
                                                                                                                                                          301
                                                                                                                                                        574
                                                                                                                                                        279
                                                                                                                                                        363
                                                                                                                                                         320 463
                                                                                                                                                           275
                                                                                                                                                           363371
                                                                                                                                                              454
                                                                                                                                                              279
                                                                                                                                                            371
                                                                                                                                                             179
                                                                                                                                                             380
                                                                                                                                                           371
                                                                                                                                                            454
                                                                                                                                                            320
                                                                                                                                                            275
                                                                                                                                                          527
                                                                                                                                                          615
                                                                                                                                                          381
                                                                                                                                                          368320179
                                                                                                                                                              615
                                                                                                                                                            615
                                                                                                                                                            368
                                                                                                                                                              380
                                                                                                                                                              372
                                                                                                                                                              320531
                                                                                                                                                                 401
                                                                                                                                                               320
                                                                                                                                                               371
                                                                                                                                                                531373
                                                                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                                                                   615
                                                                                                                                                                 615
                                                                                                                                                                 696
                                                                                                                                                                 710
                                                                                                                                                               574
                                                                                                                                                                11  401
                                                                                                                                                                    303
                                                                                                                                                                  463
                                                                                                                                                                  595615
                                                                                                                                                                   295
                                                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                                                                                 345
                                                                                                                                                                  522
                                                                                                                                                                  240
                                                                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                                                                   240
                                                                                                                                                                   320595
                                                                                                                                                                    463
                                                                                                                                                                    511300
                                                                                                                                                                     389
                                                                                                                                                                     315
                                                                                                                                                                   373
                                                                                                                                                                   536
                                                                                                                                                                   595
                                                                                                                                                                    380
                                                                                                                                                                     455
                                                                                                                                                                   320
                                                                                                                                                                   466  279
                                                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                                                       615
                                                                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                                                                        705
                                                                                                                                                                      700
                                                                                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                                                                                      466
                                                                                                                                                                     444 455
                                                                                                                                                                       493
                                                                                                                                                                        455
                                                                                                                                                                         615
                                                                                                                                                                        179
                                                                                                                                                                      389
                                                                                                                                                                      574
                                                                                                                                                                      240458
                                                                                                                                                                       458
                                                                                                                                                                        574
                                                                                                                                                                         275455
                                                                                                                                                                            487
                                                                                                                                                                             455
                                                                                                                                                                            426
                                                                                                                                                                            455
                                                                                                                                                                          577
                                                                                                                                                                          466
                                                                                                                                                                          343
                                                                                                                                                                           458
                                                                                                                                                                            265
                                                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                                                           34
                                                                                                                                                                          617
                                                                                                                                                                           315
                                                                                                                                                                           615 332
                                                                                                                                                                               375
                                                                                                                                                                              174
                                                                                                                                                                            464
                                                                                                                                                                            684
                                                                                                                                                                            426
                                                                                                                                                                            464133
                                                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                                                              466
                                                                                                                                                                              162
                                                                                                                                                                             487
                                                                                                                                                                             574  265
                                                                                                                                                                                464
                                                                                                                                                                                 458
                                                                                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                                                                                   617
                                                                                                                                                                                   455
                                                                                                                                                                                 455
                                                                                                                                                                               617230
                                                                                                                                                                                  617
                                                                                                                                                                                  466
                                                                                                                                                                                464
                                                                                                                                                                                617617
                                                                                                                                                                                   493
                                                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                                                 574
                                                                                                                                                                                 617   458
                                                                                                                                                                                        614
                                                                                                                                                                                      172
                                                                                                                                                                                     375
                                                                                                                                                                                     614  458
                                                                                                                                                                                        455
                                                                                                                                                                                        455
                                                                                                                                                                                      466
                                                                                                                                                                                       230
                                                                                                                                                                                       466
                                                                                                                                                                                     332   458
                                                                                                                                                                                         690  560
                                                                                                                                                                                            560
                                                                                                                                                                                          466 70 737
                                                                                                                                                                                               265
                                                                                                                                                                                             466
                                                                                                                                                                                             314
                                                                                                                                                                                              466
                                                                                                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                                                                                                             296  628
                                                                                                                                                                                                  737
                                                                                                                                                                                                  466314
                                                                                                                                                                                                    737
                                                                                                                                                                                                    540
                                                                                                                                                                                                    737
                                                                                                                                                                                                   737
                                                                                                                                                                                                    628607
                                                                                                                                                                                                       737458
                                                                                                                                                                                                        737
                                                                                                                                                                                                       737 458
                                                                                                                                                                                                         737  607
                                                                                                                                                                                                               401
                                                                                                                                                                                                               299
                                                                                                                                                                                                             734   401401
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        401   401          592
                   0




                                                                           314                       299          592
                                                                                                                734
                                                                                                                 528
                                                                                                                 53 698
                                                                                                                    574
                                                                                                                   592 53
                                                                                                                      698
                                                                                                                      528
                                                                                                                     172  375
                                                                                                                        133
                                                                                                                          698
                                                                                                                            350
                                                                                                                            296
                                                                                                                            698
                                                                                                                          296
                                                                                                                          592
                                                                                                                          528
                                                                                                                        607
                                                                                                                         607
                                                                                                                         734 375
                                                                                                                           607   295
                                                                                                                               350
                                                                                                                               737
                                                                                                                               574480274
                                                                                                                                     295
                                                                                                                                   480
                                                                                                                                   53
                                                                                                                                   288
                                                                                                                                   460
                                                                                                                                 528  280
                                                                                                                                    535
                                                                                                                                  460  288
                                                                                                                                      295
                                                                                                                                      460
                                                                                                                                       53460
                                                                                                                                        680
                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                       288
                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                      367530
                                                                                                                                     367367
                                                                                                                                   526
                                                                                                                                    288
                                                                                                                                   528535
                                                                                                                                      526401
                                                                                                                                       530
                                                                                                                                        132
                                                                                                                                        480
                                                                                                                                       276
                                                                                                                                       480
                                                                                                                                     375492
                                                                                                                                        574
                                                                                                                                      132
                                                                                                                                      528   288
                                                                                                                                           366
                                                                                                                                           401
                                                                                                                                           562
                                                                                                                                          367
                                                                                                                                          280
                                                                                                                                          401
                                                                                                                                        132
                                                                                                                                        560691
                                                                                                                                            53
                                                                                                                                          320
                                                                                                                                           560
                                                                                                                                           492
                                                                                                                                           480
                                                                                                                                         535
                                                                                                                                         276
                                                                                                                                       401    401
                                                                                                                                              698
                                                                                                                                              386
                                                                                                                                            276
                                                                                                                                             367
                                                                                                                                             574
                                                                                                                                             274
                                                                                                                                            560
                                                                                                                                          295
                                                                                                                                          715
                                                                                                                                          535526
                                                                                                                                             463726
                                                                                                                                              367
                                                                                                                                              530
                                                                                                                                              132
                                                                                                                                              526
                                                                                                                                            493
                                                                                                                                            320
                                                                                                                                          528    574
                                                                                                                                               681
                                                                                                                                               276
                                                                                                                                               386
                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                               560
                                                                                                                                             560
                                                                                                                                             230  463
                                                                                                                                                704
                                                                                                                                                737
                                                                                                                                                 340
                                                                                                                                                279
                                                                                                                                                 53
                                                                                                                                                366
                                                                                                                                              691
                                                                                                                                              280
                                                                                                                                              526
                                                                                                                                              560480
                                                                                                                                                 698
                                                                                                                                               480
                                                                                                                                               560
                                                                                                                                                487
                                                                                                                                                681
                                                                                                                                                174
                                                                                                                                                610
                                                                                                                                              230
                                                                                                                                              560493
                                                                                                                                                 93
                                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                                 112
                                                                                                                                               562
                                                                                                                                               279
                                                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                                                               274  54
                                                                                                                                                    520
                                                                                                                                                  550
                                                                                                                                                  492
                                                                                                                                                  150
                                                                                                                                                  320
                                                                                                                                                  280
                                                                                                                                                  174
                                                                                                                                                  280
                                                                                                                                                  464
                                                                                                                                                179
                                                                                                                                           230230
                                                                                                                                            493
                                                                                                                                            174
                                                                                                                                              680    112
                                                                                                                                                     279
                                                                                                                                                   150
                                                                                                                                                   610
                                                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                                                   480
                                                                                                                                                   345
                                                                                                                                                 279
                                                                                                                                                  610
                                                                                                                                                   726
                                                                                                                                                 230
                                                                                                                                                 527
                                                                                                                                                 615
                                                                                                                                                 560
                                                                                                                                                  179
                                                                                                                                                  610
                                                                                                                                                 150
                                                                                                                                                 493
                                                                                                                                                  560
                                                                                                                                                174
                                                                                                                                                528
                                                                                                                                                615   367
                                                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                                                     54
                                                                                                                                                     464
                                                                                                                                                     737
                                                                                                                                                   320
                                                                                                                                                   610
                                                                                                                                                    54
                                                                                                                                                     464
                                                                                                                                                     590
                                                                                                                                                     590
                                                                                                                                                   428
                                                                                                                                                   615
                                                                                                                                                     550
                                                                                                                                                     280
                                                                                                                                                   610
                                                                                                                                                   230
                                                                                                                                                   458
                                                                                                                                                   466
                                                                                                                                                   691
                                                                                                                                                   535
                                                                                                                                                   703
                                                                                                                                                 428
                                                                                                                                                 681    381
                                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                                        615
                                                                                                                                                      610
                                                                                                                                                      320
                                                                                                                                                       275
                                                                                                                                                     179
                                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                                      276
                                                                                                                                                      527
                                                                                                                                                    722
                                                                                                                                                    704
                                                                                                                                                    276
                                                                                                                                                    345480
                                                                                                                                                       590
                                                                                                                                                       54
                                                                                                                                                       345
                                                                                                                                                      280
                                                                                                                                                    466
                                                                                                                                                    230
                                                                                                                                                    560
                                                                                                                                                    493
                                                                                                                                                    454
                                                                                                                                                  430
                                                                                                                                                  466  363
                                                                                                                                                       590
                                                                                                                                                       708
                                                                                                                                                     493
                                                                                                                                                     366
                                                                                                                                                     454
                                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                                     610
                                                                                                                                                   230454
                                                                                                                                                    345   179
                                                                                                                                                        414
                                                                                                                                                      179
                                                                                                                                                      363
                                                                                                                                                      345
                                                                                                                                                      413
                                                                                                                                                      698  454
                                                                                                                                                           371
                                                                                                                                                           477
                                                                                                                                                         345
                                                                                                                                                       708
                                                                                                                                                       615
                                                                                                                                                         526
                                                                                                                                                         480
                                                                                                                                                         696
                                                                                                                                                       272
                                                                                                                                                       466
                                                                                                                                                       466
                                                                                                                                                         276
                                                                                                                                                         493
                                                                                                                                                         461
                                                                                                                                                       454
                                                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                                                                       610
                                                                                                                                                       275
                                                                                                                                                       340
                                                                                                                                                     726    737
                                                                                                                                                          345
                                                                                                                                                        367
                                                                                                                                                        413
                                                                                                                                                        53
                                                                                                                                                        381
                                                                                                                                                          414
                                                                                                                                                          414
                                                                                                                                                          520
                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                        381
                                                                                                                                                        303
                                                                                                                                                          458
                                                                                                                                                          276
                                                                                                                                                        303
                                                                                                                                                        454
                                                                                                                                                        590
                                                                                                                                                        684
                                                                                                                                                        413
                                                                                                                                                        366
                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                        704
                                                                                                                                                        708
                                                                                                                                                        340  368
                                                                                                                                                           414
                                                                                                                                                           492
                                                                                                                                                           454
                                                                                                                                                           455
                                                                                                                                                           461
                                                                                                                                                           466
                                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                                         610
                                                                                                                                                           280
                                                                                                                                                           461
                                                                                                                                                         367
                                                                                                                                                         590
                                                                                                                                                         610
                                                                                                                                                         560
                                                                                                                                                         230
                                                                                                                                                     535535
                                                                                                                                                     617
                                                                                                                                                     275
                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                       413
                                                                                                                                                       722
                                                                                                                                                       550
                                                                                                                                                       363
                                                                                                                                                        560
                                                                                                                                                        595
                                                                                                                                                        696
                                                                                                                                                        454   696
                                                                                                                                                            345
                                                                                                                                                            368
                                                                                                                                                            381
                                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                                          454
                                                                                                                                                          492
                                                                                                                                                            381
                                                                                                                                                            288
                                                                                                                                                            458
                                                                                                                                                          461
                                                                                                                                                          461
                                                                                                                                                          526
                                                                                                                                                           526
                                                                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                                           414
                                                                                                                                                           710
                                                                                                                                                            368
                                                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                                          455  461
                                                                                                                                                               345
                                                                                                                                                               380
                                                                                                                                                             460
                                                                                                                                                             461
                                                                                                                                                             368
                                                                                                                                                             461
                                                                                                                                                           492
                                                                                                                                                             381
                                                                                                                                                             380
                                                                                                                                                           367
                                                                                                                                                           454
                                                                                                                                                           461
                                                                                                                                                           595
                                                                                                                                                           610
                                                                                                                                                           430
                                                                                                                                                           250
                                                                                                                                                           617
                                                                                                                                                           4775 461
                                                                                                                                                                345
                                                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                                                              531
                                                                                                                                                              466
                                                                                                                                                            380
                                                                                                                                                            461
                                                                                                                                                            710
                                                                                                                                                             710
                                                                                                                                                             492
                                                                                                                                                              480
                                                                                                                                                            493
                                                                                                                                                            698
                                                                                                                                                            454
                                                                                                                                                              288
                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                                                              371
                                                                                                                                                            710
                                                                                                                                                            461
                                                                                                                                                            368
                                                                                                                                                            590
                                                                                                                                                            371
                                                                                                                                                            461  461
                                                                                                                                                               526
                                                                                                                                                               531
                                                                                                                                                               371
                                                                                                                                                               526
                                                                                                                                                             414
                                                                                                                                                             265
                                                                                                                                                             368
                                                                                                                                                               230
                                                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                                                             230
                                                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                                                             535
                                                                                                                                                             590
                                                                                                                                                             54   466
                                                                                                                                                                  455
                                                                                                                                                                  737
                                                                                                                                                                  380
                                                                                                                                                                  372
                                                                                                                                                                710
                                                                                                                                                                595
                                                                                                                                                              710
                                                                                                                                                               53
                                                                                                                                                                493
                                                                                                                                                                493
                                                                                                                                                              710
                                                                                                                                                              410
                                                                                                                                                              414
                                                                                                                                                              595
                                                                                                                                                              371
                                                                                                                                                              492
                                                                                                                                                               414
                                                                                                                                                                492
                                                                                                                                                                698
                                                                                                                                                                414
                                                                                                                                                                230
                                                                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                                                                              276
                                                                                                                                                              280
                                                                                                                                                              367
                                                                                                                                                              179
                                                                                                                                                              610
                                                                                                                                                              366
                                                                                                                                                              366
                                                                                                                                                              265
                                                                                                                                                              276
                                                                                                                                                              461
                                                                                                                                                         710710
                                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                                           560
                                                                                                                                                            54
                                                                                                                                                            610
                                                                                                                                                            380    361
                                                                                                                                                                 171
                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                 617
                                                                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                                                                               380
                                                                                                                                                               340
                                                                                                                                                               280
                                                                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                                                                             560
                                                                                                                                                             368    492
                                                                                                                                                                  373
                                                                                                                                                                295
                                                                                                                                                                  373
                                                                                                                                                                  526
                                                                                                                                                                288
                                                                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                                                                371
                                                                                                                                                                373
                                                                                                                                                                243
                                                                                                                                                                522
                                                                                                                                                              368
                                                                                                                                                               590
                                                                                                                                                               276
                                                                                                                                                               340
                                                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                617
                                                                                                                                                                340
                                                                                                                                                                414  617
                                                                                                                                                                   250
                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                 522
                                                                                                                                                                 460
                                                                                                                                                                   684
                                                                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                                                                   320
                                                                                                                                                                 380
                                                                                                                                                                 179
                                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                                   243
                                                                                                                                                                   343
                                                                                                                                                                   367
                                                                                                                                                                 414
                                                                                                                                                                 380
                                                                                                                                                                 610
                                                                                                                                                                 242
                                                                                                                                                                  367
                                                                                                                                                                  520
                                                                                                                                                                  617 179
                                                                                                                                                                    493
                                                                                                                                                                    735
                                                                                                                                                                    320
                                                                                                                                                                    684
                                                                                                                                                                    492
                                                                                                                                                                    536
                                                                                                                                                                  480
                                                                                                                                                                  617
                                                                                                                                                                  4458
                                                                                                                                                                   492
                                                                                                                                                                    265
                                                                                                                                                                    61
                                                                                                                                                                  492
                                                                                                                                                                  430  243
                                                                                                                                                                       705
                                                                                                                                                                       463
                                                                                                                                                                     243
                                                                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                                                                   461
                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                     320
                                                                                                                                                                     367
                                                                                                                                                                   535
                                                                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                                                                   444
                                                                                                                                                                   340
                                                                                                                                                                   288
                                                                                                                                                                 340
                                                                                                                                                                 414
                                                                                                                                                                 366
                                                                                                                                                                 61
                                                                                                                                                                  414
                                                                                                                                                                   414  265
                                                                                                                                                                      343
                                                                                                                                                                      458
                                                                                                                                                                      511
                                                                                                                                                                    684
                                                                                                                                                                    373
                                                                                                                                                                      230
                                                                                                                                                                      536
                                                                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                                                                    577  179
                                                                                                                                                                         279
                                                                                                                                                                       242
                                                                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                                                                       389
                                                                                                                                                                       480
                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                                     242
                                                                                                                                                                     460
                                                                                                                                                                     617
                                                                                                                                                                      5174
                                                                                                                                                                     461
                                                                                                                                                                     535  133
                                                                                                                                                                        240
                                                                                                                                                                        375
                                                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                                                        53
                                                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                                                      320
                                                                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                                      526
                                                                                                                                                                        389
                                                                                                                                                                        610
                                                                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                                                                      705
                                                                                                                                                                      610
                                                                                                                                                                      690
                                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                                    340
                                                                                                                                                                    735
                                                                                                                                                                    700
                                                                                                                                                                    610
                                                                                                                                                                    275
                                                                                                                                                                    426    737
                                                                                                                                                                         480
                                                                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                                                         617
                                                                                                                                                                         375
                                                                                                                                                                       705
                                                                                                                                                                       276276
                                                                                                                                                                          315
                                                                                                                                                                          240
                                                                                                                                                                          426
                                                                                                                                                                        171
                                                                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                                                                        463
                                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                                      735463
                                                                                                                                                                       367
                                                                                                                                                                       698
                                                                                                                                                                     526
                                                                                                                                                                     366
                                                                                                                                                                     710
                                                                                                                                                                     528365
                                                                                                                                                                      526
                                                                                                                                                                      526
                                                                                                                                                                      276
                                                                                                                                                                      461
                                                                                                                                                                      174535
                                                                                                                                                                         511
                                                                                                                                                                       275
                                                                                                                                                                       276
                                                                                                                                                                       315
                                                                                                                                                                       426
                                                                                                                                                                       288
                                                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                                                        367
                                                                                                                                                                       526   480
                                                                                                                                                                           174
                                                                                                                                                                           615
                                                                                                                                                                         172
                                                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                                                         492
                                                                                                                                                                       372
                                                                                                                                                                       172
                                                                                                                                                                       430
                                                                                                                                                                       617
                                                                                                                                                                        26
                                                                                                                                                                        375   528
                                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                                                                            375
                                                                                                                                                                            276
                                                                                                                                                                            172
                                                                                                                                                                            528
                                                                                                                                                                            430
                                                                                                                                                                          528
                                                                                                                                                                          230  430
                                                                                                                                                                             528
                                                                                                                                                                             430
                                                                                                                                                                           172
                                                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                                                         315
                                                                                                                                                                         426 610
                                                                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                                                                             464
                                                                                                                                                                             617
                                                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                                                           279
                                                                                                                                                                           375
                                                                                                                                                                           463
                                                                                                                                                                           320
                                                                                                                                                                         526
                                                                                                                                                                         314
                                                                                                                                                                         708
                                                                                                                                                                         375
                                                                                                                                                                         528
                                                                                                                                                                         372    528
                                                                                                                                                                              464
                                                                                                                                                                              276
                                                                                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                                                                                            615
                                                                                                                                                                          430
                                                                                                                                                                           240
                                                                                                                                                                           610
                                                                                                                                                                            48753
                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                                                                            607
                                                                                                                                                                            708
                                                                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                                                                            614
                                                                                                                                                                          691
                                                                                                                                                                        389288
                                                                                                                                                                           460   480
                                                                                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                                                                                               464
                                                                                                                                                                               430
                                                                                                                                                                             230  528
                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                  528
                                                                                                                                                                                  737
                                                                                                                                                                                430
                                                                                                                                                                                375
                                                                                                                                                                                430
                                                                                                                                                                                 76
                                                                                                                                                                               375
                                                                                                                                                                               691
                                                                                                                                                                               133
                                                                                                                                                                               610
                                                                                                                                                                                162
                                                                                                                                                                                332
                                                                                                                                                                                535
                                                                                                                                                                              492
                                                                                                                                                                              463
                                                                                                                                                                            288
                                                                                                                                                                          240
                                                                                                                                                                           487698
                                                                                                                                                                            526
                                                                                                                                                                            171    230
                                                                                                                                                                                   614
                                                                                                                                                                                 375
                                                                                                                                                                                 61030
                                                                                                                                                                                  690
                                                                                                                                                                                535
                                                                                                                                                                                614
                                                                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                                                                 375480
                                                                                                                                                                                  691
                                                                                                                                                                                  610
                                                                                                                                                                             463463
                                                                                                                                                                             535
                                                                                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                                                                                               172
                                                                                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                                                                                                463172
                                                                                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                                                                                                 230
                                                                                                                                                                               463
                                                                                                                                                                               288
                                                                                                                                                                             367
                                                                                                                                                                              367
                                                                                                                                                                              320   528
                                                                                                                                                                                    610
                                                                                                                                                                                    172
                                                                                                                                                                                  314
                                                                                                                                                                                  172
                                                                                                                                                                                 54    493
                                                                                                                                                                                      172
                                                                                                                                                                                      53
                                                                                                                                                                                     492
                                                                                                                                                                                     172
                                                                                                                                                                                   230
                                                                                                                                                                                  162
                                                                                                                                                                                  463
                                                                                                                                                                                 492  610
                                                                                                                                                                                     70   737
                                                                                                                                                                                         314
                                                                                                                                                                                         230
                                                                                                                                                                                         607
                                                                                                                                                                                         493
                                                                                                                                                                                       230
                                                                                                                                                                                        560
                                                                                                                                                                                        480
                                                                                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                                                                                      492
                                                                                                                                                                                      230
                                                                                                                                                                                    492
                                                                                                                                                                                    560
                                                                                                                                                                                    527
                                                                                                                                                                                  698
                                                                                                                                                                                   132
                                                                                                                                                                                    528  4
                                                                                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                                                                                        230
                                                                                                                                                                                        133
                                                                                                                                                                                      460
                                                                                                                                                                                       698
                                                                                                                                                                                       460  560
                                                                                                                                                                                            737
                                                                                                                                                                                           53
                                                                                                                                                                                          691
                                                                                                                                                                                           492
                                                                                                                                                                                           92
                                                                                                                                                                                          527
                                                                                                                                                                                          280 265
                                                                                                                                                                                              520
                                                                                                                                                                                             492
                                                                                                                                                                                            540
                                                                                                                                                                                          480
                                                                                                                                                                                           280  574
                                                                                                                                                                                                737
                                                                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                                                                            280 628607
                                                                                                                                                                                                  493
                                                                                                                                                                                                  493
                                                                                                                                                                                                   53
                                                                                                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                                                                                                 540
                                                                                                                                                                                                  520
                                                                                                                                                                                                 133 493 493
                                                                                                                                                                                                         574
                                                                                                                                                                                                         53
                                                                                                                                                                                                       296
                                                                                                                                                                                                        296   53
                                                                                                                                                                                                             57457453 53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     574
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   715715 299
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          715
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          574 53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              690
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             690
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            574
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           59252
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7569053
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 715
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  690
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 574299
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     592
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    574 53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         592
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         75
                                                                  299     299314                            737
                                                                                                          133
                                                                                                            617 734
                                                                                                                430574
                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                   53 737
                                                                                                                      296
                                                                                                                    574
                                                                                                                    430  172
                                                                                                                          607
                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                      430
                                                                                                                      460
                                                                                                                      574
                                                                                                                      617  172
                                                                                                                         574
                                                                                                                       574
                                                                                                                       430
                                                                                                                      574
                                                                                                                      734     460
                                                                                                                            172
                                                                                                                             592
                                                                                                                            460
                                                                                                                             607
                                                                                                                           460
                                                                                                                           430
                                                                                                                            574
                                                                                                                           617
                                                                                                                           112617607
                                                                                                                               592
                                                                                                                               401
                                                                                                                             492
                                                                                                                             690
                                                                                                                              295
                                                                                                                              401
                                                                                                                               458
                                                                                                                             112
                                                                                                                               296288
                                                                                                                                607132
                                                                                                                                   279
                                                                                                                                   480
                                                                                                                                    110
                                                                                                                                    350
                                                                                                                                    480
                                                                                                                                  401480
                                                                                                                                     480
                                                                                                                                     492
                                                                                                                                     530
                                                                                                                                   430
                                                                                                                                1296
                                                                                                                                  492
                                                                                                                                  72
                                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                                   607
                                                                                                                                 5926
                                                                                                                                  530
                                                                                                                                 492
                                                                                                                                314   430
                                                                                                                                     617
                                                                                                                                     574
                                                                                                                                      607
                                                                                                                                      07
                                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                                     172
                                                                                                                                    492  295
                                                                                                                                       350
                                                                                                                                       607 463
                                                                                                                                         607
                                                                                                                                         463
                                                                                                                                         375
                                                                                                                                        690
                                                                                                                                        279
                                                                                                                                       314
                                                                                                                                     615    430
                                                                                                                                           230
                                                                                                                                          617
                                                                                                                                          230
                                                                                                                                         279
                                                                                                                                           428
                                                                                                                                           615
                                                                                                                                         607
                                                                                                                                         615
                                                                                                                                         172
                                                                                                                                       463
                                                                                                                                        615   615
                                                                                                                                              386
                                                                                                                                              230
                                                                                                                                            295
                                                                                                                                            726
                                                                                                                                          684
                                                                                                                                          493  230
                                                                                                                                             320
                                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                                             527
                                                                                                                                           265
                                                                                                                                          466
                                                                                                                                           455
                                                                                                                                           466  466
                                                                                                                                              466
                                                                                                                                              174
                                                                                                                                              386
                                                                                                                                              458
                                                                                                                                            466
                                                                                                                                              455
                                                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                                                            466  458
                                                                                                                                               607
                                                                                                                                               715
                                                                                                                                               350
                                                                                                                                               458
                                                                                                                                             466320527
                                                                                                                                                 617
                                                                                                                                                 112
                                                                                                                                               690684
                                                                                                                                                250
                                                                                                                                                715
                                                                                                                                                684
                                                                                                                                                 150
                                                                                                                                                 174
                                                                                                                                                 265
                                                                                                                                               684
                                                                                                                                               607
                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                             527250
                                                                                                                                                386  560
                                                                                                                                                     528
                                                                                                                                                     340
                                                                                                                                                     696
                                                                                                                                                   279
                                                                                                                                                   200230
                                                                                                                                                      691
                                                                                                                                                      303
                                                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                                      250
                                                                                                                                                    320
                                                                                                                                                    562
                                                                                                                                                    715
                                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                                   174
                                                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                                                    696726
                                                                                                                                                       684
                                                                                                                                                       708
                                                                                                                                                       455
                                                                                                                                                     345
                                                                                                                                                     464
                                                                                                                                                   314595
                                                                                                                                                      272
                                                                                                                                                    696
                                                                                                                                                     595
                                                                                                                                                     600
                                                                                                                                                   464735
                                                                                                                                                      680528
                                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                                         346
                                                                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                                                                         708708
                                                                                                                                                         708
                                                                                                                                                       274
                                                                                                                                                       242
                                                                                                                                                     681
                                                                                                                                                      350
                                                                                                                                                      607
                                                                                                                                                       242
                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                                                     174
                                                                                                                                                    242
                                                                                                                                                    595
                                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                                     243  710
                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                        710
                                                                                                                                                        265172
                                                                                                                                                           528
                                                                                                                                                         531
                                                                                                                                                       172  295
                                                                                                                                                            708
                                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                                          690
                                                                                                                                                          172
                                                                                                                                                          275
                                                                                                                                                        345
                                                                                                                                                        243550
                                                                                                                                                           726
                                                                                                                                                         454
                                                                                                                                                         455
                                                                                                                                                         691
                                                                                                                                                          722
                                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                                          610
                                                                                                                                                           477
                                                                                                                                                           363
                                                                                                                                                          343
                                                                                                                                                          562
                                                                                                                                                         560
                                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                                         410
                                                                                                                                                         715
                                                                                                                                                    150150
                                                                                                                                                      150     54
                                                                                                                                                              314
                                                                                                                                                              528
                                                                                                                                                              242
                                                                                                                                                              368
                                                                                                                                                              410
                                                                                                                                                              710
                                                                                                                                                            410
                                                                                                                                                            340
                                                                                                                                                            708
                                                                                                                                                            275
                                                                                                                                                          410
                                                                                                                                                          410
                                                                                                                                                           179
                                                                                                                                                           413
                                                                                                                                                           614
                                                                                                                                                          345
                                                                                                                                                        614410
                                                                                                                                                           410
                                                                                                                                                         150
                                                                                                                                                         346
                                                                                                                                                       174     522
                                                                                                                                                               368
                                                                                                                                                             410
                                                                                                                                                             179590
                                                                                                                                                                410
                                                                                                                                                                54
                                                                                                                                                                371
                                                                                                                                                              368
                                                                                                                                                            179
                                                                                                                                                              426
                                                                                                                                                              454
                                                                                                                                                            410
                                                                                                                                                             577
                                                                                                                                                             722
                                                                                                                                                             275
                                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                                            691
                                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                                        531426
                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                                                           179   343
                                                                                                                                                                 373
                                                                                                                                                                 368
                                                                                                                                                                 710
                                                                                                                                                               243
                                                                                                                                                               426
                                                                                                                                                               371
                                                                                                                                                               410
                                                                                                                                                             410
                                                                                                                                                             607
                                                                                                                                                             274  280
                                                                                                                                                                  368
                                                                                                                                                                  528
                                                                                                                                                                368
                                                                                                                                                                380
                                                                                                                                                                301
                                                                                                                                                              708410
                                                                                                                                                                 577
                                                                                                                                                                 373
                                                                                                                                                                350
                                                                                                                                                                708
                                                                                                                                                              275
                                                                                                                                                              373463
                                                                                                                                                               550
                                                                                                                                                               371  11
                                                                                                                                                                    276
                                                                                                                                                                    705
                                                                                                                                                                    691
                                                                                                                                                                  361
                                                                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                                                                368
                                                                                                                                                              522
                                                                                                                                                              726704
                                                                                                                                                                 368
                                                                                                                                                                  276
                                                                                                                                                                  726
                                                                                                                                                                  276
                                                                                                                                                                522
                                                                                                                                                                691
                                                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                                                  710
                                                                                                                                                                380
                                                                                                                                                              413
                                                                                                                                                            373
                                                                                                                                                             617
                                                                                                                                                              522560
                                                                                                                                                                  174590
                                                                                                                                                                     536
                                                                                                                                                                    54463
                                                                                                                                                                    368
                                                                                                                                                                    381
                                                                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                                                                  410
                                                                                                                                                                  614
                                                                                                                                                                  735
                                                                                                                                                                371
                                                                                                                                                                 705   691
                                                                                                                                                                       279
                                                                                                                                                                     368
                                                                                                                                                                     368
                                                                                                                                                                     371
                                                                                                                                                                    174
                                                                                                                                                                  373280
                                                                                                                                                                     280
                                                                                                                                                                   705
                                                                                                                                                                   735
                                                                                                                                                                 710
                                                                                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                                                                                  708 54526
                                                                                                                                                                        590
                                                                                                                                                                        366
                                                                                                                                                                      461
                                                                                                                                                                    444
                                                                                                                                                                    371
                                                                                                                                                                    454
                                                                                                                                                                    708  614
                                                                                                                                                                         375
                                                                                                                                                                       520
                                                                                                                                                                     607
                                                                                                                                                                     54708
                                                                                                                                                                     350
                                                                                                                                                                     375
                                                                                                                                                                     708
                                                                                                                                                                     726
                                                                                                                                                                   527
                                                                                                                                                                 332
                                                                                                                                                                 722
                                                                                                                                                                 705454
                                                                                                                                                                  413
                                                                                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                                                                                   550    366
                                                                                                                                                                        708
                                                                                                                                                                        280
                                                                                                                                                                        389
                                                                                                                                                                      704  300
                                                                                                                                                                           34
                                                                                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                                                                                         607
                                                                                                                                                                         511
                                                                                                                                                                       340
                                                                                                                                                                       375
                                                                                                                                                                       527
                                                                                                                                                                         332
                                                                                                                                                                         280
                                                                                                                                                                         617
                                                                                                                                                                        381
                                                                                                                                                                       371
                                                                                                                                                                       461  5
                                                                                                                                                                            367
                                                                                                                                                                          162
                                                                                                                                                                        536
                                                                                                                                                                        54487
                                                                                                                                                                        726
                                                                                                                                                                          240
                                                                                                                                                                          540
                                                                                                                                                                        560
                                                                                                                                                                        274
                                                                                                                                                                        536
                                                                                                                                                                      461
                                                                                                                                                                    562
                                                                                                                                                                     708 389
                                                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                                                        413
                                                                                                                                                                        487  367
                                                                                                                                                                             463
                                                                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                                                                             26
                                                                                                                                                                           590
                                                                                                                                                                         240  463
                                                                                                                                                                            320
                                                                                                                                                                          526  332
                                                                                                                                                                               367
                                                                                                                                                                               162
                                                                                                                                                                               366
                                                                                                                                                                             460
                                                                                                                                                                             590
                                                                                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                                                                                             280
                                                                                                                                                                           511
                                                                                                                                                                           279
                                                                                                                                                                           527  367
                                                                                                                                                                              162
                                                                                                                                                                              54
                                                                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                                                                             726
                                                                                                                                                                             372
                                                                                                                                                                              520
                                                                                                                                                                            350
                                                                                                                                                                             320
                                                                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                                                                              413
                                                                                                                                                                            413
                                                                                                                                                                           381
                                                                                                                                                                         320
                                                                                                                                                                         454
                                                                                                                                                                          300511
                                                                                                                                                                             560
                                                                                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                                                                                           615   492
                                                                                                                                                                                 367
                                                                                                                                                                                463
                                                                                                                                                                              560  366
                                                                                                                                                                                   288
                                                                                                                                                                                 590
                                                                                                                                                                                 366
                                                                                                                                                                               460
                                                                                                                                                                                 280
                                                                                                                                                                                366
                                                                                                                                                                               162
                                                                                                                                                                               346
                                                                                                                                                                                372
                                                                                                                                                                                350
                                                                                                                                                                                340
                                                                                                                                                                              320
                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                                                              346
                                                                                                                                                                            240     366
                                                                                                                                                                                  366
                                                                                                                                                                                  540460
                                                                                                                                                                                   528
                                                                                                                                                                                   460
                                                                                                                                                                                    528
                                                                                                                                                                                  366
                                                                                                                                                                                  171
                                                                                                                                                                                  726
                                                                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                                                                   367
                                                                                                                                                                                 320
                                                                                                                                                                                  520
                                                                                                                                                                                704    280
                                                                                                                                                                                       527
                                                                                                                                                                                      280
                                                                                                                                                                                       288
                                                                                                                                                                                     590
                                                                                                                                                                                     726
                                                                                                                                                                                   413280
                                                                                                                                                                                    366
                                                                                                                                                                                   54
                                                                                                                                                                                 628   590
                                                                                                                                                                                     280
                                                                                                                                                                                     366
                                                                                                                                                                                    132   698
                                                                                                                                                                                        628
                                                                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                                                                         726
                                                                                                                                                                                       171
                                                                                                                                                                                     520
                                                                                                                                                                                      413
                                                                                                                                                                                      413
                                                                                                                                                                                     704    480
                                                                                                                                                                                          737
                                                                                                                                                                                          590
                                                                                                                                                                                         288
                                                                                                                                                                                        366 704
                                                                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                                                                           288
                                                                                                                                                                                           715
                                                                                                                                                                                         520
                                                                                                                                                                                          704
                                                                                                                                                                                          726  628
                                                                                                                                                                                                520
                                                                                                                                                                                              480
                                                                                                                                                                                              288
                                                                                                                                                                                              171 133
                                                                                                                                                                                                698
                                                                                                                                                                                                  520
                                                                                                                                                                                                   698
                                                                                                                                                                                                   715
                                                                                                                                                                                                 704
                                                                                                                                                                                                  480
                                                                                                                                                                                                 480
                                                                                                                                                                                               288350
                                                                                                                                                                                                520592
                                                                                                                                                                                                   520 715
                                                                                                                                                                                                      698
                                                                                                                                                                                                    480
                                                                                                                                                                                                     133 296
                                                                                                                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                                                                                                                       698
                                                                                                                                                                                                       480   715
                                                                                                                                                                                                               704
                                                                                                                                                                                                             592
                                                                                                                                                                                                              133
                                                                                                                                                                                                            296 734
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 75704 592
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      704
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        704
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         704              299     299    299299299 299299
                                                        299299    299                 690     690
                                                                                         690 737737   690
                                                                                                        737        690
                                                                                                                 458
                                                                                                                   53 574
                                                                                                                     133 715
                                                                                                                       314
                                                                                                                       734
                                                                                                                       734
                                                                                                                       265458295
                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                           265
                                                                                                                           530
                                                                                                                           112
                                                                                                                         458  401
                                                                                                                               295
                                                                                                                              401
                                                                                                                             401 296
                                                                                                                                  463
                                                                                                                                295
                                                                                                                              455
                                                                                                                               112   265
                                                                                                                                   684
                                                                                                                                   428463
                                                                                                                                      592
                                                                                                                                       684
                                                                                                                                     463466
                                                                                                                                      455
                                                                                                                                      684
                                                                                                                                      365493
                                                                                                                                        455
                                                                                                                                       614 250
                                                                                                                                         527
                                                                                                                                         466
                                                                                                                                       428
                                                                                                                                         493
                                                                                                                                        592 375
                                                                                                                                          444
                                                                                                                                          466
                                                                                                                                         365
                                                                                                                                          527
                                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                                          444
                                                                                                                                          250
                                                                                                                                           243
                                                                                                                                           426
                                                                                                                                          243
                                                                                                                                           684112
                                                                                                                                            527
                                                                                                                                           250
                                                                                                                                           365343
                                                                                                                                            242
                                                                                                                                            540
                                                                                                                                            332
                                                                                                                                            527  200
                                                                                                                                                295
                                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                              243
                                                                                                                                               703
                                                                                                                                               614
                                                                                                                                               295
                                                                                                                                               577
                                                                                                                                                696 343
                                                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                                                   386
                                                                                                                                                   577
                                                                                                                                                   303
                                                                                                                                                  592
                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                               444577
                                                                                                                                                200
                                                                                                                                                75
                                                                                                                                                 577
                                                                                                                                                   375
                                                                                                                                                   464295
                                                                                                                                                    614
                                                                                                                                                    696
                                                                                                                                                  540
                                                                                                                                                  595
                                                                                                                                                365242
                                                                                                                                                 365
                                                                                                                                                 426
                                                                                                                                                  577464
                                                                                                                                                     577150
                                                                                                                                                        174
                                                                                                                                                      272
                                                                                                                                                      373
                                                                                                                                                    365
                                                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                                                     386
                                                                                                                                                     531 363
                                                                                                                                                        243477
                                                                                                                                                           174
                                                                                                                                                         426
                                                                                                                                                         373
                                                                                                                                                          332
                                                                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                                                                         150
                                                                                                                                                       179577
                                                                                                                                                        365
                                                                                                                                                          705
                                                                                                                                                         527
                                                                                                                                                         705
                                                                                                                                                       373   577
                                                                                                                                                             174
                                                                                                                                                              345
                                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                                             380
                                                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                                                             375
                                                                                                                                                           346
                                                                                                                                                             444
                                                                                                                                                            522
                                                                                                                                                          617
                                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                                           522
                                                                                                                                                            444 375
                                                                                                                                                                444
                                                                                                                                                              522540
                                                                                                                                                                 610
                                                                                                                                                                 413
                                                                                                                                                               174
                                                                                                                                                               527
                                                                                                                                                             522
                                                                                                                                                               380
                                                                                                                                                             332
                                                                                                                                                           365375
                                                                                                                                                             363
                                                                                                                                                             365
                                                                                                                                                           477380  680
                                                                                                                                                                 371
                                                                                                                                                                 681
                                                                                                                                                               361
                                                                                                                                                               75
                                                                                                                                                               735  413
                                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                                    413
                                                                                                                                                                  735
                                                                                                                                                                 365
                                                                                                                                                                  345
                                                                                                                                                                 628
                                                                                                                                                                240
                                                                                                                                                                 371 301
                                                                                                                                                                    722
                                                                                                                                                                    240
                                                                                                                                                                   700
                                                                                                                                                                    240
                                                                                                                                                                  708 162
                                                                                                                                                                    610
                                                                                                                                                                   70    274
                                                                                                                                                                         320
                                                                                                                                                                        715
                                                                                                                                                                        562
                                                                                                                                                                        722
                                                                                                                                                                       487
                                                                                                                                                                     389
                                                                                                                                                                     681
                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                                    345 301
                                                                                                                                                                      708  381
                                                                                                                                                                         162
                                                                                                                                                                          279
                                                                                                                                                                          454
                                                                                                                                                                         708
                                                                                                                                                                         536
                                                                                                                                                                         550
                                                                                                                                                                          389
                                                                                                                                                                        628  346
                                                                                                                                                                           315
                                                                                                                                                                         346
                                                                                                                                                                           550
                                                                                                                                                                           680
                                                                                                                                                                            34
                                                                                                                                                                          346 511
                                                                                                                                                                            715
                                                                                                                                                                           722
                                                                                                                                                                           454
                                                                                                                                                                            615
                                                                                                                                                                             454
                                                                                                                                                                             511
                                                                                                                                                                           300  274
                                                                                                                                                                              722
                                                                                                                                                                            454
                                                                                                                                                                            279
                                                                                                                                                                            511
                                                                                                                                                                           615562
                                                                                                                                                                              550
                                                                                                                                                                            592  75
                                                                                                                                                                               454 367
                                                                                                                                                                                   592
                                                                                                                                                                                 381
                                                                                                                                                                                 381274
                                                                                                                                                                                  722  520
                                                                                                                                                                                     715
                                                                                                                                                                                     340
                                                                                                                                                                                   372   691
                                                                                                                                                                                           340520
                                                                                                                                                                                            691
                                                                                                                                                                                              726
                                                                                                                                                                                              75
                                                                                                                                                                                             726
                                                                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                                                                              691
                                                                                                                                                                                               726520
                                                                                                                                                                                                520 171  698
                                                                                                                                                                                                           350
                                                                                                                                                                                                          75
                                                                                                                                                                                                           296
                                                                                                                                                                                                         171698
                                                                                                                                                                                                            698133
                                                                                                                                                                                                             296
                                                                                                                                                                                                              698
                                                                                                                                                                                                               133
                                                                                                                                                                                                                698
                                                                                                                                                                                                              296   350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    133
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  133    350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        133        350350350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           350  350
                                                                    690690   690
                                                                            690  690
                                                                                314     737             75265
                                                                                                          540458
                                                                                                            133
                                                                                                              133
                                                                                                                314
                                                                                                              265
                                                                                                               455  458
                                                                                                                  26570
                                                                                                                    5375530
                                                                                                                      455
                                                                                                                     614 455455
                                                                                                                            401
                                                                                                                           614
                                                                                                                           243
                                                                                                                         614
                                                                                                                           401
                                                                                                                         426   110
                                                                                                                             540
                                                                                                                              296
                                                                                                                              243
                                                                                                                              401
                                                                                                                              426
                                                                                                                             242  540
                                                                                                                                 243
                                                                                                                               332
                                                                                                                                 428295
                                                                                                                                     242
                                                                                                                                   614
                                                                                                                                   684
                                                                                                                                   426
                                                                                                                                   243
                                                                                                                                    428
                                                                                                                                   250 243
                                                                                                                                       426
                                                                                                                                     133
                                                                                                                                     75
                                                                                                                                   242
                                                                                                                                    332
                                                                                                                                      684
                                                                                                                                      295
                                                                                                                                      365
                                                                                                                                    684  295
                                                                                                                                         250
                                                                                                                                        343 595
                                                                                                                                           527595
                                                                                                                                            595
                                                                                                                                            444
                                                                                                                                            303
                                                                                                                                           684
                                                                                                                                         295   595
                                                                                                                                             595
                                                                                                                                             343
                                                                                                                                               527
                                                                                                                                               527
                                                                                                                                              696
                                                                                                                                            112444
                                                                                                                                             684
                                                                                                                                             705  577
                                                                                                                                                444
                                                                                                                                               34
                                                                                                                                               34373
                                                                                                                                               705
                                                                                                                                                 444
                                                                                                                                                 179
                                                                                                                                                 34
                                                                                                                                                34444
                                                                                                                                                  373
                                                                                                                                                   34
                                                                                                                                                 487 705
                                                                                                                                                     373272
                                                                                                                                                         592
                                                                                                                                                        577
                                                                                                                                                        522
                                                                                                                                                        444
                                                                                                                                                       444
                                                                                                                                                     628
                                                                                                                                                    34
                                                                                                                                                    444
                                                                                                                                                     464
                                                                                                                                                     600
                                                                                                                                                      34464
                                                                                                                                                      700
                                                                                                                                                       444
                                                                                                                                                        240522
                                                                                                                                                           444
                                                                                                                                                         522
                                                                                                                                                         527
                                                                                                                                                         700
                                                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                                                         700363
                                                                                                                                                            363
                                                                                                                                                          179
                                                                                                                                                          628
                                                                                                                                                        386
                                                                                                                                                         444
                                                                                                                                                          735
                                                                                                                                                        386  363
                                                                                                                                                             346
                                                                                                                                                           700
                                                                                                                                                            380
                                                                                                                                                             380
                                                                                                                                                            477
                                                                                                                                                              380371
                                                                                                                                                               162 345
                                                                                                                                                                  389
                                                                                                                                                                  592
                                                                                                                                                                 240
                                                                                                                                                                 38911
                                                                                                                                                                  735
                                                                                                                                                                  162 708
                                                                                                                                                                      371
                                                                                                                                                                       346
                                                                                                                                                                     346
                                                                                                                                                                      487
                                                                                                                                                                     345
                                                                                                                                                                      592
                                                                                                                                                                     346
                                                                                                                                                                     48734536
                                                                                                                                                                            315
                                                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                                                           511
                                                                                                                                                                           536
                                                                                                                                                                            34
                                                                                                                                                                          511
                                                                                                                                                                           34  301
                                                                                                                                                                               562
                                                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                                                               340
                                                                                                                                                                               301
                                                                                                                                                                              300 550
                                                                                                                                                                                381
                                                                                                                                                                                  340
                                                                                                                                                                                   681
                                                                                                                                                                                 279
                                                                                                                                                                                 315  680
                                                                                                                                                                                     279
                                                                                                                                                                                     372
                                                                                                                                                                                   381
                                                                                                                                                                                     722
                                                                                                                                                                                       550
                                                                                                                                                                                       372340
                                                                                                                                                                                          680
                                                                                                                                                                                        722   562
                                                                                                                                                                                            550
                                                                                                                                                                                           340
                                                                                                                                                                                          681 550
                                                                                                                                                                                                680274
                                                                                                                                                                                                 726
                                                                                                                                                                                                   562
                                                                                                                                                                                                  279     274171
                                                                                                                                                                                                              171 274
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   734274      52    274
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                274 274274   274
                                                                   75 75 54075 737   737 75 540 540
                                                                                       540        314614  265
                                                                                                        265
                                                                                                         614
                                                                                                         332332 614
                                                                                                               70
                                                                                                             61453426
                                                                                                                  70  530332
                                                                                                                         426
                                                                                                                       426
                                                                                                                     242
                                                                                                                     242628
                                                                                                                         428401296
                                                                                                                             242
                                                                                                                              428
                                                                                                                               250250
                                                                                                                                 112 628
                                                                                                                                      303
                                                                                                                                      705
                                                                                                                                    705
                                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                                   303  365
                                                                                                                                       343 34
                                                                                                                                           684
                                                                                                                                          705
                                                                                                                                         703 34373
                                                                                                                                             684
                                                                                                                                             373162
                                                                                                                                              696     700
                                                                                                                                                    531272
                                                                                                                                                       464
                                                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                                                      162
                                                                                                                                                      240
                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                     464
                                                                                                                                                     600
                                                                                                                                                   240    34
                                                                                                                                                        735
                                                                                                                                                         700477
                                                                                                                                                             700
                                                                                                                                                           240
                                                                                                                                                             34
                                                                                                                                                             70346
                                                                                                                                                               389
                                                                                                                                                              700
                                                                                                                                                              386
                                                                                                                                                             361
                                                                                                                                                             38934  34
                                                                                                                                                                   34
                                                                                                                                                                    346
                                                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                                                   487
                                                                                                                                                                  386  34
                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                                       511536
                                                                                                                                                                          536
                                                                                                                                                                        511 300
                                                                                                                                                                           536315 340301
                                                                                                                                                                                    340
                                                                                                                                                                                      301 722
                                                                                                                                                                                         372    550
                                                                                                                                                                                              681550 550
                                                                                                                                                                                                     681562
                                                                                                                                                                                                      550680 562171
                                                                                                                                                                                                                171  562
                                                 7575   7575 75       540 540 628314
                                                                                540 540 314
                                                                                      314
                                                                                      628628314628      628
                                                                                                      332   332
                                                                                                           332
                                                                                                            24262870
                                                                                                                  242
                                                                                                                  133530
                                                                                                                    428
                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                   428
                                                                                                                    53
                                                                                                                     530
                                                                                                                    530   428
                                                                                                                          70 70
                                                                                                                           250
                                                                                                                             303
                                                                                                                             343
                                                                                                                                  250
                                                                                                                                303
                                                                                                                               250
                                                                                                                                343112343
                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                    11270
                                                                                                                                       365
                                                                                                                                       112
                                                                                                                                   365 696735
                                                                                                                                               70
                                                                                                                                              240 531735
                                                                                                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                                   487
                                                                                                                                                 531700
                                                                                                                                                     700
                                                                                                                                                     735
                                                                                                                                                        162
                                                                                                                                                         700 477
                                                                                                                                                             389
                                                                                                                                                           389
                                                                                                                                                          272  735
                                                                                                                                                             389
                                                                                                                                                              477
                                                                                                                                                            389
                                                                                                                                                          272
                                                                                                                                                           272487
                                                                                                                                                            272 11
                                                                                                                                                              272
                                                                                                                                                              272
                                                                                                                                                               735
                                                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                                                 487
                                                                                                                                                               346
                                                                                                                                                                 11  346
                                                                                                                                                                   511386
                                                                                                                                                                    346
                                                                                                                                                                    511
                                                                                                                                                                  346
                                                                                                                                                                   511  536
                                                                                                                                                                       315  315
                                                                                                                                                                          386
                                                                                                                                                                         536 300
                                                                                                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                                                                                386  132
                                                                                                                                                                                         372
                                                                                                                                                                                       301 722
                                                                                                                                                                                          372
                                                                                                                                                                                            722
                                                                                                                                                                                            372
                                                                                                                                                                                            722
                                                                                                                                                                                            301 301    550  681
                                                                                                                                                                                                           550
                                                                                                                                                                                                          681
                                                                                                                                                                                                          171
                                                                                                                                                                                                          171171
                                                                                                                                                                                                               681  681680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       562562  680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               562    562
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      680
                                                                     628                                             530
                                                                                                                   530
                                                                                                                 530  250 250
                                                                                                                        303110
                                                                                                                          343  343                    700
                                                                                                                                                     600
                                                                                                                                                     302    487
                                                                                                                                                          487
                                                                                                                                                         361
                                                                                                                                                         11  11477
                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                                              477272
                                                                                                                                                                 511
                                                                                                                                                                 346
                                                                                                                                                                  272
                                                                                                                                                                 511
                                                                                                                                                                346 272 536
                                                                                                                                                                       272
                                                                                                                                                                         315   315  386
                                                                                                                                                                               300386   386 722
                                                                                                                                                                                           722302               734            52 680    680 680
                                                                                                      302      303
                                                                                                                302
                                                                                                                   530
                                                                                                                    343303
                                                                                                                     303
                                                                                                                     302  343
                                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                        110
                                                                                                                         110
                                                                                                                        110 302
                                                                                                                            110
                                                                                                                          110
                                                                                                                                302
                                                                                                                              302  365703302
                                                                                                                                 36570311
                                                                                                                                             696531
                                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                                             11 696
                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                                   696361
                                                                                                                                                    735
                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                    600  487
                                                                                                                                                       487
                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                    361
                                                                                                                                                      735
                                                                                                                                                        735
                                                                                                                                                            302
                                                                                                                                                           735
                                                                                                                                                            735477477 272  315
                                                                                                                                                                          315 302       302 386
                                                                                                                                                                                           722                                                 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                680
                                                                                             302
                                                                                           302                                              531696
                                                                                                                                                696
                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                                                  361600
                                                                                          302                            110    365
                                                                                                                                 703703        361
                                                                                                302 302
                                                                                                     302
                                                                                                       302
                                                                                                                     110 703
                                                                                                                                     361
                                                                                                                                      361
                                                                                                                                        361
                                                                                                                                           531361 600
                                                                                                                                             361
                                                                                                                                            361        600
                                                                                                                                                        600
                                                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                                                       600600                                                       734          52
                                                                                              302                                  703
                                                                                               302                                                                                        132                                 525252
         -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                             734
-2




                                                                                                                                                                                     132



                                          -.15                    -.1                             -.05            0           .05                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                               Potential Market Size Residual

                                                                                         Residuals                                                              Fitted values




                                                                                                                                  47
                                                                                Figure 3b.
                                                                            ^ it on Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects vs.
                                            Residuals from regression of ln K
                                            residuals from regression of ln MitT OT AL on Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects
                                                             for the 63 diseases with the most observations.



                                                   Residuals for 63 Diseases with Most Observations
                                      1.5
   Technological Opportunity Residual


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                302
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   302
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      302
                              1



                                                                                                                                                                                                         302

                                                                                                                                                                                                         302
                                                                                                                                                                                                   302

                                                                                                                                                                               11                       302
                                                                                                                                                                                  11             600
                                                                                                                                                                                          600
                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                           600    600      11
                                                                                                                                                                    600600 11                          302
                                                                                                                                                                600
                                                                                                                                                    361 600
                                                                                                                                                  361
                                                                                                                                                   361                       272 11
                                                                                                                                                  361       600          272
                                                                                                                 346                              361600
                                                                                                                                                       361             272 444      11 70 302                          303
                                                                                                                     346                                361
                                                                                                                                                       600         272                                                  303 250 250
                                                                                                                           346                              361   272        444628    1170 628
                                                                                                                                                                                      628
                                                                                                                                                                                      70      365                 303      250
                                                                                                                                                    600        361
                                                                                                                                                               272        444       70
                                                                                                                                                                                    11  365
                                                                                                                                                                                      628                           303
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   303
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    250     250
                                                                                                                           346                             272    361     332444    332
                                                                                                                                                                                  332
                                                                                                                                                                                    365
                                                                                                                                                                                    7011628
                                                                                                                                                                                          332 332            250   696
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                        350                     346            600       272 361   522          332
                                                                                                                                                                               200     628
                                                                                                                                                                                     365   332
                                                                                                                                                                                           628           250696
                                                                                                                                                                                                              696
                                                                                                    350 350 477                                      272 300300     522 444614 200  70
                                                                                                                                                                                   11          628
                                                                                                                                                                                                 332    696
                                                                                              350
                                                                                                350               477 477 240240346240        272            300
                                                                                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                                                            300
                                                                                                                                                          300   300 522
                                                                                                                                                                  345 577
                                                                                                                                                                    361    614  365
                                                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                                                614       242
                                                                                                                                                                                            332 250            303
                                                                                                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                             350                                                 112        300   522 577
                                                                                                                                                                        345 345    614242              696303
                                                                                            350                     477  477  240
                                                                                                                                    480600
                                                                                                                                   480
                                                                                                                                           295
                                                                                                                                            295
                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                             272  112
                                                                                                                                                 112112 300
                                                                                                                                                  112
                                                                                                                                                            300
                                                                                                                                                           300345577
                                                                                                                                                                522
                                                                                                                                                                 577 444
                                                                                                                                                                    361 345691
                                                                                                                                                                         365365
                                                                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                                                             426
                                                                                                                                                                              11691
                                                                                                                                                                              426
                                                                                                                                                                             332
                                                                                                                                                                                    614
                                                                                                                                                                                   332
                                                                                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                                                                                   242
                                                                                                                                                                                 426
                                                                                                                                                                                426
                                                                                                                                                                                242    614 303628
                                                                                                                                                                                      242
                                                                                                                                                                                     614
                                                                                                                                                                                     250
                                                                                                                                                                                      614          628303
                                                                                                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                   592
                                                                                       592 350
                                                                                     592 350
                                                                                    592         340
                                                                                                                           477
                                                                                                                           477
                                                                                                                          320  413
                                                                                                                              240
                                                                                                                               413
                                                                                                                             240346
                                                                                                                              477
                                                                                                                              240413
                                                                                                                                413480
                                                                                                                                   413
                                                                                                                                 477
                                                                                                                                   240
                                                                                                                                       295272
                                                                                                                                      600
                                                                                                                                    413
                                                                                                                                    477
                                                                                                                                                112
                                                                                                                                                 112
                                                                                                                                                691
                                                                                                                                              112  296
                                                                                                                                                 296
                                                                                                                                                295
                                                                                                                                               296   300
                                                                                                                                                   300
                                                                                                                                                        300
                                                                                                                                                         112
                                                                                                                                                       296
                                                                                                                                                       296296
                                                                                                                                                          112
                                                                                                                                                           345
                                                                                                                                                              345
                                                                                                                                                              522
                                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                                             112
                                                                                                                                                            522 361
                                                                                                                                                                   444
                                                                                                                                                                 361
                                                                                                                                                                 444
                                                                                                                                                               577
                                                                                                                                                                 365 250
                                                                                                                                                                    302
                                                                                                                                                                  242
                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                                                                                                                                       243
                                                                                                                                                                        365
                                                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                                                                                       112
                                                                                                                                                                       365
                                                                                                                                                                      112
                                                                                                                                                                    112243
                                                                                                                                                                      112
                                                                                                                                                                       242
                                                                                                                                                                       70 242
                                                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                                                             426
                                                                                                                                                                           112
                                                                                                                                                                         303
                                                                                                                                                                         426
                                                                                                                                                                              242
                                                                                                                                                                              243
                                                                                                                                                                              243
                                                                                                                                                                             243
                                                                                                                                                                               303
                                                                                                                                                                             426
                                                                                                                                                                                  303
                                                                                                                                                                                242
                                                                                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                                                                                               426332
                                                                                                                                                                                      303
                                                                                                                                                                                    614
                                                                                                                                                                                    614 535
                                                                                                                                                                                        535   696
                                                                                                                                                                                               628704
                                                                                                                                                                                                    704 530 530 530530 530
                                                                                     592
                                                                                     592         350340 340
                                                                                                       350                   320
                                                                                                                               162346
                                                                                                                                 413480
                                                                                                                                    413
                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                    296 296
                                                                                                                                         240
                                                                                                                                       162
                                                                                                                                        296
                                                                                                                                        477
                                                                                                                                        272 296
                                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                                             295
                                                                                                                                            162
                                                                                                                                            531
                                                                                                                                             295691
                                                                                                                                              531
                                                                                                                                            531
                                                                                                                                          477240 300
                                                                                                                                                371371
                                                                                                                                                 112
                                                                                                                                               320  371
                                                                                                                                                  428
                                                                                                                                                371320428
                                                                                                                                                       371
                                                                                                                                                       410
                                                                                                                                                      410
                                                                                                                                                     320  345
                                                                                                                                                           522
                                                                                                                                                         162
                                                                                                                                                        371243
                                                                                                                                                         345
                                                                                                                                                         410
                                                                                                                                                          243  250
                                                                                                                                                               428
                                                                                                                                                             428243
                                                                                                                                                              444
                                                                                                                                                              361162
                                                                                                                                                               242428
                                                                                                                                                                  365243
                                                                                                                                                                     426
                                                                                                                                                                   303
                                                                                                                                                                   428  265
                                                                                                                                                                      265
                                                                                                                                                                      200200
                                                                                                                                                                          26511
                                                                                                                                                                           265
                                                                                                                                                                           172
                                                                                                                                                                            265
                                                                                                                                                                           332265
                                                                                                                                                                            172
                                                                                                                                                                            428265
                                                                                                                                                                              265614
                                                                                                                                                                                 265265
                                                                                                                                                                                  428
                                                                                                                                                                                    174 535
                                                                                                                                                                                       174
                                                                                                                                                                                     428
                                                                                                                                                                                      535
                                                                                                                                                                                     174  696
                                                                                                                                                                                         428
                                                                                                                                                                                         265   628
                                                                                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                                                                                            4584584 58
                                                                                                                                                                                                  428
                                                                                                                                                                                                  530458
                                                                                                                                                                                                      458
                                                                                                                                                                                                    428
                                                                                                                                                                                                    428  428458
                                                                                                                                                                                                             458                                      592
                                                                                                     340            162       320   480
                                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                                  320320
                                                                                                                                   413 320
                                                                                                                                      320
                                                                                                                                    296   371
                                                                                                                                           320
                                                                                                                                          295428
                                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                                           428
                                                                                                                                             371691
                                                                                                                                                  320
                                                                                                                                                410
                                                                                                                                                  295
                                                                                                                                                   240
                                                                                                                                                  345  345
                                                                                                                                                       615
                                                                                                                                                     410
                                                                                                                                                    320 303
                                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                                          162
                                                                                                                                                        615
                                                                                                                                                      615
                                                                                                                                                      371
                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                                                         444 242
                                                                                                                                                            401  70
                                                                                                                                                                 401426
                                                                                                                                                                    200265 458
                                                                                                                                                                           346614  174
                                                                                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                                                                                  174
                                                                                                                                                                                 174265
                                                                                                                                                                                   332
                                                                                                                                                                                     535  458
                                                                                                                                                                                         458 628 704
                                                                                                                                                                                                530
                                                                                      592
                                                                                        592 592
                                                                                                       340
                                                                                                        350
                                                                                                       280
                                                                                                        280280 280
                                                                                                             340
                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                            350
                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                            350 280288
                                                                                                                  288
                                                                                                                 280
                                                                                                                 276
                                                                                                                 288 162
                                                                                                                   288
                                                                                                                     340
                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                          715
                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                         174
                                                                                                                       401
                                                                                                                        710
                                                                                                                        715
                                                                                                                      401
                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                        174
                                                                                                                             320
                                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                                            715
                                                                                                                           715
                                                                                                                          174
                                                                                                                        715   162
                                                                                                                             401
                                                                                                                            710
                                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                                           401288
                                                                                                                            276
                                                                                                                                 710
                                                                                                                                 296
                                                                                                                               590
                                                                                                                                590
                                                                                                                               715
                                                                                                                                 590
                                                                                                                                 590346
                                                                                                                                    480
                                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                                                296
                                                                                                                               276 715
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                   704
                                                                                                                                       590
                                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                                     401
                                                                                                                                      272
                                                                                                                                     296
                                                                                                                                      480
                                                                                                                                     480
                                                                                                                                   288413
                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                    590
                                                                                                                                     296
                                                                                                                                   428
                                                                                                                                    345
                                                                                                                                         710
                                                                                                                                       480401
                                                                                                                                        480
                                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                                     288577
                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                      704
                                                                                                                                       150  493
                                                                                                                                          577
                                                                                                                                          577
                                                                                                                                            615
                                                                                                                                           345
                                                                                                                                           493
                                                                                                                                           295
                                                                                                                                           615
                                                                                                                                         413
                                                                                                                                         345
                                                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                                                         530371
                                                                                                                                          493
                                                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                                                         704466
                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                          615
                                                                                                                                               493
                                                                                                                                              531
                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                               345
                                                                                                                                             345
                                                                                                                                              477
                                                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                                                           710
                                                                                                                                           371
                                                                                                                                            493
                                                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                                             466
                                                                                                                                           480
                                                                                                                                           466
                                                                                                                                         288
                                                                                                                                         150    615
                                                                                                                                                531
                                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                                              710
                                                                                                                                              577
                                                                                                                                               691
                                                                                                                                             480
                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                            363 112
                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                              710
                                                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                                                             466
                                                                                                                                              466
                                                                                                                                              704
                                                                                                                                               480
                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                                             288
                                                                                                                                                   401
                                                                                                                                                 531
                                                                                                                                                 531240
                                                                                                                                                  615
                                                                                                                                                691
                                                                                                                                                  531
                                                                                                                                                577
                                                                                                                                                 477
                                                                                                                                                  295
                                                                                                                                                  179
                                                                                                                                                179
                                                                                                                                                200
                                                                                                                                              363
                                                                                                                                              696179
                                                                                                                                                466
                                                                                                                                                  410
                                                                                                                                                     615
                                                                                                                                                     320
                                                                                                                                                   531
                                                                                                                                                   371
                                                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                                                     530
                                                                                                                                                   531
                                                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                                                    179
                                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                                       401
                                                                                                                                                      371
                                                                                                                                                       275
                                                                                                                                                       320
                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                       414
                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                     577
                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                   530458
                                                                                                                                                       243
                                                                                                                                                     710
                                                                                                                                                          615
                                                                                                                                                        522
                                                                                                                                                        240
                                                                                                                                                        444
                                                                                                                                                      522
                                                                                                                                                        340
                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                       242
                                                                                                                                                       265
                                                                                                                                                     477
                                                                                                                                                           275
                                                                                                                                                         320
                                                                                                                                                       371   242
                                                                                                                                                           150
                                                                                                                                                           361
                                                                                                                                                         243615
                                                                                                                                                           179
                                                                                                                                                          275
                                                                                                                                                         179
                                                                                                                                                       179  179
                                                                                                                                                            200
                                                                                                                                                           530
                                                                                                                                                         242
                                                                                                                                                           458
                                                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                                                                         340
                                                                                                                                                       25070
                                                                                                                                                        710
                                                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                                                      704
                                                                                                                                                       414
                                                                                                                                                        696 265
                                                                                                                                                           340
                                                                                                                                                           704
                                                                                                                                                                265
                                                                                                                                                              179
                                                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                                                           240615
                                                                                                                                                              365
                                                                                                                                                             179
                                                                                                                                                              179162
                                                                                                                                                               615
                                                                                                                                                                615
                                                                                                                                                              240
                                                                                                                                                                296
                                                                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                                                                            172
                                                                                                                                                            696
                                                                                                                                                                   426
                                                                                                                                                                   458
                                                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                                                458
                                                                                                                                                                 530
                                                                                                                                                                   150
                                                                                                                                                                  265
                                                                                                                                                                 426
                                                                                                                                                                615
                                                                                                                                                               172
                                                                                                                                                                696 426
                                                                                                                                                                   696
                                                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                                                   704
                                                                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                                                                  340
                                                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                                                      430
                                                                                                                                                                       172
                                                                                                                                                                       430
                                                                                                                                                                     614
                                                                                                                                                                           430
                                                                                                                                                                            614
                                                                                                                                                                           172
                                                                                                                                                                           346
                                                                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                                                                         614430
                                                                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                                                                          430
                                                                                                                                                                          430
                                                                                                                                                                         172
                                                                                                                                                                         172
                                                                                                                                                                         346 174
                                                                                                                                                                           430
                                                                                                                                                                            332
                                                                                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                                                                                          174
                                                                                                                                                                        704
                                                                                                                                                                        535
                                                                                                                                                                      430
                                                                                                                                                                      172    710
                                                                                                                                                                           430
                                                                                                                                                                             704
                                                                                                                                                                                401
                                                                                                                                                                              530
                                                                                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                                                                                            430
                                                                                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                                                                                  265
                                                                                                                                                                                 535
                                                                                                                                                                                704704 530
                                                                                                                                                                                      150  401
                                                                                                                                                                                           704
                                                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                                                                                        280
                                                                                                                                                                                               704
                                                                                                                                                                                               628
                                                                                                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                                                                                                                  401
                                                                                                                                                                                                 150   401
                                                                                                                                                                                                   150 150
                                                                                                                                                                                                  715       401401 401
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    401 401                 592 592
          0




                                                                                                         276
                                                                                                         710276
                                                                                                            288
                                                                                                             288710
                                                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                704   280
                                                                                                                       704
                                                                                                                     174
                                                                                                                    340
                                                                                                                     715
                                                                                                                   401  174
                                                                                                                      401
                                                                                                                       530 303
                                                                                                                           280
                                                                                                                           530276
                                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                             174
                                                                                                                             696  590
                                                                                                                                280
                                                                                                                               280
                                                                                                                                 696
                                                                                                                                458
                                                                                                                                428 715
                                                                                                                                  530272
                                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                                    345
                                                                                                                                    280
                                                                                                                                   715
                                                                                                                                    346276
                                                                                                                                       363
                                                                                                                                       413
                                                                                                                                     280
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                     590363
                                                                                                                                       363
                                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                     615
                                                                                                                                     414  371
                                                                                                                                           179
                                                                                                                                         458
                                                                                                                                          696
                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                         615
                                                                                                                                         413
                                                                                                                                          414
                                                                                                                                          179
                                                                                                                                         371
                                                                                                                                        590
                                                                                                                                      715414
                                                                                                                                       413
                                                                                                                                       414
                                                                                                                                        179  276
                                                                                                                                              363
                                                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                                                             276
                                                                                                                                           280
                                                                                                                                            250
                                                                                                                                            414
                                                                                                                                            493 480
                                                                                                                                              691
                                                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                                                               265
                                                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                                                             414
                                                                                                                                              410
                                                                                                                                            295691
                                                                                                                                               276
                                                                                                                                               295
                                                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                                                             493  531
                                                                                                                                                275
                                                                                                                                                363
                                                                                                                                              414   243
                                                                                                                                                  363
                                                                                                                                                414
                                                                                                                                                466
                                                                                                                                                288430
                                                                                                                                                    363
                                                                                                                                                    363
                                                                                                                                                  531
                                                                                                                                                  414
                                                                                                                                                 414
                                                                                                                                                   531
                                                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                                                   295
                                                                                                                                                   242
                                                                                                                                                  288
                                                                                                                                                280
                                                                                                                                                275
                                                                                                                                                466480
                                                                                                                                                   430
                                                                                                                                                   414
                                                                                                                                                    340
                                                                                                                                                  172
                                                                                                                                                  243  275
                                                                                                                                                     172
                                                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                                                 410    275
                                                                                                                                                        320
                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                    414
                                                                                                                                                    522
                                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                                    275
                                                                                                                                                    363
                                                                                                                                                    414
                                                                                                                                                  280444
                                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                                   531   371
                                                                                                                                                         172
                                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                                       414
                                                                                                                                                       577340
                                                                                                                                                        363
                                                                                                                                                        414
                                                                                                                                                      410
                                                                                                                                                        410430
                                                                                                                                                           710
                                                                                                                                                         361
                                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                                       288
                                                                                                                                                       320
                                                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                                                       414
                                                                                                                                                     535
                                                                                                                                                      340   710
                                                                                                                                                            426
                                                                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                                                                        410
                                                                                                                                                        295 363426
                                                                                                                                                                430
                                                                                                                                                                240
                                                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                                                             288
                                                                                                                                                              288
                                                                                                                                                              162  535
                                                                                                                                                                 535
                                                                                                                                                                615
                                                                                                                                                                 240430
                                                                                                                                                                   346
                                                                                                                                                                  276
                                                                                                                                                                 614
                                                                                                                                                                276
                                                                                                                                                                174   162
                                                                                                                                                                    276
                                                                                                                                                                     276
                                                                                                                                                                     174
                                                                                                                                                                   288
                                                                                                                                                                 162162
                                                                                                                                                                  288346430
                                                                                                                                                                          704
                                                                                                                                                                          332
                                                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                                                        162
                                                                                                                                                                        276  710
                                                                                                                                                                            276276
                                                                                                                                                                              340
                                                                                                                                                                                276
                                                                                                                                                                                  715280   628
                                                                                                                                                                                         715
                                                                                                                                                                                           340
                                                                                                                                                                                         715                                              592
                                                                                                  592
                                                                                                 710  710
                                                                                                     592  710
                                                                                                           288
                                                                                                             401
                                                                                                             704
                                                                                                           401      303
                                                                                                                    530174
                                                                                                                     350
                                                                                                                   530
                                                                                                                     715
                                                                                                                      530
                                                                                                                      430530
                                                                                                                          696
                                                                                                                           150
                                                                                                                         174458
                                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                           250
                                                                                                                          340 430
                                                                                                                             350
                                                                                                                            174
                                                                                                                           458150  296
                                                                                                                                   345
                                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                                 615250
                                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                                  615
                                                                                                                                    272
                                                                                                                                  345
                                                                                                                                150     414
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                       715
                                                                                                                                       275
                                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                                      179275
                                                                                                                                          715
                                                                                                                                        340
                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                       242
                                                                                                                                        371
                                                                                                                                        535
                                                                                                                                        340  590
                                                                                                                                           275
                                                                                                                                           430
                                                                                                                                           413276
                                                                                                                                            179
                                                                                                                                            493
                                                                                                                                            295
                                                                                                                                            172
                                                                                                                                          265  410
                                                                                                                                              410
                                                                                                                                             535
                                                                                                                                            179
                                                                                                                                           275
                                                                                                                                           413
                                                                                                                                         243     363
                                                                                                                                                 466
                                                                                                                                               242
                                                                                                                                               691
                                                                                                                                               590
                                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                                                               426
                                                                                                                                             275
                                                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                                                             410  466
                                                                                                                                                  265
                                                                                                                                                243
                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                                363
                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                              52270
                                                                                                                                               691
                                                                                                                                                410
                                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                               493
                                                                                                                                             410
                                                                                                                                               493 340
                                                                                                                                                 275480
                                                                                                                                                  522
                                                                                                                                                  466
                                                                                                                                                   363
                                                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                                                 531
                                                                                                                                                  590
                                                                                                                                                  112
                                                                                                                                                  363
                                                                                                                                                  577 414
                                                                                                                                                      477
                                                                                                                                                    414426
                                                                                                                                                     414
                                                                                                                                                       480
                                                                                                                                                     280
                                                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                                                     466
                                                                                                                                                   363
                                                                                                                                                   466
                                                                                                                                                   300
                                                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                                                   493466
                                                                                                                                                     493
                                                                                                                                                      466
                                                                                                                                                    590
                                                                                                                                                    715
                                                                                                                                                     614  410
                                                                                                                                                        371162
                                                                                                                                                         320
                                                                                                                                                         480
                                                                                                                                                          276
                                                                                                                                                          480
                                                                                                                                                         477
                                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                                       466
                                                                                                                                                       466280  363
                                                                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                                                                             276
                                                                                                                                                              365
                                                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                                                             276
                                                                                                                                                            295
                                                                                                                                                            614
                                                                                                                                                             276 240
                                                                                                                                                                 615
                                                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                                                                371
                                                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                                                             174
                                                                                                                                                           480
                                                                                                                                                            590   363
                                                                                                                                                                  162
                                                                                                                                                                   295
                                                                                                                                                                 346
                                                                                                                                                                   710
                                                                                                                                                                 24011 288
                                                                                                                                                                        332
                                                                                                                                                                          710
                                                                                                                                                                          715
                                                                                                                                                                          280288
                                                                                                                                                                               715
                                                                                                                                                                                 280
                                                                                                                                                                                280
                                                                                                                                                                                  288
                                                                                                                                                                                 280   280
                                                                                                                                                                                     340  340
                                                                                                                                                                                          628                                592      592
                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                 430  592 430
                                                                                                          401
                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                       172 172430
                                                                                                            458
                                                                                                            535  530
                                                                                                               530 535
                                                                                                                  535696
                                                                                                                     365
                                                                                                                    250 696
                                                                                                                         428
                                                                                                                       535
                                                                                                                        530
                                                                                                                         365
                                                                                                                       530
                                                                                                                       530   150
                                                                                                                           250
                                                                                                                         458   150
                                                                                                                               615
                                                                                                                             365
                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                             615150
                                                                                                                                174
                                                                                                                               615
                                                                                                                                265
                                                                                                                               200 150
                                                                                                                                   535
                                                                                                                                 345
                                                                                                                                 600
                                                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                                                  174296
                                                                                                                                   340150
                                                                                                                                    150179
                                                                                                                                      350
                                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                                     179
                                                                                                                                   365  172
                                                                                                                                      296  172
                                                                                                                                           410
                                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                                         150
                                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                                        242
                                                                                                                                         243
                                                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                                                     174346
                                                                                                                                      150
                                                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                                                      174346  493
                                                                                                                                              691
                                                                                                                                            410
                                                                                                                                            275
                                                                                                                                             410
                                                                                                                                            413
                                                                                                                                          410522
                                                                                                                                           577426
                                                                                                                                            295
                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                                                             275
                                                                                                                                             410
                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                            371
                                                                                                                                            410
                                                                                                                                            614
                                                                                                                                          522    363
                                                                                                                                               531
                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                               413   276
                                                                                                                                                   350
                                                                                                                                                   577  493
                                                                                                                                                      320
                                                                                                                                                    715
                                                                                                                                                      444
                                                                                                                                                    577  280
                                                                                                                                                         174
                                                                                                                                                        493
                                                                                                                                                       715
                                                                                                                                                      174 162
                                                                                                                                                          477
                                                                                                                                                         715 280
                                                                                                                                                              296
                                                                                                                                                            162
                                                                                                                                                           493 280
                                                                                                                                                               332
                                                                                                                                                             480
                                                                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                                            480
                                                                                                                                                             531 590
                                                                                                                                                                  615
                                                                                                                                                                493
                                                                                                                                                              295
                                                                                                                                                              320715280
                                                                                                                                                                  240710
                                                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                                                      715 590
                                                                                                                                                                          710
                                                                                                                                                                        710
                                                                                                                                                                      710
                                                                                                                                                                      710  340
                                                                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                                                                        710   590
                                                                                                                                                                               280
                                                                                                                                                                                628
                                                                                                                                                                                  590
                                                                                                                                                                                   288
                                                                                                                                                                                     590
                                                                                                                                                                                    288 288288
                                                                                                                                                                                         590  590
                                                                                                                                                                                            288 592            592       592
                                                                                           430
                                                                                            430458    458
                                                                                                    535535
                                                                                                      704 401
                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                          401
                                                                                                          696 592696
                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                  172172
                                                                                                                    428
                                                                                                                     250
                                                                                                                    265365
                                                                                                                       615 615
                                                                                                                            265
                                                                                                                          615
                                                                                                                          444
                                                                                                                         172    345
                                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                                                200  172
                                                                                                                                   272
                                                                                                                                   179 243
                                                                                                                                       365
                                                                                                                                     242  426
                                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                                          174
                                                                                                                                          295
                                                                                                                                        365
                                                                                                                                         614
                                                                                                                                          346
                                                                                                                                          371
                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                        426
                                                                                                                                        577  691
                                                                                                                                           340
                                                                                                                                           691
                                                                                                                                         295 70
                                                                                                                                            365200
                                                                                                                                             174
                                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                                             577 577
                                                                                                                                                174 332
                                                                                                                                                   413
                                                                                                                                                  444
                                                                                                                                                   413  350
                                                                                                                                                      162
                                                                                                                                                      361
                                                                                                                                                      413
                                                                                                                                                      413   480
                                                                                                                                                              413
                                                                                                                                                            413
                                                                                                                                                            480  615
                                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                                346
                                                                                                                                                                 413
                                                                                                                                                                320413
                                                                                                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                                                               296   295
                                                                                                                                                                    240  628
                                                                                                                                                                         413
                                                                                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                                                                                         413 413  340 340
                                                                                                                                                                                 413
                                                                                   430 430    458
                                                                                                    458  530
                                                                                                        401
                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                       704
                                                                                                     696 401    592
                                                                                                               428
                                                                                                                250250 365444200
                                                                                                                            426444
                                                                                                                             592
                                                                                                                            444
                                                                                                                            242   242
                                                                                                                                243
                                                                                                                              614
                                                                                                                              70   70200
                                                                                                                                   614
                                                                                                                                   345295
                                                                                                                                       522
                                                                                                                                      179243
                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                         691
                                                                                                                                        691
                                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                                       691
                                                                                                                                      522
                                                                                                                                     272
                                                                                                                                     691   371
                                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                                              444
                                                                                                                                             346
                                                                                                                                               365
                                                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                                                             577
                                                                                                                                             444
                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                                                            577
                                                                                                                                            444
                                                                                                                                          332
                                                                                                                                                   332
                                                                                                                                                 365  365 11
                                                                                                                                                      11240
                                                                                                                                                     628    477
                                                                                                                                                             628
                                                                                                                                                             240
                                                                                                                                                            531
                                                                                                                                                           480
                                                                                                                                                            320
                                                                                                                                                            480346
                                                                                                                                                              240
                                                                                                                                                                477615
                                                                                                                                                                  296 350
                                                                                                                                                                    477         340
                                                                                                                                                                               592340 350
                                                                                              458
                                                                                              704      530
                                                                                                     265  401
                                                                                                        401     428
                                                                                                                426  426
                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                    614
                                                                                                                     242
                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                     7070
                                                                                                                      70  200
                                                                                                                        243 70
                                                                                                                            243444
                                                                                                                                691
                                                                                                                                444691
                                                                                                                                 200  522
                                                                                                                                     345
                                                                                                                                     691
                                                                                                                                     577
                                                                                                                                   691   295
                                                                                                                                        592371
                                                                                                                                         444112
                                                                                                                                          444
                                                                                                                                         444
                                                                                                                                          577531346
                                                                                                                                                 162
                                                                                                                                                 371       480
                                                                                                                                                         531   320
                                                                                                                                                              480 477592
                                                                                                                                                                   615
                                                                                                                                                                     477
                                                                                 458 458458 704
                                                                                      265         704
                                                                                                   696
                                                                                                 265
                                                                                                 614
                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                      530
                                                                                                      250
                                                                                                      614
                                                                                                     426
                                                                                                    428
                                                                                                      530
                                                                                                         401
                                                                                                       614426
                                                                                                          428303
                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                             242
                                                                                                             243
                                                                                                                614
                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                                 243
                                                                                                                  243
                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                365
                                                                                                                     365
                                                                                                                   242243
                                                                                                                    243
                                                                                                                     696
                                                                                                                     696
                                                                                                                    332 70
                                                                                                                       696  70
                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                   522
                                                                                                                                 444
                                                                                                                               444444
                                                                                                                                  179
                                                                                                                                162  200
                                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                                 600
                                                                                                                                   522
                                                                                                                                  162
                                                                                                                                  522444
                                                                                                                                     272444
                                                                                                                                      628345
                                                                                                                                       300
                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                            628
                                                                                                                                            332
                                                                                                                                          371
                                                                                                                                          112
                                                                                                                                        345531
                                                                                                                                           11211
                                                                                                                                               371
                                                                                                                                                     592
                                                                                                                                                   361
                                                                                                                                                 240
                                                                                                                                                 371346 531592
                                                                                                                                                           320480
                                                                                                                                                              346
                                                                                                                                                            240
                                                                                                                                                            320
                                                                                                                                                                  320
                                                                                                                                                                 296
                                                                                                                                                                346
                                                                                                                                                               296     477                            350     350 350
                                                                                        265  265
                                                                                              426
                                                                                            614  696  530
                                                                                                    250  332242  628            70
                                                                                                                                60070 11 112
                                                                                                                                 522                320
                                                                                                                                                   240531 346296477                                                         350350
                                                                                    614
                                                                                  614265 614426426
                                                                                             303
                                                                                               428 242
                                                                                                   628
                                                                                                     428
                                                                                                     250                        522
                                                                                                                              52211 240300
                                                                                                                                        11270345
                                                                                                                                               240
                                                                                                                                                345  320                 477
                                                                                  628 426628  428
                                                                                           242250
                                                                                           332
                                                                                                  332
                                                                                                696250
                                                                                                 242  242        365        11600112300
                                                                                                                                       272
                                                                                                                                       272
                                                                                                                                          240345
                                                                                                                                               34570346346    296
                                                                                                                                                            296 296        477
                                                                                                                                                                            477
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  350
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   350 350
                                                                        628                                                            272272 345
                                                                                                                                               361       346
                                                        628    628628         332 303        250             11
                                                                                                                  11           300
                                                                                                                              600          272
                                                                                                                                           361272 272
                                                                                                                                                272272
                                                                                                                                                    272346
                                                  628                     332332
                                                                               303       250250        11     365302302 302 112
                                                                                                                        302      302 302
                                                                                                                               300       361302 272 302 302302
                                                                            332
                                                                       332 303           250       11302        302 112300    600
                                                                       303                302
                                                                                           11
                                                                                         302                 365 112112  300 300 361
                                                                   303                    11302
                                                                                         302
                                                                                        302
                                                                                         11
                                                                                            11302                              600361
-.5




                                                                 303               11 302          302             361
                                                                                                                    361         361
                                                                                                                              361
                                                              303                                                      361361    600
                                                        303                             302
                                                                                                                                   600 600
                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                        600
                                                                                                                                      600
                                                                                                                                        600600



                                            -.1                                  -.05                         0                .05                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                Potential Market Size Residual

                                                                                           Residuals                                                         Fitted values




                                                                                                                                 48
                                                                                                                Figure 3c.
Residuals from regression of ln                                      NitALL                ^ it
                                                                                     on ln K                   , ln MitOBESIT Y ; and Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects vs.
residuals from regression of ln MitAGIN G on ln K^ it , ln M OBESIT Y ; and Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects
                                                            it
                                              for all 127 diseases.



                                                                                   Residuals for All Diseases
                                                                                                                                                                                              734
                  1
                                                                                                            700
                                                                                                                  700

                                                                                                                            700 700
                                                                                                                         700                                3434
                                                                                                              700                                                    34
                                                                                                                                                              332                              75
                                                                                                  314                  487
       All Research Residual




                                                                           684                                             562                     301    715                                                    734
                                                                                                                    700      536536                          332705
                                                                                                                                250455 735 34 332                                               75
                         .5




                                                                                          314314                        562 536250                           332 705
                                                                                                                                                                 332
                                                                                                                                                                705 332
                                                                                                  314
                                                                                                    314                   562
                                                                                                                           428250                             715
                                                                                                                                                             332550                       463   734
                                                                                                       680             562428   455
                                                                                                                               536  455 27434                                                                       132
                                                                                            314 680   680               562
                                                                                                                      526536
                                                                                                                         562
                                                                                                                           428 250265
                                                                                                                              536   265          734
                                                                                                                                            301301461715         550                             463
                               299                                                   617 737          314 54 132    487 536
                                                                                                                          735
                                                                                                                           726
                                                                                                                           562    455
                                                                                                                                574
                                                                                                                                       301272
                                                                                                                                      700
                                                                                                                                    691
                                                                                                                                     36548775715 737     705 332
                                                                                                                                                       464        680           34 75           75
                                   299     299 299                                     52 617617 734680511
                                                                                                      511     132
                                                                                                              54132        428 380
                                                                                                                              250
                                                                                                                              735
                                                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                                                574  536
                                                                                                                                      531
                                                                                                                                      466
                                                                                                                                    455
                                                                                                                                   455     595
                                                                                                                                         493
                                                                                                                                          301
                                                                                                                                                 715
                                                                                                                                               461
                                                                                                                                                272715    705
                                                                                                                                                        735  705
                                                                                                                                                            75
                                                                                                                                                               464
                                                                                                                                                               550705700
                                                                                                                                                                       75
                                                                                                                                                                      690  75 734 75 698    37275 463
                                       299                               617 343                        314
                                                                                                       680 700 54132
                                                                                                              526
                                                                                                              133  132 230302302
                                                                                                                           536
                                                                                                                            230 302
                                                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                                                367
                                                                                                                                592
                                                                                                                                 681
                                                                                                                               380
                                                                                                                                592
                                                                                                                                 455132
                                                                                                                                     380
                                                                                                                                     691  414
                                                                                                                                        493
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                        531 272280
                                                                                                                                          735     703
                                                                                                                                                   511
                                                                                                                                                     722461  371332
                                                                                                                                                              735
                                                                                                                                                                684
                                                                                                                                                                 705 34110372      70         372
                                                                                                                                                                                              75372 463                               70
                                                                                         343       700 314     296610  562 302
                                                                                                                           367
                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                             302
                                                                                                                             303  365
                                                                                                                                  380
                                                                                                                                 487
                                                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                                                592   531
                                                                                                                                      696737
                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                       493
                                                                                                                                       531
                                                                                                                                       466 414
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                         493  272 280
                                                                                                                                                 735464
                                                                                                                                                  737  705
                                                                                                                                                        461
                                                                                                                                                          530
                                                                                                                                                        722680550332
                                                                                                                                                               332                 110
                                                                            343617                        296133
                                                                                                              133
                                                                                                            132
                                                                                                           49254
                                                                                                               511     511
                                                                                                                     610   302 428
                                                                                                                             367
                                                                                                                             704
                                                                                                                              250
                                                                                                                              250428
                                                                                                                                250
                                                                                                                                 681
                                                                                                                               230574
                                                                                                                                   574
                                                                                                                                  610 493
                                                                                                                                      295
                                                                                                                                      295
                                                                                                                                    265
                                                                                                                                     380
                                                                                                                                    368  274
                                                                                                                                         274
                                                                                                                                       295 27470477
                                                                                                                                              715
                                                                                                                                                590
                                                                                                                                                477
                                                                                                                                               454
                                                                                                                                               691
                                                                                                                                               464    528 737
                                                                                                                                                        461
                                                                                                                                                         530
                                                                                                                                                        461
                                                                                                                                                       461375
                                                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                                                          454
                                                                                                                                                           520 698
                                                                                                                                                             550
                                                                                                                                                               722
                                                                                                                                                              550   698           69875
                                                                                                                                                                                     698 75
                                                                                                                                                                                         698                   684                 70
                                                                           52                    296
                                                                                                   296  511
                                                                                                       734  314
                                                                                                             302
                                                                                                            610
                                                                                                          526   700
                                                                                                                  54
                                                                                                                 54    735487
                                                                                                                        610
                                                                                                                          373
                                                                                                                        296
                                                                                                                       487 230
                                                                                                                           511
                                                                                                                            230 250
                                                                                                                               250
                                                                                                                              230
                                                                                                                               367365
                                                                                                                                 592
                                                                                                                                  617
                                                                                                                                230368
                                                                                                                                 592
                                                                                                                                 511
                                                                                                                                  380  295
                                                                                                                                      265274
                                                                                                                                         531
                                                                                                                                         715
                                                                                                                                         272
                                                                                                                                          34
                                                                                                                                        430
                                                                                                                                        295
                                                                                                                                      112  461
                                                                                                                                         531
                                                                                                                                       265
                                                                                                                                     574
                                                                                                                                       600493
                                                                                                                                        460413112
                                                                                                                                              279
                                                                                                                                             600 464
                                                                                                                                               590280
                                                                                                                                                 280
                                                                                                                                                  272174
                                                                                                                                                      174
                                                                                                                                                     530
                                                                                                                                                    680
                                                                                                                                                   332
                                                                                                                                                    461279
                                                                                                                                                       530
                                                                                                                                                      174  550
                                                                                                                                                         726
                                                                                                                                                         684 617332
                                                                                                                                                              371 332
                                                                                                                                                                464
                                                                                                                                                                 617200
                                                                                                                                                                     381
                                                                                                                                                                   700  372372  53
                                                                                                                                                                                 34   372
                                                                                                                                                                                    698
                                                                                                                                                                                     171  372           463 684
                                                                52               52               511  296 110
                                                                                                           680 610
                                                                                                                734
                                                                                                              302
                                                                                                              162
                                                                                                                110296
                                                                                                                  52653
                                                                                                                   511
                                                                                                                    54
                                                                                                                  110  735
                                                                                                                       361
                                                                                                                     162    361
                                                                                                                             610681
                                                                                                                               367
                                                                                                                              367
                                                                                                                              375
                                                                                                                             296    696
                                                                                                                                     380
                                                                                                                                    691
                                                                                                                                   536
                                                                                                                                   368 684
                                                                                                                                     681
                                                                                                                                     460
                                                                                                                                     487
                                                                                                                                     493
                                                                                                                                      531274
                                                                                                                                          531
                                                                                                                                         531
                                                                                                                                        493
                                                                                                                                        386
                                                                                                                                         430
                                                                                                                                         487
                                                                                                                                        430
                                                                                                                                        536
                                                                                                                                       708
                                                                                                                                      380
                                                                                                                                        274
                                                                                                                                         461 710
                                                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                                                           526
                                                                                                                                            430
                                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                            413
                                                                                                                                           703
                                                                                                                                            527 477
                                                                                                                                               600430
                                                                                                                                                430  174
                                                                                                                                                      461
                                                                                                                                                    371
                                                                                                                                                      530
                                                                                                                                                      454
                                                                                                                                                      174
                                                                                                                                                      460
                                                                                                                                                      530 381
                                                                                                                                                         454
                                                                                                                                                           70315
                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                                                              550
                                                                                                                                                             464
                                                                                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                                                               737200492
                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                  300          171
                                                                                                                                                                                 520520
                                                                                                                                                                                    171      53463
                                                                                                                                                                                                684            684              70
                                                                         684
                                                                            684 684
                                                                                       343 296       617511  133
                                                                                                           610133
                                                                                                              346
                                                                                                              133617
                                                                                                               301
                                                                                                                     386
                                                                                                                    680
                                                                                                                    577
                                                                                                                  389
                                                                                                                       302
                                                                                                                      54  373
                                                                                                                           302
                                                                                                                         367162
                                                                                                                           52
                                                                                                                          704
                                                                                                                        562
                                                                                                                          373
                                                                                                                          303
                                                                                                                           373
                                                                                                                         726
                                                                                                                       708162 367
                                                                                                                              454
                                                                                                                              272
                                                                                                                            726
                                                                                                                            303
                                                                                                                                 455
                                                                                                                                 735
                                                                                                                                 345
                                                                                                                                272
                                                                                                                                681
                                                                                                                               722
                                                                                                                               380
                                                                                                                               162230
                                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                                     371
                                                                                                                                   279
                                                                                                                                   466
                                                                                                                                 386
                                                                                                                                  250 536
                                                                                                                                      617
                                                                                                                                      691
                                                                                                                                    466
                                                                                                                                    681
                                                                                                                                      715
                                                                                                                                    466
                                                                                                                                    386
                                                                                                                                  681
                                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                                  526
                                                                                                                                         715
                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                       272
                                                                                                                                       560
                                                                                                                                       466
                                                                                                                                     493
                                                                                                                                     493
                                                                                                                                   681
                                                                                                                                    428
                                                                                                                                          560
                                                                                                                                          710
                                                                                                                                           710
                                                                                                                                         464
                                                                                                                                           531
                                                                                                                                          696
                                                                                                                                          595
                                                                                                                                        375
                                                                                                                                          480
                                                                                                                                          265
                                                                                                                                           691
                                                                                                                                         710
                                                                                                                                         487
                                                                                                                                         722
                                                                                                                                          414
                                                                                                                                          430
                                                                                                                                          493
                                                                                                                                           430
                                                                                                                                          279
                                                                                                                                           414
                                                                                                                                           413
                                                                                                                                               386
                                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                                               455
                                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                                             430
                                                                                                                                            413
                                                                                                                                             288
                                                                                                                                           617
                                                                                                                                            386590
                                                                                                                                              296
                                                                                                                                              477
                                                                                                                                            715
                                                                                                                                             11703
                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                                617
                                                                                                                                               230
                                                                                                                                               531
                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                 279
                                                                                                                                                  371615
                                                                                                                                                     174
                                                                                                                                                   174
                                                                                                                                                  530 615
                                                                                                                                                    430
                                                                                                                                                    696
                                                                                                                                                   375
                                                                                                                                                  480
                                                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                                                    174
                                                                                                                                                  280
                                                                                                                                                          340
                                                                                                                                                        617
                                                                                                                                                        300
                                                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                                                                        511
                                                                                                                                                      530
                                                                                                                                                      615
                                                                                                                                                           340
                                                                                                                                                          34
                                                                                                                                                        708
                                                                                                                                                        527  200
                                                                                                                                                            371
                                                                                                                                                            340
                                                                                                                                                             550389
                                                                                                                                                               296
                                                                                                                                                              375
                                                                                                                                                                464680
                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                                                  340  70463
                                                                                                                                                                      240
                                                                                                                                                                      34
                                                                                                                                                                       520
                                                                                                                                                                       296
                                                                                                                                                                     300
                                                                                                                                                                           171
                                                                                                                                                                           690
                                                                                                                                                                           34
                                                                                                                                                                           296
                                                                                                                                                                           520171
                                                                                                                                                                               520
                                                                                                                                                                                 171
                                                                                                                                                                                   34
                                                                                                                                                                                   520 698 75
                                                                                                                                                                                      527
                                                                                                                                                                                     171            46370    607     70 70 70 70
                                                                           684      343 53 52   6075368052617492
                                                                                                            301 680
                                                                                                              302
                                                                                                              610
                                                                                                                     132
                                                                                                                   302386
                                                                                                                    303
                                                                                                                    577527
                                                                                                                         526
                                                                                                                       171
                                                                                                                       615
                                                                                                                            460
                                                                                                                          726
                                                                                                                         303
                                                                                                                          704
                                                                                                                           527
                                                                                                                          373
                                                                                                                        366
                                                                                                                        617386
                                                                                                                           373
                                                                                                                           346
                                                                                                                         492
                                                                                                                              365
                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                              527
                                                                                                                            704
                                                                                                                                 373
                                                                                                                                  466
                                                                                                                                 361
                                                                                                                                367
                                                                                                                                681301
                                                                                                                                   691
                                                                                                                                 592
                                                                                                                                   592
                                                                                                                                   368
                                                                                                                                 401
                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                272
                                                                                                                                574
                                                                                                                              487
                                                                                                                              367361
                                                                                                                                 380
                                                                                                                                      600
                                                                                                                                    250
                                                                                                                                    243
                                                                                                                                     345
                                                                                                                                    350
                                                                                                                                  162
                                                                                                                                  401  243
                                                                                                                                     444
                                                                                                                                   361
                                                                                                                                   734276
                                                                                                                                    600526
                                                                                                                                       243
                                                                                                                                       428
                                                                                                                                      480
                                                                                                                                      380
                                                                                                                                    527
                                                                                                                                      363
                                                                                                                                      493
                                                                                                                                    243
                                                                                                                                  458272
                                                                                                                                    250
                                                                                                                                    375
                                                                                                                                     380
                                                                                                                                          458
                                                                                                                                        230
                                                                                                                                        426
                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                        274414
                                                                                                                                         242
                                                                                                                                          162
                                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                                          477
                                                                                                                                         288
                                                                                                                                        243
                                                                                                                                        691
                                                                                                                                       274242
                                                                                                                                        380
                                                                                                                                             461
                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                           680200
                                                                                                                                            288112
                                                                                                                                             413
                                                                                                                                             487
                                                                                                                                               737
                                                                                                                                             703
                                                                                                                                           704
                                                                                                                                           464
                                                                                                                                            710
                                                                                                                                              480
                                                                                                                                            350
                                                                                                                                          243413
                                                                                                                                             726
                                                                                                                                              691
                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                            477
                                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                                              590
                                                                                                                                            414  288
                                                                                                                                               511527
                                                                                                                                                477
                                                                                                                                                288
                                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                                681
                                                                                                                                               401
                                                                                                                                               531
                                                                                                                                                      171
                                                                                                                                                      550
                                                                                                                                                    315
                                                                                                                                                      528
                                                                                                                                                     574
                                                                                                                                                      366
                                                                                                                                                    460
                                                                                                                                                    574
                                                                                                                                                   279
                                                                                                                                                 288
                                                                                                                                                  174
                                                                                                                                                  288
                                                                                                                                                         371
                                                                                                                                                       574
                                                                                                                                                       332
                                                                                                                                                     681
                                                                                                                                                     615
                                                                                                                                                     704
                                                                                                                                                   300276
                                                                                                                                                     315
                                                                                                                                                          320
                                                                                                                                                           371
                                                                                                                                                          332
                                                                                                                                                          296
                                                                                                                                                        371
                                                                                                                                                      480550
                                                                                                                                                         171
                                                                                                                                                          315   737
                                                                                                                                                              320
                                                                                                                                                              375
                                                                                                                                                               320
                                                                                                                                                              690
                                                                                                                                                            389
                                                                                                                                                             375
                                                                                                                                                             381  53
                                                                                                                                                                375
                                                                                                                                                                 527
                                                                                                                                                                340
                                                                                                                                                                520
                                                                                                                                                              315
                                                                                                                                                              340
                                                                                                                                                            315350  11
                                                                                                                                                                  133
                                                                                                                                                                705240
                                                                                                                                                                     110520
                                                                                                                                                                      171  690
                                                                                                                                                                         110 540527
                                                                                                                                                                            300    34
                                                                                                                                                                                   520
                                                                                                                                                                                   171  5352
                                                                                                                                                                                       110
                                                                                                                                                                                     52296 110
                                                                                                                                                                                            734      607      70
                                                   299    5252 52
                                                                   52   684 737   614
                                                                                             53  343511
                                                                                                   614
                                                                                                     343 492
                                                                                                       607
                                                                                                       301
                                                                                                        700
                                                                                                         607
                                                                                                             610
                                                                                                               610
                                                                                                                389
                                                                                                                381
                                                                                                                53
                                                                                                              110
                                                                                                            614
                                                                                                                   301
                                                                                                                 389
                                                                                                                 628
                                                                                                                  133
                                                                                                                  346
                                                                                                                    110
                                                                                                                    110
                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                        345
                                                                                                                         527
                                                                                                                       708
                                                                                                                      345
                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                       528
                                                                                                                     528
                                                                                                                    684
                                                                                                                    527
                                                                                                                          373
                                                                                                                          726
                                                                                                                        680
                                                                                                                      460
                                                                                                                        562
                                                                                                                        386
                                                                                                                      346
                                                                                                                      527
                                                                                                                        361
                                                                                                                      345
                                                                                                                           528
                                                                                                                          708
                                                                                                                         464
                                                                                                                           366
                                                                                                                               279
                                                                                                                               272
                                                                                                                                607
                                                                                                                              302
                                                                                                                            726
                                                                                                                              295
                                                                                                                            698
                                                                                                                              132
                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                            426
                                                                                                                             230
                                                                                                                              343
                                                                                                                            303
                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                           722
                                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                 560
                                                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                                                 367
                                                                                                                                  401
                                                                                                                                  458
                                                                                                                                  368
                                                                                                                                681
                                                                                                                                 346
                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                             171 380
                                                                                                                                 401
                                                                                                                               303
                                                                                                                               361
                                                                                                                               340
                                                                                                                               340
                                                                                                                                272
                                                                                                                                361
                                                                                                                              373
                                                                                                                               577
                                                                                                                               346
                                                                                                                                     250
                                                                                                                                   361
                                                                                                                                    368
                                                                                                                                    444
                                                                                                                                    243
                                                                                                                                    464
                                                                                                                                  592
                                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                                   708
                                                                                                                                 527
                                                                                                                                 368592
                                                                                                                                     243
                                                                                                                                     179
                                                                                                                                   373
                                                                                                                                   303
                                                                                                                                   466
                                                                                                                                 704
                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                                                386272
                                                                                                                                  366
                                                                                                                                  368
                                                                                                                                  458
                                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                                   386
                                                                                                                                  444
                                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                                  480
                                                                                                                                        296
                                                                                                                                        401
                                                                                                                                      493
                                                                                                                                      363
                                                                                                                                       595
                                                                                                                                        704
                                                                                                                                        715
                                                                                                                                      463
                                                                                                                                      722
                                                                                                                                      535
                                                                                                                                    691
                                                                                                                                    691426
                                                                                                                                       112
                                                                                                                                        696
                                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                        703
                                                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                                                      401
                                                                                                                                      274
                                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                                      461
                                                                                                                                     466
                                                                                                                                    595
                                                                                                                                  540  535
                                                                                                                                     726
                                                                                                                                     303
                                                                                                                                     401
                                                                                                                                    455
                                                                                                                                   735  696
                                                                                                                                      454
                                                                                                                                      522
                                                                                                                                       444
                                                                                                                                       530
                                                                                                                                     361
                                                                                                                                      455
                                                                                                                                       454
                                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                                      288
                                                                                                                                      386
                                                                                                                                           458
                                                                                                                                           413
                                                                                                                                         410
                                                                                                                                         243
                                                                                                                                       461  696
                                                                                                                                          361
                                                                                                                                          276
                                                                                                                                           112
                                                                                                                                          288
                                                                                                                                           413
                                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                        410595
                                                                                                                                         428
                                                                                                                                         302
                                                                                                                                       162
                                                                                                                                       410
                                                                                                                                       735 230
                                                                                                                                         242
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                                        361
                                                                                                                                         522
                                                                                                                                       574
                                                                                                                                       240
                                                                                                                                              288
                                                                                                                                            243
                                                                                                                                            530
                                                                                                                                            536
                                                                                                                                           265
                                                                                                                                           410
                                                                                                                                            279
                                                                                                                                            590
                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                          265
                                                                                                                                           522
                                                                                                                                         274
                                                                                                                                          112
                                                                                                                                          487 300
                                                                                                                                             722
                                                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                         280
                                                                                                                                       345  11595
                                                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                                                            413
                                                                                                                                            560
                                                                                                                                            366
                                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                                           487
                                                                                                                                           276
                                                                                                                                           522
                                                                                                                                                 280
                                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                                               371
                                                                                                                                               280
                                                                                                                                               595
                                                                                                                                               172
                                                                                                                                              708
                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                             414
                                                                                                                                           401 172
                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                             401
                                                                                                                                           590
                                                                                                                                           454
                                                                                                                                            708
                                                                                                                                           265
                                                                                                                                           710
                                                                                                                                          345
                                                                                                                                                  366
                                                                                                                                                 174
                                                                                                                                                560
                                                                                                                                                684
                                                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                                              276
                                                                                                                                            458  162
                                                                                                                                               288
                                                                                                                                             455708
                                                                                                                                                 288
                                                                                                                                               174
                                                                                                                                                 600
                                                                                                                                                 426
                                                                                                                                                 703
                                                                                                                                                 531
                                                                                                                                                 240
                                                                                                                                               458
                                                                                                                                             413710
                                                                                                                                              1124
                                                                                                                                               528
                                                                                                                                             361
                                                                                                                                              52
                                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                                            172 574
                                                                                                                                              530
                                                                                                                                               332
                                                                                                                                               288
                                                                                                                                                     615
                                                                                                                                                     708
                                                                                                                                                    296
                                                                                                                                                     430
                                                                                                                                                     520
                                                                                                                                                     430
                                                                                                                                                   530708
                                                                                                                                                     690
                                                                                                                                                      705
                                                                                                                                                     595
                                                                                                                                                      346
                                                                                                                                                    346
                                                                                                                                                  460
                                                                                                                                                  346
                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                  574
                                                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                                                477
                                                                                                                                                288
                                                                                                                                                460
                                                                                                                                                 531
                                                                                                                                               726
                                                                                                                                                562
                                                                                                                                                276
                                                                                                                                                274   315
                                                                                                                                                      346
                                                                                                                                                     343
                                                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                                     458
                                                                                                                                                    722
                                                                                                                                                      315
                                                                                                                                                      528
                                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                                  704
                                                                                                                                                   698 276
                                                                                                                                                      366
                                                                                                                                                      240
                                                                                                                                                          492
                                                                                                                                                         480
                                                                                                                                                         350 11
                                                                                                                                                            240
                                                                                                                                                          464
                                                                                                                                                          230
                                                                                                                                                         302
                                                                                                                                                               464
                                                                                                                                                              464
                                                                                                                                                               381
                                                                                                                                                               389
                                                                                                                                                             527
                                                                                                                                                             340240
                                                                                                                                                                32011
                                                                                                                                                                  628
                                                                                                                                                                 628
                                                                                                                                                                     240
                                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                                    520
                                                                                                                                                                   372
                                                                                                                                                                       527
                                                                                                                                                                      133
                                                                                                                                                                    628
                                                                                                                                                                     133
                                                                                                                                                                     737
                                                                                                                                                                    11240520
                                                                                                                                                                         698
                                                                                                                                                                       628
                                                                                                                                                                      171
                                                                                                                                                                     628
                                                                                                                                                                      628 53
                                                                                                                                                                         133
                                                                                                                                                                       300
                                                                                                                                                                       73475
                                                                                                                                                                            520
                                                                                                                                                                          690
                                                                                                                                                                          300
                                                                                                                                                                            480
                                                                                                                                                                          240
                                                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                                                                                           527
                                                                                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                                               690
                                                                                                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                                                                             690
                                                                                                                                                                              171
                                                                                                                                                                             34698
                                                                                                                                                                                  296
                                                                                                                                                                                 520
                                                                                                                                                                                 75540
                                                                                                                                                                                  343
                                                                                                                                                                                 463
                                                                                                                                                                                       296
                                                                                                                                                                                        296
                                                                                                                                                                                      296
                                                                                                                                                                                    492      110607 5353
                                                                                                                                                                                             492
                                                                                                                                                                                             70                     53
                                                                    29952       540   614
                                                                                       53
                                                                                       540 614
                                                                                           343
                                                                                           540 690
                                                                                             628
                                                                                             734
                                                                                               540            302
                                                                                                             133
                                                                                                            343
                                                                                                             110   480
                                                                                                                 343
                                                                                                                  52
                                                                                                                   386
                                                                                                                 577   303
                                                                                                                     722
                                                                                                                     375
                                                                                                                   577350
                                                                                                                      350722
                                                                                                                        54
                                                                                                                         346
                                                                                                                       735
                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                     527
                                                                                                                      345
                                                                                                                     350  303
                                                                                                                         460
                                                                                                                         350
                                                                                                                        615
                                                                                                                          373
                                                                                                                          345
                                                                                                                           615
                                                                                                                         345
                                                                                                                        373   272
                                                                                                                              526
                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                              704
                                                                                                                            577
                                                                                                                            373
                                                                                                                             345 363
                                                                                                                                 726
                                                                                                                               279
                                                                                                                              340
                                                                                                                              492
                                                                                                                              560
                                                                                                                                380
                                                                                                                               272
                                                                                                                               350 380
                                                                                                                                    696
                                                                                                                                   466
                                                                                                                                 401
                                                                                                                                  464
                                                                                                                                574
                                                                                                                                708
                                                                                                                               279   230
                                                                                                                                     522
                                                                                                                                   458
                                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                                   367
                                                                                                                                  703
                                                                                                                                   466  458
                                                                                                                                        242
                                                                                                                                      511
                                                                                                                                      250
                                                                                                                                    466
                                                                                                                                    691  708
                                                                                                                                       303
                                                                                                                                     708
                                                                                                                                    401401
                                                                                                                                    363
                                                                                                                                    696
                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                    562
                                                                                                                                  460363
                                                                                                                                   410    426
                                                                                                                                        522
                                                                                                                                      710
                                                                                                                                      179
                                                                                                                                        628
                                                                                                                                        332242
                                                                                                                                         243
                                                                                                                                         595
                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                        350
                                                                                                                                         300
                                                                                                                                       455
                                                                                                                                       275  112
                                                                                                                                          703
                                                                                                                                            295
                                                                                                                                            240
                                                                                                                                            371
                                                                                                                                          577
                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                        595
                                                                                                                                      477    614
                                                                                                                                           592
                                                                                                                                           522
                                                                                                                                           535
                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                                                         454
                                                                                                                                          703
                                                                                                                                         590
                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                           426  528
                                                                                                                                              279
                                                                                                                                                444
                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                              53
                                                                                                                                               696
                                                                                                                                             172
                                                                                                                                              280
                                                                                                                                              444
                                                                                                                                            345
                                                                                                                                            275
                                                                                                                                             112
                                                                                                                                             560
                                                                                                                                            172
                                                                                                                                            522
                                                                                                                                             414
                                                                                                                                           428    350
                                                                                                                                                 454
                                                                                                                                                 288
                                                                                                                                                530
                                                                                                                                                  595
                                                                                                                                                174
                                                                                                                                                112
                                                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                                               704
                                                                                                                                               361
                                                                                                                                             112455
                                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                              590 531276
                                                                                                                                                     454
                                                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                                                   363
                                                                                                                                                   528
                                                                                                                                                 44443011
                                                                                                                                                       375
                                                                                                                                                     179
                                                                                                                                                     528
                                                                                                                                                     346
                                                                                                                                                   365
                                                                                                                                                 381
                                                                                                                                                 708
                                                                                                                                                  540   614
                                                                                                                                                      528
                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                                                    179
                                                                                                                                                     340
                                                                                                                                                   240
                                                                                                                                                    389
                                                                                                                                                      179162
                                                                                                                                                         11 705
                                                                                                                                                           389
                                                                                                                                                         340
                                                                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                                                                           480 162
                                                                                                                                                             464
                                                                                                                                                              389
                                                                                                                                                               11320
                                                                                                                                                                 150
                                                                                                                                                               240
                                                                                                                                                               389
                                                                                                                                                              372320
                                                                                                                                                                240
                                                                                                                                                                 11320
                                                                                                                                                                   617
                                                                                                                                                                 381
                                                                                                                                                                 375
                                                                                                                                                               389  350
                                                                                                                                                                  480
                                                                                                                                                                 320
                                                                                                                                                               110  540
                                                                                                                                                                    690240
                                                                                                                                                                     614
                                                                                                                                                                     700
                                                                                                                                                                       345
                                                                                                                                                                        300
                                                                                                                                                                       350
                                                                                                                                                                       540   690
                                                                                                                                                                           381343
                                                                                                                                                                             698
                                                                                                                                                                           350 296343
                                                                                                                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                                                                                110 296296  607
                                                                                                                                                                                          698 463
                                                                                                                                                                                          684    53 734 607
                                                                                                                                                                                                        492 53        52
                                                          299 52               628       737463614698526  492
                                                                                                        690    314
                                                                                                                133
                                                                                                              389
                                                                                                            607 528 560
                                                                                                                  381
                                                                                                                   375389
                                                                                                                    527
                                                                                                                     179
                                                                                                                      345
                                                                                                                    560
                                                                                                                      350
                                                                                                                      132
                                                                                                                      303
                                                                                                                      708340
                                                                                                                        560
                                                                                                                          340
                                                                                                                          615
                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                        303  346
                                                                                                                           560
                                                                                                                           726
                                                                                                                           381
                                                                                                                         301
                                                                                                                         179
                                                                                                                         708
                                                                                                                           704300
                                                                                                                            350371
                                                                                                                             426
                                                                                                                             615426
                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                                               54600
                                                                                                                                735
                                                                                                                               346
                                                                                                                               574
                                                                                                                              614279696
                                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                                  381
                                                                                                                                698  595
                                                                                                                                   454
                                                                                                                                   150458
                                                                                                                                    715
                                                                                                                                    133
                                                                                                                                    590
                                                                                                                                    243
                                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                                  722
                                                                                                                                  346
                                                                                                                                444
                                                                                                                                 363   493
                                                                                                                                     703
                                                                                                                                     466
                                                                                                                                     380
                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                   363
                                                                                                                                   715  461
                                                                                                                                      150
                                                                                                                                     466
                                                                                                                                    681
                                                                                                                                      280
                                                                                                                                    275  592
                                                                                                                                         444
                                                                                                                                         320
                                                                                                                                       279
                                                                                                                                       477
                                                                                                                                       487
                                                                                                                                     590
                                                                                                                                     410
                                                                                                                                   346    560
                                                                                                                                         535
                                                                                                                                         150
                                                                                                                                         179
                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                      698
                                                                                                                                      363365
                                                                                                                                        477
                                                                                                                                        560
                                                                                                                                       373
                                                                                                                                        595
                                                                                                                                      410
                                                                                                                                      381
                                                                                                                                       592
                                                                                                                                     363710
                                                                                                                                         171
                                                                                                                                       346  373
                                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                                             172
                                                                                                                                           172
                                                                                                                                           536
                                                                                                                                         455
                                                                                                                                         595444
                                                                                                                                          410
                                                                                                                                            363
                                                                                                                                            703
                                                                                                                                          540
                                                                                                                                          303280
                                                                                                                                            265
                                                                                                                                            413
                                                                                                                                           179
                                                                                                                                           413
                                                                                                                                         242
                                                                                                                                         458174 279
                                                                                                                                                372
                                                                                                                                              703
                                                                                                                                              428
                                                                                                                                               444
                                                                                                                                              426
                                                                                                                                            280
                                                                                                                                            522
                                                                                                                                             112
                                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                                            112375
                                                                                                                                               430
                                                                                                                                             535
                                                                                                                                             444
                                                                                                                                              367
                                                                                                                                              373363
                                                                                                                                               274
                                                                                                                                               444
                                                                                                                                             174274
                                                                                                                                                426
                                                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                                                              275
                                                                                                                                              179  454
                                                                                                                                                 150
                                                                                                                                                 426
                                                                                                                                               477
                                                                                                                                             276
                                                                                                                                             345
                                                                                                                                             112   276
                                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                                  703
                                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                                  444
                                                                                                                                                  366 460
                                                                                                                                                      615
                                                                                                                                                      279
                                                                                                                                                    276
                                                                                                                                                    368133
                                                                                                                                                     401
                                                                                                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                                    366  628
                                                                                                                                                       708315
                                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                                       381
                                                                                                                                                     615  628
                                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                                        607
                                                                                                                                                      179
                                                                                                                                                        230
                                                                                                                                                        240
                                                                                                                                                        680
                                                                                                                                                         698  735
                                                                                                                                                               722
                                                                                                                                                             389
                                                                                                                                                           320
                                                                                                                                                            577366
                                                                                                                                                             492
                                                                                                                                                             628
                                                                                                                                                             320
                                                                                                                                                           240
                                                                                                                                                           11 607
                                                                                                                                                            389
                                                                                                                                                             614
                                                                                                                                                            389366
                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                                                               680
                                                                                                                                                             162  240
                                                                                                                                                                480
                                                                                                                                                              520   463
                                                                                                                                                                  320
                                                                                                                                                                   320 690
                                                                                                                                                                        480
                                                                                                                                                                      628
                                                                                                                                                                      133
                                                                                                                                                                      617
                                                                                                                                                                      614
                                                                                                                                                                       314
                                                                                                                                                                      381690
                                                                                                                                                                          480
                                                                                                                                                                           540
                                                                                                                                                                           684350  343
                                                                                                                                                                                     110
                                                                                                                                                                                   350
                                                                                                                                                                                  560 132
                                                                                                                                                                                       607 386
                 0




                                                        463 463 463 540        299540628
                                                                                    737 690    734 511
                                                                                                     540110
                                                                                                      301 53366
                                                                                                          492
                                                                                                         315    110
                                                                                                               366
                                                                                                              301
                                                                                                               705
                                                                                                             722  381
                                                                                                                 480492
                                                                                                                  607
                                                                                                                 577
                                                                                                                   366
                                                                                                                   389
                                                                                                                 610480
                                                                                                                  528
                                                                                                                 607
                                                                                                                  11   560
                                                                                                                       350
                                                                                                                     301
                                                                                                                      527
                                                                                                                     460200
                                                                                                                      366
                                                                                                                      614
                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                    381381
                                                                                                                     366 607
                                                                                                                         340
                                                                                                                        381 345
                                                                                                                           560
                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                           610366
                                                                                                                              454
                                                                                                                              363
                                                                                                                             726
                                                                                                                            179
                                                                                                                           464
                                                                                                                          460  426
                                                                                                                               320
                                                                                                                             454
                                                                                                                             560600
                                                                                                                              279
                                                                                                                             53
                                                                                                                             480
                                                                                                                              346
                                                                                                                             464
                                                                                                                               454 466
                                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                 320691
                                                                                                                                  363
                                                                                                                                  240
                                                                                                                                   368
                                                                                                                                   300
                                                                                                                                   295
                                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                  614
                                                                                                                                365
                                                                                                                                  703
                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                    426
                                                                                                                                    477
                                                                                                                                  528
                                                                                                                                  375
                                                                                                                                132
                                                                                                                                295    464
                                                                                                                                     592
                                                                                                                                     600
                                                                                                                                     691
                                                                                                                                   302
                                                                                                                                     696
                                                                                                                                   371
                                                                                                                                   615
                                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                                    477
                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                                     279
                                                                                                                                   171  179
                                                                                                                                      493
                                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                                    530
                                                                                                                                    610
                                                                                                                                   363   250
                                                                                                                                       710
                                                                                                                                       274
                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                    410   530
                                                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                                                          703
                                                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                                                         90
                                                                                                                                        242
                                                                                                                                        590
                                                                                                                                      458
                                                                                                                                      595
                                                                                                                                      363
                                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                                       371
                                                                                                                                       614
                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                       280
                                                                                                                                      466  444
                                                                                                                                          295
                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                          274
                                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                                                        535
                                                                                                                                      413   414
                                                                                                                                           275
                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                         276
                                                                                                                                       681  303
                                                                                                                                            535
                                                                                                                                          250
                                                                                                                                          595
                                                                                                                                          280
                                                                                                                                        363
                                                                                                                                        466522
                                                                                                                                         413
                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                         574
                                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                                         288
                                                                                                                                         274
                                                                                                                                         536
                                                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                                                         373
                                                                                                                                       493
                                                                                                                                       600174
                                                                                                                                        174    477
                                                                                                                                             367
                                                                                                                                             455
                                                                                                                                             426
                                                                                                                                            522
                                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                                             172
                                                                                                                                           535
                                                                                                                                            592
                                                                                                                                            265
                                                                                                                                            487
                                                                                                                                           460
                                                                                                                                         710
                                                                                                                                          371
                                                                                                                                           410  536
                                                                                                                                                373
                                                                                                                                                710
                                                                                                                                              345
                                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                                            288
                                                                                                                                              444
                                                                                                                                            150  386
                                                                                                                                               171
                                                                                                                                               428
                                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                                             414  295
                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                                                                426
                                                                                                                                                 463
                                                                                                                                                 340
                                                                                                                                                454
                                                                                                                                              710179
                                                                                                                                               528
                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                               366
                                                                                                                                               275
                                                                                                                                               528
                                                                                                                                               179
                                                                                                                                             410
                                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                                             315
                                                                                                                                             381    726
                                                                                                                                                    574
                                                                                                                                                  628
                                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                                 444
                                                                                                                                                  430
                                                                                                                                                690
                                                                                                                                                722
                                                                                                                                                320
                                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                              265
                                                                                                                                              710
                                                                                                                                               276
                                                                                                                                                444
                                                                                                                                              487
                                                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                                                               526   179
                                                                                                                                                    574
                                                                                                                                                   1735
                                                                                                                                                    430
                                                                                                                                                   708
                                                                                                                                                    368
                                                                                                                                                  401
                                                                                                                                                 368
                                                                                                                                                 430 303363
                                                                                                                                                      528
                                                                                                                                                      737
                                                                                                                                                        315
                                                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                                                      628
                                                                                                                                                      492
                                                                                                                                                        340
                                                                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                                                                     363
                                                                                                                                                     79
                                                                                                                                                     577
                                                                                                                                                       315  345
                                                                                                                                                          540
                                                                                                                                                        320  577
                                                                                                                                                           735
                                                                                                                                                           577
                                                                                                                                                          577
                                                                                                                                                           722526
                                                                                                                                                            577
                                                                                                                                                            704 150
                                                                                                                                                              511
                                                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                                                              380
                                                                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                            363  690
                                                                                                                                                               162
                                                                                                                                                               320
                                                                                                                                                                 375
                                                                                                                                                               562  628
                                                                                                                                                                   562
                                                                                                                                                                   614
                                                                                                                                                                  511 614
                                                                                                                                                                    520
                                                                                                                                                                  299614
                                                                                                                                                                    314
                                                                                                                                                                      480
                                                                                                                                                                       540
                                                                                                                                                                       680
                                                                                                                                                                     480607   540540 343 560 734
                                                                                                                                                                                               299 53463299      607
                                                                                           690
                                                                                             690607
                                                                                                 607734
                                                                                                    628614
                                                                                                      607 70
                                                                                                          301301
                                                                                                              240614
                                                                                                               705
                                                                                                                315
                                                                                                                492 315
                                                                                                                   735
                                                                                                                  480
                                                                                                                  171  200
                                                                                                                       320
                                                                                                                       350
                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                      560
                                                                                                                       480
                                                                                                                       610
                                                                                                                     480
                                                                                                                   301  315
                                                                                                                      492
                                                                                                                        150375
                                                                                                                         300726
                                                                                                                          577735
                                                                                                                            315
                                                                                                                             279
                                                                                                                            615
                                                                                                                            132
                                                                                                                           314
                                                                                                                         389 230574
                                                                                                                              684
                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                                371
                                                                                                                                275
                                                                                                                              179
                                                                                                                              600
                                                                                                                              365
                                                                                                                              615315
                                                                                                                                 272
                                                                                                                               340
                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                             444
                                                                                                                             371    401
                                                                                                                                  371
                                                                                                                                   279
                                                                                                                                    454
                                                                                                                                  363
                                                                                                                                  340
                                                                                                                                 426
                                                                                                                                279
                                                                                                                              628346
                                                                                                                               150   401
                                                                                                                                    477
                                                                                                                                  401
                                                                                                                                  458
                                                                                                                                480 590
                                                                                                                                    560
                                                                                                                                  592
                                                                                                                                  530
                                                                                                                                  577
                                                                                                                                615  410
                                                                                                                                   703
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                   458
                                                                                                                                 562
                                                                                                                                 174
                                                                                                                                 681
                                                                                                                                  615   681
                                                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                                                      274
                                                                                                                                    735  413
                                                                                                                                         426
                                                                                                                                        410
                                                                                                                                        710
                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                     320
                                                                                                                                    275
                                                                                                                                    628288
                                                                                                                                     276
                                                                                                                                     696
                                                                                                                                     373600
                                                                                                                                      389
                                                                                                                                      592  413
                                                                                                                                         112
                                                                                                                                         242
                                                                                                                                       592
                                                                                                                                       365
                                                                                                                                     710
                                                                                                                                      365492
                                                                                                                                         493
                                                                                                                                       174
                                                                                                                                       528
                                                                                                                                       577  112
                                                                                                                                          511
                                                                                                                                          426
                                                                                                                                           375
                                                                                                                                            698
                                                                                                                                          381
                                                                                                                                         477
                                                                                                                                         615
                                                                                                                                       275
                                                                                                                                       274242
                                                                                                                                        288
                                                                                                                                         346
                                                                                                                                       726454 240
                                                                                                                                              295
                                                                                                                                             595
                                                                                                                                             361
                                                                                                                                           466
                                                                                                                                         493
                                                                                                                                         595
                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                          265
                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                           458
                                                                                                                                           595
                                                                                                                                            179
                                                                                                                                             595
                                                                                                                                           615
                                                                                                                                           172
                                                                                                                                           367
                                                                                                                                           315
                                                                                                                                         458    302
                                                                                                                                                710
                                                                                                                                                275
                                                                                                                                              288
                                                                                                                                            414
                                                                                                                                          703
                                                                                                                                           522 610
                                                                                                                                               526
                                                                                                                                             455303
                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                               426
                                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                                               628
                                                                                                                                              528
                                                                                                                                              430   320
                                                                                                                                                  179615
                                                                                                                                                   577
                                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                                 703
                                                                                                                                                 540
                                                                                                                                                 528
                                                                                                                                               455  574
                                                                                                                                                   346
                                                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                                                  458
                                                                                                                                                  361
                                                                                                                                                  531
                                                                                                                                                   345
                                                                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                                                                  531  460
                                                                                                                                                      315
                                                                                                                                                     179 540
                                                                                                                                                       361
                                                                                                                                                     615
                                                                                                                                                   444    734
                                                                                                                                                        361
                                                                                                                                                        303
                                                                                                                                                       372  373
                                                                                                                                                          366
                                                                                                                                                            230
                                                                                                                                                          460
                                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                                       276   320
                                                                                                                                                           600
                                                                                                                                                           150
                                                                                                                                                            577  600
                                                                                                                                                               375
                                                                                                                                                                726
                                                                                                                                                                614
                                                                                                                                                                 705
                                                                                                                                                               375
                                                                                                                                                                366
                                                                                                                                                              681
                                                                                                                                                               540
                                                                                                                                                                 726
                                                                                                                                                                722
                                                                                                                                                               375  617
                                                                                                                                                                   722
                                                                                                                                                                   381614
                                                                                                                                                                      680132
                                                                                                                                                                        381386
                                                                                                                                                                             314  299
                                                                                                                                                                                 492
                                                                                                                                                                                607343  492        492          53
                                                                                     540
                                                                                     690
                                                                                     53 171171698
                                                                                                734
                                                                                              320
                                                                                              11
                                                                                              299  737
                                                                                                    315
                                                                                                     526 301
                                                                                                       301
                                                                                                     366    540
                                                                                                          734
                                                                                                          492   550
                                                                                                               705
                                                                                                               110 240
                                                                                                                   540
                                                                                                                 375
                                                                                                                   276200
                                                                                                                      276
                                                                                                                     610726
                                                                                                                      690
                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                      350
                                                                                                                     314
                                                                                                                     560   444
                                                                                                                         150
                                                                                                                         340
                                                                                                                         133
                                                                                                                         350
                                                                                                                       628  527
                                                                                                                            386
                                                                                                                           460
                                                                                                                            276
                                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                          562
                                                                                                                         150   615
                                                                                                                               172
                                                                                                                               444
                                                                                                                             389
                                                                                                                             240
                                                                                                                              301
                                                                                                                                380
                                                                                                                                 179
                                                                                                                                 530
                                                                                                                                454
                                                                                                                               610
                                                                                                                              365
                                                                                                                              340
                                                                                                                             340
                                                                                                                           628600
                                                                                                                               345  368
                                                                                                                                    696
                                                                                                                                  150
                                                                                                                                  272
                                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                                                  592696
                                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                 295
                                                                                                                                 389
                                                                                                                                 530
                                                                                                                                 574  615
                                                                                                                                    590
                                                                                                                                    295
                                                                                                                                     458
                                                                                                                                      410
                                                                                                                                    172
                                                                                                                                      368
                                                                                                                                      279
                                                                                                                                      413
                                                                                                                                    704
                                                                                                                                    703595
                                                                                                                                     172
                                                                                                                                   295
                                                                                                                                     737
                                                                                                                                     53
                                                                                                                                   280
                                                                                                                                   726
                                                                                                                                   527    522
                                                                                                                                        242
                                                                                                                                      681
                                                                                                                                        413
                                                                                                                                        367
                                                                                                                                        696
                                                                                                                                      288
                                                                                                                                      710
                                                                                                                                    477    560
                                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                                         466
                                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                                       314
                                                                                                                                       265
                                                                                                                                      172
                                                                                                                                      477
                                                                                                                                       477
                                                                                                                                       366  535
                                                                                                                                            368
                                                                                                                                            595
                                                                                                                                            75
                                                                                                                                          528
                                                                                                                                         410
                                                                                                                                         11 426
                                                                                                                                          368
                                                                                                                                          332
                                                                                                                                         345 275
                                                                                                                                             466
                                                                                                                                           274
                                                                                                                                            430
                                                                                                                                          172
                                                                                                                                          279
                                                                                                                                          726
                                                                                                                                        172696
                                                                                                                                         367
                                                                                                                                         592  265
                                                                                                                                            280112
                                                                                                                                          179179
                                                                                                                                           243
                                                                                                                                           368
                                                                                                                                           535
                                                                                                                                            243
                                                                                                                                            528
                                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                                           250    444
                                                                                                                                                 531
                                                                                                                                               179
                                                                                                                                                 444
                                                                                                                                               368
                                                                                                                                               426
                                                                                                                                               628
                                                                                                                                                466
                                                                                                                                                710
                                                                                                                                              426426
                                                                                                                                                 365
                                                                                                                                                 531
                                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                                               536
                                                                                                                                               577
                                                                                                                                              243
                                                                                                                                               428  614
                                                                                                                                                  444
                                                                                                                                                458526
                                                                                                                                                   444
                                                                                                                                                  691 526
                                                                                                                                                    373
                                                                                                                                                     705
                                                                                                                                                     361
                                                                                                                                                   368230
                                                                                                                                                     367
                                                                                                                                                      315
                                                                                                                                                    110
                                                                                                                                                    275
                                                                                                                                                  179
                                                                                                                                                295
                                                                                                                                                365
                                                                                                                                                368550
                                                                                                                                                   295
                                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                                  615   460
                                                                                                                                                        410
                                                                                                                                                      346
                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                      574  389
                                                                                                                                                         460
                                                                                                                                                         708
                                                                                                                                                         53
                                                                                                                                                          577
                                                                                                                                                          690
                                                                                                                                                         346
                                                                                                                                                         361 366
                                                                                                                                                             389
                                                                                                                                                             133
                                                                                                                                                           614
                                                                                                                                                         366
                                                                                                                                                          343 690
                                                                                                                                                               171
                                                                                                                                                             726
                                                                                                                                                              345
                                                                                                                                                            366
                                                                                                                                                            560
                                                                                                                                                            577
                                                                                                                                                            346  722
                                                                                                                                                               162
                                                                                                                                                              704 11
                                                                                                                                                                614722
                                                                                                                                                                 540
                                                                                                                                                                366
                                                                                                                                                                628
                                                                                                                                                               343 737
                                                                                                                                                                 320
                                                                                                                                                               526
                                                                                                                                                               389
                                                                                                                                                                610
                                                                                                                                                               375  133
                                                                                                                                                                   722704600
                                                                                                                                                                       617    690
                                                                                                                                                                             560
                                                                                                                                                                            492
                                                                                                                                                                          381
                                                                                                                                                                          314    540
                                                                                                                                                                               540                         684  299
                                                                                 70 53         315
                                                                                                607
                                                                                                  70690
                                                                                                   320240
                                                                                                    607301
                                                                                                       366
                                                                                                       320389
                                                                                                           607
                                                                                                         389
                                                                                                         700690320
                                                                                                              722
                                                                                                               302
                                                                                                                463 300
                                                                                                                   480
                                                                                                                   386
                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                   610
                                                                                                                 276    150
                                                                                                                      708
                                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                                        350737
                                                                                                                          480
                                                                                                                         726
                                                                                                                       343   527
                                                                                                                             528
                                                                                                                             279
                                                                                                                              11179
                                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                              560
                                                                                                                              600
                                                                                                                             299
                                                                                                                             454
                                                                                                                              460454
                                                                                                                               530
                                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                                                527
                                                                                                                                704
                                                                                                                                530
                                                                                                                               350
                                                                                                                              363  172
                                                                                                                                   401
                                                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                                                   54577
                                                                                                                                     295
                                                                                                                                    590
                                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                                   461
                                                                                                                                 172
                                                                                                                                  372
                                                                                                                                    280
                                                                                                                                  172
                                                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                                                530    295
                                                                                                                                     530
                                                                                                                                   280477
                                                                                                                                      696
                                                                                                                                      590
                                                                                                                                     461
                                                                                                                                     426
                                                                                                                                    590
                                                                                                                                    628
                                                                                                                                    461
                                                                                                                                  461    535
                                                                                                                                         389
                                                                                                                                         590
                                                                                                                                       430
                                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                                       413
                                                                                                                                     710
                                                                                                                                      528
                                                                                                                                      367
                                                                                                                                      691
                                                                                                                                      132
                                                                                                                                       368
                                                                                                                                       54
                                                                                                                                     368
                                                                                                                                   426    371
                                                                                                                                        522
                                                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                                                     595
                                                                                                                                     275
                                                                                                                                      172
                                                                                                                                      535
                                                                                                                                     477   574
                                                                                                                                         455
                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                                                         535
                                                                                                                                       401
                                                                                                                                         681
                                                                                                                                         380
                                                                                                                                        295
                                                                                                                                      680133
                                                                                                                                         522
                                                                                                                                        172
                                                                                                                                      414
                                                                                                                                      343242
                                                                                                                                       607
                                                                                                                                        590
                                                                                                                                        371 535
                                                                                                                                            371
                                                                                                                                           288
                                                                                                                                           703
                                                                                                                                            414
                                                                                                                                            346
                                                                                                                                          600
                                                                                                                                        315    368
                                                                                                                                             426
                                                                                                                                             265
                                                                                                                                           426
                                                                                                                                           455
                                                                                                                                          595
                                                                                                                                           243
                                                                                                                                         610
                                                                                                                                          413 280
                                                                                                                                            522  315
                                                                                                                                                 477
                                                                                                                                               243
                                                                                                                                             577
                                                                                                                                             696
                                                                                                                                               410365
                                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                                 361
                                                                                                                                                 700
                                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                              595
                                                                                                                                            628
                                                                                                                                            466
                                                                                                                                             112 444
                                                                                                                                                703
                                                                                                                                                365
                                                                                                                                                710
                                                                                                                                              368
                                                                                                                                              132    315
                                                                                                                                                   279
                                                                                                                                                   34
                                                                                                                                                 366477
                                                                                                                                                   466
                                                                                                                                                 492
                                                                                                                                                410
                                                                                                                                                 345
                                                                                                                                                 366
                                                                                                                                               243    726
                                                                                                                                                    691
                                                                                                                                                    340
                                                                                                                                                    276
                                                                                                                                                  368
                                                                                                                                                  726
                                                                                                                                                  276
                                                                                                                                                  410
                                                                                                                                                   615
                                                                                                                                                    528  386
                                                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                                       526
                                                                                                                                                       272
                                                                                                                                                      410
                                                                                                                                                       460577
                                                                                                                                                         361
                                                                                                                                                         592
                                                                                                                                                        577 373
                                                                                                                                                          373
                                                                                                                                                           363614
                                                                                                                                                            162
                                                                                                                                                             363
                                                                                                                                                           230
                                                                                                                                                            303
                                                                                                                                                          526
                                                                                                                                                          361
                                                                                                                                                          614
                                                                                                                                                          272
                                                                                                                                                            272480345
                                                                                                                                                                 681
                                                                                                                                                                 560
                                                                                                                                                                386  617
                                                                                                                                                                       680
                                                                                                                                                                      302
                                                                                                                                                                     610
                                                                                                                                                                      737
                                                                                                                                                                    680
                                                                                                                                                                     737 492
                                                                                                                                                                          562 52 540
                                                                                                                                                                               343
                                                                                                                                                                                 314                463 684   52
                                                                                                                                                                                                            684        299
                                                                                                    11240 492 75300
                                                                                                              722      607 444
                                                                                                                         276   174
                                                                                                                                340
                                                                                                                                560
                                                                                                                              365
                                                                                                                                460  430
                                                                                                                                     174
                                                                                                                                     615372
                                                                                                                                      295
                                                                                                                                        265522
                                                                                                                                           380
                                                                                                                                         242681
                                                                                                                                              460
                                                                                                                                            414
                                                                                                                                             705
                                                                                                                                             265
                                                                                                                                             345
                                                                                                                                              574368
                                                                                                                                                  562
                                                                                                                                                389
                                                                                                                                                 454346
                                                                                                                                                     315
                                                                                                                                                   381
                                                                                                                                                   366   410
                                                                                                                                                          380 162
                                                                                                                                                                314
                                                                                                                                                                 614
                                                                                                                                                               375722
                                                                                                                                                                   511
                                                                                                                                                                   704
                                                                                                                                                                    737  54
                                                                            70520
                                                                          520  463 320 320
                                                                                  520
                                                                                          372
                                                                                           70343
                                                                                                 690520
                                                                                                  607
                                                                                                        737
                                                                                                         520
                                                                                                       240
                                                                                                           320
                                                                                                         492315
                                                                                                          171
                                                                                                          381
                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                         492
                                                                                                              381
                                                                                                            734276
                                                                                                               381
                                                                                                                110
                                                                                                              737
                                                                                                              171
                                                                                                            684
                                                                                                           722
                                                                                                             381372
                                                                                                              722
                                                                                                              110
                                                                                                                   375
                                                                                                                    386
                                                                                                                  375162
                                                                                                                    550
                                                                                                                     386
                                                                                                                   460
                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                    375
                                                                                                                    550
                                                                                                                   386
                                                                                                                 520162
                                                                                                                  110
                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                   320
                                                                                                                        704
                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                         528
                                                                                                                         162
                                                                                                                         562
                                                                                                                          464
                                                                                                                          444
                                                                                                                          463
                                                                                                                        240
                                                                                                                          132
                                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                                           34
                                                                                                                             371530
                                                                                                                              600
                                                                                                                              607
                                                                                                                            340530
                                                                                                                              708
                                                                                                                            690279
                                                                                                                               464
                                                                                                                             133
                                                                                                                             371
                                                                                                                            708
                                                                                                                              381
                                                                                                                              600
                                                                                                                             340
                                                                                                                                  560
                                                                                                                                133280
                                                                                                                                  345
                                                                                                                                704
                                                                                                                                  530
                                                                                                                                628
                                                                                                                                 735 280
                                                                                                                                   454
                                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                                    477
                                                                                                                                   715
                                                                                                                                 174703
                                                                                                                                    230
                                                                                                                                  350
                                                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                                                276492
                                                                                                                                  280
                                                                                                                                  288
                                                                                                                                  704
                                                                                                                                 174
                                                                                                                                   34
                                                                                                                                 371
                                                                                                                               430
                                                                                                                               112 574
                                                                                                                                   280
                                                                                                                                  174
                                                                                                                                  280
                                                                                                                                   365
                                                                                                                                       172
                                                                                                                                       477
                                                                                                                                       535
                                                                                                                                     710
                                                                                                                                     52
                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                     595
                                                                                                                                     288
                                                                                                                                     345
                                                                                                                                   288
                                                                                                                                  280   691
                                                                                                                                      595
                                                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                                                       361
                                                                                                                                        522
                                                                                                                                      535
                                                                                                                                      280
                                                                                                                                     710535
                                                                                                                                      361
                                                                                                                                    414
                                                                                                                                    530
                                                                                                                                    174 265
                                                                                                                                        350
                                                                                                                                       522
                                                                                                                                       340
                                                                                                                                       710
                                                                                                                                           426
                                                                                                                                         681
                                                                                                                                       315
                                                                                                                                         172
                                                                                                                                         242
                                                                                                                                          280
                                                                                                                                         401
                                                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                                                        414  696
                                                                                                                                           487
                                                                                                                                            230
                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                          493
                                                                                                                                           455
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                         132
                                                                                                                                       274265
                                                                                                                                           280
                                                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                                                       477
                                                                                                                                         691
                                                                                                                                       691
                                                                                                                                        242
                                                                                                                                        493
                                                                                                                                         696
                                                                                                                                       414
                                                                                                                                       274
                                                                                                                                        280
                                                                                                                                        361
                                                                                                                                               365
                                                                                                                                             243
                                                                                                                                           132
                                                                                                                                           477243
                                                                                                                                             265
                                                                                                                                             401
                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                         430
                                                                                                                                          590  230
                                                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                                                              343
                                                                                                                                            401
                                                                                                                                            493
                                                                                                                                            365
                                                                                                                                            458
                                                                                                                                             562
                                                                                                                                            265
                                                                                                                                           274
                                                                                                                                           454
                                                                                                                                                  373
                                                                                                                                                710
                                                                                                                                               428
                                                                                                                                               365
                                                                                                                                               243
                                                                                                                                             458592
                                                                                                                                              536
                                                                                                                                            696
                                                                                                                                             243
                                                                                                                                             361
                                                                                                                                              615
                                                                                                                                            389
                                                                                                                                            590
                                                                                                                                           112
                                                                                                                                            726
                                                                                                                                                   275
                                                                                                                                                   444
                                                                                                                                                  368
                                                                                                                                                  466
                                                                                                                                                487592
                                                                                                                                                  487
                                                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                                                 560
                                                                                                                                                 230
                                                                                                                                                454
                                                                                                                                                 365
                                                                                                                                               401
                                                                                                                                              454
                                                                                                                                              458
                                                                                                                                               607401
                                                                                                                                                454
                                                                                                                                                614
                                                                                                                                                 536
                                                                                                                                                  367
                                                                                                                                                  681
                                                                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                                                                     735
                                                                                                                                                   315  345
                                                                                                                                                        708
                                                                                                                                                        681
                                                                                                                                                        460
                                                                                                                                                      315
                                                                                                                                                     410
                                                                                                                                                       401
                                                                                                                                                       373
                                                                                                                                                     361
                                                                                                                                                      614
                                                                                                                                                      700
                                                                                                                                                    610
                                                                                                                                                     708
                                                                                                                                                   696
                                                                                                                                                    133
                                                                                                                                                           681
                                                                                                                                                         460
                                                                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                                                                         460
                                                                                                                                                        75
                                                                                                                                                       708
                                                                                                                                                     366
                                                                                                                                                            577
                                                                                                                                                          132
                                                                                                                                                          162
                                                                                                                                                         373
                                                                                                                                                          110
                                                                                                                                                        346
                                                                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                                                                       132
                                                                                                                                                      314
                                                                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                                                                              132
                                                                                                                                                             526
                                                                                                                                                            562
                                                                                                                                                           314
                                                                                                                                                            592
                                                                                                                                                              592
                                                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                                                                 34
                                                                                                                                                               722
                                                                                                                                                                 734
                                                                                                                                                                 704
                                                                                                                                                                    480
                                                                                                                                                                  133
                                                                                                                                                                302
                                                                                                                                                                345
                                                                                                                                                                  540
                                                                                                                                                                  75
                                                                                                                                                                      386
                                                                                                                                                                     345
                                                                                                                                                                     704617
                                                                                                                                                                       52
                                                                                                                                                                           381
                                                                                                                                                                          610
                                                                                                                                                                            343 600386
                                                                                                                                                                              610
                                                                                                                                                                              562
                                                                                                                                                                                386 734                  684          52            299
                                                             70                684372   520    520
                                                                                                698   463
                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                    171381
                                                                                                     680
                                                                                                      240  628
                                                                                                           372
                                                                                                         698  11
                                                                                                            299
                                                                                                            705
                                                                                                              550     520
                                                                                                                    480
                                                                                                                    737  350
                                                                                                                       372
                                                                                                                       562540
                                                                                                                        132
                                                                                                                        162
                                                                                                                        386
                                                                                                                         722
                                                                                                                           550  174
                                                                                                                              162
                                                                                                                              454
                                                                                                                             371 314
                                                                                                                               600
                                                                                                                               528288
                                                                                                                                   414
                                                                                                                                  332
                                                                                                                                  461
                                                                                                                                174
                                                                                                                                112
                                                                                                                                 162 340
                                                                                                                                     301
                                                                                                                                      371
                                                                                                                                      703
                                                                                                                                    371
                                                                                                                                  430703
                                                                                                                                   174
                                                                                                                                  461    368
                                                                                                                                         386
                                                                                                                                       368
                                                                                                                                      691
                                                                                                                                       550
                                                                                                                                      413
                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                      361   493
                                                                                                                                          340
                                                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                                                           734
                                                                                                                                           361
                                                                                                                                         562
                                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                                          455
                                                                                                                                          414  371
                                                                                                                                             250
                                                                                                                                               299
                                                                                                                                               346
                                                                                                                                             274
                                                                                                                                             527
                                                                                                                                             454367
                                                                                                                                              487
                                                                                                                                              340
                                                                                                                                              250
                                                                                                                                             133 401
                                                                                                                                                 466
                                                                                                                                                 162
                                                                                                                                               243
                                                                                                                                                536
                                                                                                                                                531
                                                                                                                                              466
                                                                                                                                                487
                                                                                                                                              265
                                                                                                                                               615
                                                                                                                                             350  696
                                                                                                                                                250  132
                                                                                                                                                      345
                                                                                                                                                    295
                                                                                                                                                    367
                                                                                                                                                  368
                                                                                                                                                    401
                                                                                                                                                      54
                                                                                                                                                     295373
                                                                                                                                                      162
                                                                                                                                                     272
                                                                                                                                                       560 726
                                                                                                                                                           367
                                                                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                                         367
                                                                                                                                                        367346
                                                                                                                                                           230
                                                                                                                                                            30252
                                                                                                                                                                54
                                                                                                                                                                 722
                                                                                                                                                               133
                                                                                                                                                                 133
                                                                                                                                                                303   737
                                                                                                                                                                      560
                                                                                                                                                                     680617
                                                                                                                                                                      511  700     343
                                                                                                                                                                                 301684 386                                299
                                                                  463 70        684 70 53  34 372   698
                                                                                                  698    240 607
                                                                                                        492
                                                                                                       300
                                                                                                       372        480
                                                                                                                705
                                                                                                                 375 133
                                                                                                                     34
                                                                                                                   386
                                                                                                                  722
                                                                                                                  690  110
                                                                                                                     708
                                                                                                                      550
                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                     734  386
                                                                                                                          464
                                                                                                                         464
                                                                                                                        375
                                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                                         550  340
                                                                                                                            372174
                                                                                                                             600
                                                                                                                             430
                                                                                                                             520 75
                                                                                                                                112
                                                                                                                                 461
                                                                                                                               726
                                                                                                                               371174
                                                                                                                                230
                                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                                                   430
                                                                                                                                  715 350
                                                                                                                                    550280
                                                                                                                                        274
                                                                                                                                      110
                                                                                                                                      527
                                                                                                                                      361550
                                                                                                                                        265
                                                                                                                                      295737
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                         413
                                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                                       413
                                                                                                                                       265   265
                                                                                                                                           242
                                                                                                                                           493
                                                                                                                                           696
                                                                                                                                           414
                                                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                          696
                                                                                                                                           531
                                                                                                                                              243
                                                                                                                                            696455
                                                                                                                                             371
                                                                                                                                              737
                                                                                                                                             520
                                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                                              590
                                                                                                                                            314243
                                                                                                                                             274  487
                                                                                                                                                536
                                                                                                                                                487466
                                                                                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                                                                 132
                                                                                                                                               458314
                                                                                                                                                615  401
                                                                                                                                                      592
                                                                                                                                                    590
                                                                                                                                                  365  279
                                                                                                                                                     628
                                                                                                                                                      365
                                                                                                                                                    36552
                                                                                                                                                     526
                                                                                                                                                           737
                                                                                                                                                           230
                                                                                                                                                         346
                                                                                                                                                       389
                                                                                                                                                         708  726
                                                                                                                                                             526
                                                                                                                                                           511
                                                                                                                                                           373     343
                                                                                                                                                                 511            54 343610            684 301
                                                                                                                                                                                                           52
                                                                                                                                                                                                          52                    299
                                                                  7070 463           463
                                                                                     520
                                                                                       53  171     698
                                                                                                 171 698    34
                                                                                                           492 550480  698112371
                                                                                                                            600 174
                                                                                                                                 710112
                                                                                                                                  288 703
                                                                                                                                     530
                                                                                                                                   690   414
                                                                                                                                       477
                                                                                                                                        530
                                                                                                                                        413
                                                                                                                                      112
                                                                                                                                       461 265455
                                                                                                                                            703
                                                                                                                                             274590
                                                                                                                                                54
                                                                                                                                              493
                                                                                                                                              458487
                                                                                                                                               691250
                                                                                                                                                428487
                                                                                                                                                    737
                                                                                                                                                  380
                                                                                                                                                  132   460
                                                                                                                                                       279
                                                                                                                                                      715133
                                                                                                                                                       346592
                                                                                                                                                        708
                                                                                                                                                         610   617
                                                                                                                                                               737
                                                                                                                                                             302726
                                                                                                                                                              526
                                                                                                                                                               511
                                                                                                                                                              735   700
                                                                                                                                                                      562
                                                                                                                                                                       54     54610
                                                                                                                                                                                 343610     610
                                                           463                    70       53372
                                                                                               171 300 24011
                                                                                                     240 389   550      200
                                                                                                                       75734
                                                                                                                           562
                                                                                                                           430 200 530
                                                                                                                                    461
                                                                                                                                     574
                                                                                                                                     272  592
                                                                                                                                        272696
                                                                                                                                          274
                                                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                                                         414 700
                                                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                                                           592
                                                                                                                                            132487
                                                                                                                                                455
                                                                                                                                                 428466
                                                                                                                                                  590
                                                                                                                                                   367
                                                                                                                                                  487
                                                                                                                                                  272
                                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                              592
                                                                                                                                                133526  380
                                                                                                                                                          735
                                                                                                                                                           463
                                                                                                                                                           526
                                                                                                                                                         367380
                                                                                                                                                       380373
                                                                                                                                                     367
                                                                                                                                                     528
                                                                                                                                                   301       363
                                                                                                                                                           373301
                                                                                                                                                            133
                                                                                                                                                             617
                                                                                                                                                             511302303
                                                                                                                                                                     737
                                                                                                                                                                    511                                                52                 299
                                                                                 53        520     698
                                                                                                  698
                                                                                                   372         375480
                                                                                                                  698734 200 200
                                                                                                                               464112
                                                                                                                                  461
                                                                                                                                550461715
                                                                                                                                    520 531
                                                                                                                                      530
                                                                                                                                      230
                                                                                                                                     595
                                                                                                                                      574  272
                                                                                                                                          691
                                                                                                                                        455527272
                                                                                                                                            681
                                                                                                                                          272550
                                                                                                                                            574
                                                                                                                                             380550
                                                                                                                                                 454
                                                                                                                                                 536
                                                                                                                                                 705
                                                                                                                                                428 272
                                                                                                                                                    466
                                                                                                                                                    735
                                                                                                                                                    250
                                                                                                                                                  487  592
                                                                                                                                                        132700
                                                                                                                                                           367302  303
                                                                                                                                                                 30354
                                                                                                                                                                     511
                                                                                                                                                                      700
                                                                                                                                                                        301
                                                                                                                                                                       680 54          610 301 52                                       299
                                                                                               300              705
                                                                                                              550   705     110
                                                                                                                            680
                                                                                                                              464
                                                                                                                            464
                                                                                                                             550  288
                                                                                                                                380461
                                                                                                                                  288   274
                                                                                                                                         715
                                                                                                                                       715   110
                                                                                                                                            274
                                                                                                                                              691455536367     302302                   301463  52 301
                                                                    7070 463          372 300   332 296     722         332  464 705
                                                                                                                                 464
                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                 230
                                                                                                                                  461
                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                     705574
                                                                                                                                         715
                                                                                                                                         230
                                                                                                                                         574  458
                                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                                             477
                                                                                                                                            595 527
                                                                                                                                               428
                                                                                                                                                 493
                                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                                455
                                                                                                                                                708
                                                                                                                                                272
                                                                                                                                                493
                                                                                                                                                  536230
                                                                                                                                                      250
                                                                                                                                                      735735302
                                                                                                                                                       250
                                                                                                                                                     466250
                                                                                                                                                               526726
                                                                                                                                                                    617
                                                                                                                                                                    303617
                                                                                                                                                                     303343302 34 463                          301                            299
                                                                       70 70              53684
                                                                                         300   3475
                                                                                                 332          734 110430332   705
                                                                                                                                110
                                                                                                                                 531
                                                                                                                                     531
                                                                                                                                   715   461272
                                                                                                                                           530
                                                                                                                                         527
                                                                                                                                          428
                                                                                                                                        527    493
                                                                                                                                             681
                                                                                                                                           574
                                                                                                                                          690681536
                                                                                                                                                380
                                                                                                                                                   527
                                                                                                                                                  487
                                                                                                                                                  493536
                                                                                                                                                    735    279302 700
                                                                                                                                                              735
                                                                                                                                                                        680                                       52
                                                                       75 684            75          34 698                   562531715  705
                                                                                                                                       274681
                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                         715    691380
                                                                                                                                              428                132 302
                                                                                                                                                                 511    700 314    34314
                                                               75              34 34                           375 735 705562 531 132
                                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                      461
                                                                                                                                       700 428 691487 562
                                                                                                                                                 536      617
        -.5




                                                                                          53       171 296                  531 464
                                                                                                                               531
                                                                                                                                 680 715455493 279 380 680314
                                                                   75      75 75 34                      171           430705 464715            455 617  250                          314314
                                                                                      684             332           332
                                                                                                                    735                                   250 511
                                                                                                                                                             250                    562
                                                                                                                                                  455 617511                            562
                                                                           34                           332
                                                                                                                                                  617
                                                                                                                                                    536 250 700
                                                      75 75                             34                    332
                                                                                                               332                                 536
                                                                                                            332 332         734          700 680536
                                                                                                   684 296  296
                                                                                                              296
                                                                                                                 296                                                    680
                                                                                                    734                                                                                314
                  -1




                                                                                                      734
                                                                                                                                                         700
                                                                                                                                                            700

                                                                                                                                                            700



                               -.1                                             -.05                       0               .05                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                           Potential Market Size Residual

                                                                                      Residuals                                                       Fitted values




                                                                                                                           49
                                                                                                                            Figure 3d.
Residuals from regression of ln                                      NitDRU G 1               on ln          MitAGIN G         , ln MitOBESIT Y ; and Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects vs.
    residuals from regression of ln K^ it on ln         , ln MitOBESIT Y ; and Class Year and Disease …xed e¤ects
                                                                                                             MitAGIN G
                                   for the 63 Diseases with the most observations.



                                            Residuals for 63 Diseases with Most Observations
                       1

                                                                                                             365
           DRUG 1 Research Residual


                                                                                                                     414                                    272
                                                                                                                                                          272
                                                                                                                     414
                                                                                                                    265
                                                                                                                     414         413                           272
                                                                                                                   265
                                                                                                                   365
                                                                                                                   265           296
                                                                                                                     365                                      272
                              .5



                                                                                                    280               414         296                           272
                                                                                               365 365                371
                                                                                                                     265
                                                                                                                      577                        577          272                                       302                 302
                                                                                                   280 531            414                                                                                                 302
                                                                                    365                                        614 296
                                                                                                                             466
                                                                                                                               430
                                                                                                                              614           340
                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                                                                  303
                                                                                                                                                250 272
                                                                                                                                                   577                     600                                302   302
                                                                                                     696              414  413  430 296
                                                                                                                              466
                                                                                                                                295             340          272
                                                                                                                                                           272
                                                                                       332            531 363 614         371
                                                                                                                          320
                                                                                                                           430413 413 426
                                                                                                                                  276250 250   250
                                                                                                                                               295 592   272                               302
                                                                                                                                                                                           346
                                                                                          332        371
                                                                                                     696      531
                                                                                                                363    265466  430    413                         477
                                                                                                                                                                 592                              302
                                                                                                  458   691       577
                                                                                                                444   414
                                                                                                                      414  535 243
                                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                                             430      346
                                                                                                                                     401
                                                                                                                                      296  295
                                                                                                                                           296          303
                                                                                                                                                          272 477    346
                                                                                           332
                                                                                           531 531                172
                                                                                                                   428
                                                                                                                    371430
                                                                                                                       401
                                                                                                                       265   401401
                                                                                                                               590    250
                                                                                                                                       296
                                                                                                                                      276  303
                                                                                                                                             250250 350
                                                                                                                                               272                            600
                                                                                                                                                                             302       346
                                                                                          332 280 346
                                                                                                   691
                                                                                                 280
                                                                                                  280691
                                                                                                   531 69170
                                                                                                         371530
                                                                                                             480
                                                                                                                275
                                                                                                              577  346
                                                                                                                 480
                                                                                                                 363
                                                                                                                  531
                                                                                                                        265
                                                                                                                         320
                                                                                                                        320
                                                                                                                         172
                                                                                                                       413
                                                                                                                     414  413
                                                                                                                         466
                                                                                                                          43070
                                                                                                                            243
                                                                                                                           614
                                                                                                                         401
                                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                                               276
                                                                                                                             535
                                                                                                                             466
                                                                                                                            426   250
                                                                                                                                  401
                                                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                                                     426
                                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                                   401272
                                                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                                         296
                                                                                                                                            592
                                                                                                                                              577
                                                                                                                                            296
                                                                                                                                             250 592
                                                                                                                                                   112
                                                                                                                                                 350
                                                                                                                                                  112    11     592
                                                                                                                                                               346 33211
                                                                                                                                                                 592            346
                                                                600 365             332
                                                                                    332      332
                                                                                             522   522530
                                                                                                  691    704691
                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                            174  363
                                                                                                                704
                                                                                                                531
                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                                   413
                                                                                                                  531
                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                                     414340
                                                                                                                        535
                                                                                                                      522
                                                                                                                       276
                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                     414466
                                                                                                                      413
                                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                                           426
                                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                                             320
                                                                                                                           535
                                                                                                                          265 243
                                                                                                                             340
                                                                                                                            345
                                                                                                                            242  243
                                                                                                                               70530
                                                                                                                             426
                                                                                                                             345 401371401
                                                                                                                                      300
                                                                                                                                        300
                                                                                                                                       276
                                                                                                                                           300
                                                                                                                                          250
                                                                                                                                           340        346350350     477 346
                                                                                                                                                                 592628
                                                                         477           531
                                                                                         332 522
                                                                                             531
                                                                                             628
                                                                                                288
                                                                                              332     11480
                                                                                                      704   288
                                                                                                          530
                                                                                                           480
                                                                                                           530
                                                                                                           696
                                                                                                            174
                                                                                                          371
                                                                                                          444
                                                                                                         577 174
                                                                                                             522
                                                                                                               275
                                                                                                                  428
                                                                                                                 346
                                                                                                                430
                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                275
                                                                                                              458   401
                                                                                                                  276
                                                                                                                  530 320
                                                                                                                     430
                                                                                                                    363
                                                                                                                    590   320
                                                                                                                        615
                                                                                                                         275
                                                                                                                       628
                                                                                                                        696
                                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                                        493
                                                                                                                      614466
                                                                                                                         614
                                                                                                                         535
                                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                                             172
                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                                                             530
                                                                                                                           345458530
                                                                                                                               242
                                                                                                                             346
                                                                                                                              250
                                                                                                                                345
                                                                                                                                       401
                                                                                                                                         272
                                                                                                                                        413
                                                                                                                                        696 340303
                                                                                                                                           413
                                                                                                                                            320    112
                                                                                                                                                    112
                                                                                                                                                     112
                                                                                                                                                      361477
                                                                                                                                                               592
                                                                                                                                                             47711240  600
                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                         531
                                                                                          332288   696
                                                                                                     691
                                                                                                     704
                                                                                                     696
                                                                                                       628174
                                                                                                           710
                                                                                                         174
                                                                                                          288
                                                                                                          522
                                                                                                        174174
                                                                                                            174
                                                                                                          295
                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                           300 410
                                                                                                                172
                                                                                                                275 371
                                                                                                                  614
                                                                                                                   69670
                                                                                                                    276  303
                                                                                                                       414
                                                                                                                       320243
                                                                                                                         250
                                                                                                                          276
                                                                                                                        320
                                                                                                                          535
                                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                                         340  200
                                                                                                                               243
                                                                                                                             295
                                                                                                                             628
                                                                                                                             363
                                                                                                                             466
                                                                                                                            371
                                                                                                                            242 371
                                                                                                                                 295
                                                                                                                                363
                                                                                                                                 272
                                                                                                                                345 715
                                                                                                                                   345
                                                                                                                                     426
                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                                                       426
                                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                                                       371
                                                                                                                                        295   162
                                                                                                                                                477240     592 444
                                                                302361 361    302   11
                                                                                  531 70
                                                                                       11       280458
                                                                                                     288
                                                                                                   696
                                                                                                 332444  288
                                                                                                       288614444
                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                           530   401
                                                                                                               275
                                                                                                               715522
                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                               458615535
                                                                                                                     428
                                                                                                                   531 250
                                                                                                                       535
                                                                                                                     340  530
                                                                                                                        242363
                                                                                                                         250
                                                                                                                         340
                                                                                                                          250
                                                                                                                          70696
                                                                                                                            345 112
                                                                                                                                345
                                                                                                                                 243
                                                                                                                                345
                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                               530
                                                                                                                              200    592
                                                                                                                                   426303
                                                                                                                                    300
                                                                                                                                    240
                                                                                                                                  710  401
                                                                                                                                     401
                                                                                                                                     371    477
                                                                                                                                           240413
                                                                                                                                               350477
                                                                                                                                                    112
                                                                                                                                                     112           444444 600
                                                                             302240      33211592  11
                                                                                                   480715 530
                                                                                                        710
                                                                                                      480    174
                                                                                                           530
                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                            522
                                                                                                           704
                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                            288 340
                                                                                                               592 200
                                                                                                                  243
                                                                                                                 710
                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                               371 535
                                                                                                                 493  276
                                                                                                                     493426
                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                        480
                                                                                                                      275
                                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                                        530
                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                                      426
                                                                                                                       363
                                                                                                                      240 345
                                                                                                                          200444
                                                                                                                           710
                                                                                                                         250  345
                                                                                                                             592
                                                                                                                              590
                                                                                                                            242345 715
                                                                                                                                 704
                                                                                                                                242
                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                              426
                                                                                                                               428  70
                                                                                                                                    150340
                                                                                                                                      628
                                                                                                                                       303
                                                                                                                                        592
                                                                                                                                        295
                                                                                                                                      150
                                                                                                                                     426         112  112       592 332
                                                          361 361 361     346 240480     628
                                                                                          332 288
                                                                                              11 691
                                                                                               280
                                                                                              590   691
                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                   350332
                                                                                                     577  350
                                                                                                           628
                                                                                                         615614  172
                                                                                                               691  320
                                                                                                                    275
                                                                                                                  428
                                                                                                                   522
                                                                                                                    275
                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                    531
                                                                                                                  288
                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                691 288458
                                                                                                                     295
                                                                                                                   614303
                                                                                                                       428
                                                                                                                       466
                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                     628
                                                                                                                       242493
                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                          276
                                                                                                                        466320
                                                                                                                         303
                                                                                                                         615
                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                                     361
                                                                                                                      710 493
                                                                                                                         715
                                                                                                                         150
                                                                                                                        295   710
                                                                                                                               530
                                                                                                                             363
                                                                                                                             288
                                                                                                                            295
                                                                                                                            70    340
                                                                                                                                320401
                                                                                                                                   696
                                                                                                                                 243
                                                                                                                                 242
                                                                                                                                  150
                                                                                                                                428
                                                                                                                                530
                                                                                                                                  426
                                                                                                                                  70  480
                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                    480
                                                                                                                                    628 350162  346628 112
                                                                                                                                                     477
                                                                                                                                                      628
                                                                                                                                                    444          361
                                                                                           288  280
                                                                                                  332
                                                                                                522
                                                                                              240    288
                                                                                                     615
                                                                                                    715 444
                                                                                                        614
                                                                                                        295
                                                                                                      240  162
                                                                                                         174
                                                                                                         704 295
                                                                                                           458
                                                                                                            430
                                                                                                           401
                                                                                                             296275
                                                                                                              466 522
                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                413
                                                                                                              288458
                                                                                                                  275 320
                                                                                                                    200250
                                                                                                                       530
                                                                                                                      410
                                                                                                                      410
                                                                                                                       696
                                                                                                                     410  696
                                                                                                                        112
                                                                                                                         414
                                                                                                                        458
                                                                                                                      172
                                                                                                                    535
                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                      477715
                                                                                                                       172
                                                                                                                       320
                                                                                                                        303  590
                                                                                                                              615
                                                                                                                            320
                                                                                                                             363
                                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                                            172
                                                                                                                           590  288
                                                                                                                                 303
                                                                                                                               172
                                                                                                                              530
                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                              428
                                                                                                                            365242710
                                                                                                                                458
                                                                                                                                240
                                                                                                                                444
                                                                                                                              243
                                                                                                                              350   350
                                                                                                                                  300
                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                   174
                                                                                                                                 590
                                                                                                                                  345
                                                                                                                                   150477
                                                                                                                                      296
                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                     371
                                                                                                                                   288  296
                                                                                                                                        477
                                                                                                                                        444
                                                                                                                                      288
                                                                                                                                      296     361
                                                                                                                                              480480
                                                                                                                                            162       112 444600
                                                                                                                                                        112   592       350 11600
                                                                                                                                                                       350                       11
                                         600                                 240         628  522
                                                                                             288
                                                                                           340  70444
                                                                                                  715
                                                                                                 300 710
                                                                                                     715
                                                                                                    179
                                                                                                    590162
                                                                                                        522
                                                                                                        174
                                                                                                         346458
                                                                                                            614
                                                                                                            346
                                                                                                           614
                                                                                                         150    70
                                                                                                                493
                                                                                                                522
                                                                                                              614
                                                                                                              162
                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                              493  200
                                                                                                                 590
                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                               430
                                                                                                                 275
                                                                                                               340   179
                                                                                                                    414
                                                                                                                    179
                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                    493
                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                  172
                                                                                                                  493  179
                                                                                                                     428
                                                                                                                   426
                                                                                                                    480 275
                                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                                      303
                                                                                                                     242
                                                                                                                      615 530
                                                                                                                        243493
                                                                                                                           628
                                                                                                                           428
                                                                                                                         295
                                                                                                                        179
                                                                                                                        592
                                                                                                                         466
                                                                                                                           615590
                                                                                                                              615
                                                                                                                            276
                                                                                                                            172704
                                                                                                                              480
                                                                                                                            428
                                                                                                                              363 345
                                                                                                                                242
                                                                                                                                150   522
                                                                                                                                    112
                                                                                                                                   710
                                                                                                                                    444
                                                                                                                                  371
                                                                                                                                   162
                                                                                                                                    715
                                                                                                                                  710   162
                                                                                                                                        296  295
                                                                                                                                           112
                                                                                                                                            444
                                                                                                                                              112
                                                                                                                                              365577  112
                                                                                                                                                       477628240350 361           361
                                                                             302 11        590   696
                                                                                                 691 522
                                                                                                     715174
                                                                                                         458  295
                                                                                                              614
                                                                                                              162
                                                                                                               162
                                                                                                               426
                                                                                                               590
                                                                                                             430  200
                                                                                                                615493
                                                                                                                  340
                                                                                                                 535
                                                                                                                  493
                                                                                                                  242
                                                                                                                350  179
                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                  275
                                                                                                                   410  265
                                                                                                                      242
                                                                                                                      615
                                                                                                                      531493
                                                                                                                       466493
                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                                         522
                                                                                                                         615
                                                                                                                        428
                                                                                                                       179 531
                                                                                                                           363
                                                                                                                          179 303
                                                                                                                            458428
                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                             174
                                                                                                                           704
                                                                                                                            696
                                                                                                                             428
                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                              150480
                                                                                                                                345
                                                                                                                                243 345       240300300                        600  11
                     0




                                       600 600 600         361361 302600    240
                                                                           240
                                                                           300       477
                                                                                     332
                                                                                   240  477
                                                                                         361
                                                                                           150
                                                                                         240
                                                                                         11
                                                                                         300350  691
                                                                                               480 296
                                                                                                 150  361
                                                                                                       340
                                                                                                       162 179
                                                                                                          162
                                                                                                        280  710
                                                                                                           162
                                                                                                           295
                                                                                                          365
                                                                                                         715   276
                                                                                                              346
                                                                                                             614
                                                                                                            477172
                                                                                                               426
                                                                                                             340
                                                                                                           428
                                                                                                           363
                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                              710 410
                                                                                                                466179
                                                                                                                  179
                                                                                                                  493
                                                                                                                 280
                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                                  295
                                                                                                                361
                                                                                                                 150
                                                                                                               522   691
                                                                                                                    414
                                                                                                                    242
                                                                                                                     410
                                                                                                                   444
                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                    410
                                                                                                                   179
                                                                                                                  466
                                                                                                                   250 179
                                                                                                                     493179
                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                       162
                                                                                                                       265
                                                                                                                       691
                                                                                                                      614
                                                                                                                    493
                                                                                                                     466288
                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                      179  265
                                                                                                                          615200
                                                                                                                            428
                                                                                                                            590
                                                                                                                          458
                                                                                                                           715
                                                                                                                          696
                                                                                                                          174
                                                                                                                          458
                                                                                                                           272 361
                                                                                                                             288
                                                                                                                             345242
                                                                                                                              715
                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                              303
                                                                                                                            242242
                                                                                                                             590
                                                                                                                              590
                                                                                                                               710
                                                                                                                              615 303
                                                                                                                                  243
                                                                                                                                162 345
                                                                                                                                     371
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                 288  371
                                                                                                                                    704 162   162    112
                                                                                                                                                     300   361                      361
                                                                                                                                                                                     361
                                           600           302
                                                          361     477 302    346
                                                                          11 11346 480
                                                                                   300
                                                                                 112  11
                                                                                     615 477       112
                                                                                                   240
                                                                                                    704 704
                                                                                                      150
                                                                                                      704303
                                                                                                         371
                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                       715  150
                                                                                                           240
                                                                                                          295
                                                                                                          590
                                                                                                          710
                                                                                                           276
                                                                                                           577
                                                                                                           280
                                                                                                          242
                                                                                                           332
                                                                                                          614 530
                                                                                                              426
                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                            162  426
                                                                                                               162 172
                                                                                                                 179179
                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                    320
                                                                                                                  265
                                                                                                                  243
                                                                                                                 275
                                                                                                                275414
                                                                                                                   535
                                                                                                                    243
                                                                                                                    458
                                                                                                                   615 179
                                                                                                                     577 493
                                                                                                                        531
                                                                                                                        444
                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                       350
                                                                                                                        332
                                                                                                                       615
                                                                                                                     174
                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                     150179480
                                                                                                                           200
                                                                                                                           715
                                                                                                                         179303
                                                                                                                            401
                                                                                                                            615
                                                                                                                          410
                                                                                                                           240
                                                                                                                           303
                                                                                                                          458
                                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                                          150  365
                                                                                                                             704
                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                            531
                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                               428
                                                                                                                               371
                                                                                                                                401590
                                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                 243   704
                                                                                                                                     296696
                                                                                                                                        691
                                                                                                                                      174              600     332
                                                                                                                                                                628
                                                                                                                                                                  350
                                            600                           361  350   480
                                                                                   590  346
                                                                                      112  628
                                                                                         480
                                                                                          615345628  710
                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                   280  174
                                                                                                        477
                                                                                                      715
                                                                                                        600
                                                                                                       444
                                                                                                         444
                                                                                                       590
                                                                                                        614
                                                                                                      280    614
                                                                                                            401172
                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                             430320
                                                                                                               172
                                                                                                               428
                                                                                                              535
                                                                                                             174
                                                                                                              426
                                                                                                            493     162
                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                   530
                                                                                                                  340
                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                                  174
                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                                  466
                                                                                                                   493
                                                                                                                 179
                                                                                                                 275
                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                               303
                                                                                                                172   162
                                                                                                                      614
                                                                                                                       410
                                                                                                                     242
                                                                                                                     172
                                                                                                                      615
                                                                                                                     577
                                                                                                                     715
                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                     410
                                                                                                                     320
                                                                                                                   414  172
                                                                                                                      428
                                                                                                                    704  275
                                                                                                                       174
                                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                                       179
                                                                                                                      430275
                                                                                                                         410
                                                                                                                         410
                                                                                                                          28070
                                                                                                                           303691
                                                                                                                            363
                                                                                                                             691
                                                                                                                           691 361
                                                                                                                               363 243
                                                                                                                                 295477
                                                                                                                                     320
                                                                                                                                    296
                                                                                                                                   710
                                                                                                                                    715
                                                                                                                                      174
                                                                                                                                      710  365300
                                                                                                                                            280
                                                                                                                                            628413                 600
                                                                                                                                                                     350
                                                               350300        302
                                                                        302240112
                                                                             240
                                                                              240   600  590     590
                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                444
                                                                                                  600243
                                                                                                       174
                                                                                                      715
                                                                                                     413  577
                                                                                                        614
                                                                                                         428
                                                                                                         162
                                                                                                         280710
                                                                                                           162535
                                                                                                            444  477
                                                                                                                710
                                                                                                                276
                                                                                                                 172
                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                              172
                                                                                                              242 428
                                                                                                                 628179
                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                   320
                                                                                                                   71511
                                                                                                                    615 410
                                                                                                                      458
                                                                                                                      615  172
                                                                                                                         361
                                                                                                                        696
                                                                                                                        345
                                                                                                                        493
                                                                                                                      577
                                                                                                                      27570
                                                                                                                       590   428
                                                                                                                           340
                                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                                          414
                                                                                                                          365
                                                                                                                          615 401
                                                                                                                             365
                                                                                                                             458
                                                                                                                           530 345303
                                                                                                                                  172365
                                                                                                                                   704
                                                                                                                                    710
                                                                                                                                    280
                                                                                                                                   590704288  280600
                                                                                                                                                413
                                                                                                                                                  522   240
                                                                                                                                                      300            240     600361
                                          350        600 350 361
                                                    350        300 346 350 11 240
                                                                     302
                                                                     477               480 303
                                                                                           628   444
                                                                                            480340
                                                                                                 615340
                                                                                                    345162
                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                     179458
                                                                                                        428
                                                                                                       577
                                                                                                       162
                                                                                                     243
                                                                                                       530
                                                                                                     162
                                                                                                       401   242
                                                                                                            280
                                                                                                           715
                                                                                                            276
                                                                                                             242
                                                                                                             413
                                                                                                           174
                                                                                                            345 710
                                                                                                              276
                                                                                                                535
                                                                                                                628276
                                                                                                                 172
                                                                                                                 174
                                                                                                                 265
                                                                                                                242 414
                                                                                                                     276
                                                                                                                     280
                                                                                                                   466
                                                                                                                    704
                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                  345
                                                                                                                  413
                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                    276
                                                                                                                   696 280
                                                                                                                     466
                                                                                                                      70530
                                                                                                                        265410
                                                                                                                         401
                                                                                                                        320 345
                                                                                                                             615
                                                                                                                           428
                                                                                                                            477
                                                                                                                          531
                                                                                                                         365363590
                                                                                                                               174
                                                                                                                             280 371
                                                                                                                                   365 480
                                                                                                                                        174288
                                                                                                                                           280  413
                                                                                                                                                  365     628 240
                                                                                                                                                                240 350350600361
                                                             300 592    11 302        590
                                                                                        592480   480
                                                                                               444
                                                                                                 242 628
                                                                                                   444710
                                                                                                      715 340
                                                                                                          428
                                                                                                         530
                                                                                                         340
                                                                                                       413
                                                                                                        363   276
                                                                                                            363
                                                                                                            426
                                                                                                             70530
                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                            430172
                                                                                                               363
                                                                                                             715
                                                                                                           577
                                                                                                            250150
                                                                                                              275
                                                                                                               696 493
                                                                                                                  320
                                                                                                                  265340
                                                                                                                     615
                                                                                                                   410
                                                                                                                   493
                                                                                                                  150
                                                                                                                 466
                                                                                                                  691
                                                                                                                332
                                                                                                                240   466
                                                                                                                     276 275
                                                                                                                         704
                                                                                                                       715
                                                                                                                       340
                                                                                                                        614 361
                                                                                                                          493
                                                                                                                        410696
                                                                                                                            458
                                                                                                                           303
                                                                                                                         531
                                                                                                                          696 590715
                                                                                                                                11704
                                                                                                                                  710  600
                                                                                                                                         480 365 480       302
                                                                                                                                                             480 240  350 361
                                                                      11
                                                                      300 592                    365   628
                                                                                                      413242
                                                                                                         426
                                                                                                         265
                                                                                                       243413
                                                                                                         577 200
                                                                                                             493
                                                                                                             162
                                                                                                             577
                                                                                                              250250
                                                                                                               243
                                                                                                               535 458
                                                                                                                    577
                                                                                                                  401577
                                                                                                                    628            522
                                                                                                                                 280     288                             350
                                      350                 112
                                                                        296     296296
                                                                              592
                                                                              300
                                                                             303    346628
                                                                                         477   444
                                                                                             371
                                                                                            600
                                                                                           296
                                                                                           628
                                                                                                    371
                                                                                                    303
                                                                                                    444
                                                                                                     710
                                                                                                         243
                                                                                                         276
                                                                                                        250
                                                                                                         426
                                                                                                       592
                                                                                                        413
                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                        276
                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                       413426
                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                         276
                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                        426
                                                                                                              577
                                                                                                             320
                                                                                                            704535
                                                                                                              162
                                                                                                             24370
                                                                                                               430
                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                              346
                                                                                                             276 340
                                                                                                                   365
                                                                                                                 172
                                                                                                                 535
                                                                                                                 696
                                                                                                                112458
                                                                                                                  414
                                                                                                                      704
                                                                                                                    696
                                                                                                                    272
                                                                                                                          696
                                                                                                                          710
                                                                                                                         458
                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                        458
                                                                                                                        493522
                                                                                                                             531
                                                                                                                              345696
                                                                                                                               280
                                                                                                                              715
                                                                                                                                  590
                                                                                                                                280
                                                                                                                                 691
                                                                                                                                      691
                                                                                                                                     361
                                                                                                                                    280
                                                                                                                                   531 480
                                                                                                                                     691
                                                                                                                                       174 11
                                                                                                                                           280        300       592 332600
                                              600                   296302 302
                                                                       296    302
                                                                                303303477
                                                                                        303   444340
                                                                                                  242
                                                                                                   295
                                                                                                  242 320
                                                                                                     295 200
                                                                                                        426
                                                                                                       295
                                                                                                        320265
                                                                                                          320
                                                                                                            401
                                                                                                          426
                                                                                                          265
                                                                                                         243
                                                                                                         365
                                                                                                          70 577 696
                                                                                                                 466
                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                               466
                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                     276
                                                                                                                    275
                                                                                                                    577
                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                   363265
                                                                                                                    704
                                                                                                                  696
                                                                                                                   172
                                                                                                                  276
                                                                                                                 371 265
                                                                                                                   530  265
                                                                                                                         295 332531
                                                                                                                               522
                                                                                                                                477   691
                                                                                                                                    371
                                                                                                                                   590
                                                                                                                                     531
                                                                                                                                    614   6332
                                                                                                                                        174
                                                                                                                                        280
                                                                                                                                            91
                                                                                                                                             296
                                                                                                                                               11 11
                                             350         361
                                                        112            302 346 345
                                                                      11                345 295
                                                                                        592     444
                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                  628
                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                          363
                                                                                                          413
                                                                                                         276272
                                                                                                           426
                                                                                                         363
                                                                                                          346
                                                                                                           426466
                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                              430
                                                                                                               11   577
                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                  614
                                                                                                                 577    696
                                                                                                                       363
                                                                                                                      365
                                                                                                                       275
                                                                                                                     276  600
                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                             280
                                                                                                                            615
                                                                                                                            363                       300
                                                350       302 272
                                                         112        296592
                                                                   272272592296
                                                                        112
                                                                               302       346444428
                                                                                                 444  710
                                                                                                    250
                                                                                                     320413
                                                                                                       200
                                                                                                      242
                                                                                                     242
                                                                                                       29511
                                                                                                            577
                                                                                                          320
                                                                                                          426
                                                                                                          295
                                                                                                             365
                                                                                                           577
                                                                                                           628
                                                                                                          426
                                                                                                           320
                                                                                                         371
                                                                                                               577
                                                                                                             365
                                                                                                              466 265
                                                                                                                  265
                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                                     458
                                                                                                                   276
                                                                                                                 295
                                                                                                                  430
                                                                                                                    265
                                                                                                                   430
                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                                 577
                                                                                                                  365
                                                                                                                 466 458
                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                          340
                                                                                                                         458
                                                                                                                        275
                                                                                                                        430
                                                                                                                       365   696522288  288
                                                                                                                                       531296 691                   240
                                                                                 477
                                                                                  592
                                                                                345          250
                                                                                               371413     426
                                                                                                            200466265  493 614          288  522 480
                                                             302
                                                              272 112        345
                                                                            477
                                                                             303           250303295
                                                                                                 477 365
                                                                                                      243
                                                                                                       401 200  265
                                                                                                              363
                                                                                                              466414
                                                                                                               535
                                                                                                               614
                                                                                                          346696
                                                                                                                   535
                                                                                                                   265265
                                                                                                                    430  691
                                                                                                                         365   614 174     480         300
                                                            302112592  592112
                                                                           345        371
                                                                                        592     413
                                                                                                401  346
                                                                                                     243
                                                                                                      320
                                                                                                    428
                                                                                                    401  320   70
                                                                                                              295 70
                                                                                                                 414 535
                                                                                                                    430
                                                                                                                     296
                                                                                                                   414  535
                                                                                                                  430 3712 96302   691  614531        522
                                                                                                                                                    365
                                                                    272                 250 401
                                                                                           477              340
                                                                                                              371414         614 332     531                    332
                                                                      592                371 413             363   430 371 174691
                                                                                                                     414
                                                                                                                     265                               332
                                                                 302
                                                                            272          401 243
                                                                                        401
                                                                                                     428340 414   340
                                                                                                                   530
                                                                                                                  414
                                                                                                                   414
                                                                                                                   530
                                                                                                                    414               288 531   332
                                                                            302               413                                   296
             -.5




                                                                                    401    413                                 296       522
                                                                      346             272 346
                                                                                     250          272             414                                       332
                                                                                                                           430 288 332
                                                                                                                          530
                                                                     272 272                                                                   531
                                                                              272 250
                                                                                272
                                                                               272
                                                                                                      346              530                     531
                                                                                 250250
                       -1




                                      -.5                                                          0                      .5                                                                                                      1
                                                                                              Technological Opportunity Residual

                                                                                                Residuals                                                            Fitted values




                                                                                                                                        50
                                                          Table 1
                                              Induced Pharmaceutical Innovation

                                                    (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)

                   Dependent variable:               ^ it )
                                                  ln(K                  ^ it )
                                                                     ln(K                  ^ it )
                                                                                        ln(K                 ^ it )
                                                                                                          ln(K

                                                    3:03                                 1:32
                   ln   MitT OT AL                 [1:31]                               [0:70]
                                               pwild = 0:002                        pwild = 0:042

                                                                      3:25                                  2:28
                   ln MitAGIN G                                     [1:149]                                [1:38]
                                                                 pwild = 0:008                         pwild = 0:111

                                                                      2:84                                  0:92
                   ln   MitOBESIT Y                                  [1:43]                                [0:77]
                                                                 pwild = 0:017                         pwild = 0:188

                                                Disease,           Disease,            Disease,           Disease,
                   Fixed e¤ects
                                               Class Year         Class Year            Year               Year
                   Number of observations          3883                 3883             3883               3883

    Our statistical inference is based on pwild which is calculated using the cluster-robust standard error (clustered at the class level)
and the wild cluster bootstrapped distribution of the t-statistic (1000 iterations). Monte Carlo evidence favors this approach when the
number of clusters is small and the clusters are unbalanced (Cameron et al., 2007). The wild cluster bootstrapped standard error (1000
iterations) is presented in brackets.




                                                                   51
                                                          Table 2
                                            Determinants of All Medical Research

                                 (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)

 Dependent variable:          ln(NitALL )       ln(NitALL )        ln(NitALL )       ln(NitALL )        ln(NitALL )       ln(NitALL )

                                                                      0:32               0:22              0:29               0:22
    ^ it
 ln K                                                                [0:16]             [0:15]            [0:14]             [0:15]
                                                                 pwild = 0:027      pwild = 0:137     pwild = 0:014      pwild = 0:149

                                 2:74               2:40              1:76               1:84              2:66               2:76
 ln   MitAGIN G                 [1:43]             [1:29]            [1:16]             [1:18]            [1:47]             [1:28]
                            pwild = 0:037      pwild = 0:083     pwild = 0:125      pwild = 0:168     pwild = 0:062      pwild = 0:023

                                 0:43               0:004              0:25               0:13              0:07               0:13
 ln   MitOBESIT Y               [1:18]             [0:71]            [0:98]             [0:68]            [1:05]             [0:68]
                            pwild = 0:773      pwild = 0:996     pwild = 0:800      pwild = 0:858     pwild = 0:947      pwild = 0:857

                              Disease,           Disease,          Disease,           Disease,          Disease,           Disease,
 Fixed e¤ects
                             Class Year           Year            Class Year           Year            Class Year           Year
 Number of observations         3884               3884                3883             3883              3796               3796

    In columns 5 and 6 children’s mental health diseases (299, 314, 315) are omitted. See the footnote to Table 1 for an explanation of
the standard errors and p-values.




                                                                  52
                                                          Table 3
                                       Determinants of Drug-Related Medical Research

                                 (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)

 Dependent variable:        ln(NitDRU G 1 )    ln(NitDRU G 1 )   ln(NitDRU G 2 )    ln(NitDRU G 2 )   ln(NitDRU G 3 )    ln(NitDRU G 3 )

                                 0:64               0:58              0:59               0:48              0:85               0:74
    ^ it
 ln K                           [0:36]             [0:31]            [0:30]             [0:28]            [0:35]             [0:31]
                            pwild = 0:021      pwild = 0:037     pwild = 0:022      pwild = 0:057     pwild = 0:006      pwild = 0:010

                                 2:51               2:32              2:46               2:73              3:85               4:06
 ln   MitAGIN G                 [1:81]             [1:09]            [1:17]             [1:22]            [1:92]             [1:93]
                            pwild = 0:200      pwild = 0:008     pwild = 0:185      pwild = 0:015     pwild = 0:030      pwild = 0:019

                                  1:75               1:79              1:77               1:57              2:08               1:87
 ln   MitOBESIT Y               [2:02]             [1:29]            [1:91]             [1:15]            [2:11]             [1:49]
                            pwild = 0:525      pwild = 0:163     pwild = 0:489      pwild = 0:223     pwild = 0:451      pwild = 0:208

                              Disease,            Disease,         Disease,            Disease,         Disease,            Disease,
 Fixed e¤ects
                             Class Year            Year           Class Year            Year           Class Year            Year
 Number of observations         3730               3730                3730             3730              3697               3697

   Children’s mental health diseases (299, 314, 315) are omitted. See the footnote to Table 1 for an explanation of the standard errors
and p-values.




                                                                  53
                                                            Table 4
                                            Determinants of Other Medical Research

                                 (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)

 Dependent variable:       ln(NitOT HER 1 )    ln(NitOT HER 1 )   ln(NitOT HER 2 )   ln(NitOT HER 2 )   ln(NitOT HER 3 )   ln(NitOT HER 3 )

                                 0:20               0:15               0:06               0:007               0:11               0:06
    ^ it
 ln K                           [0:12]             [0:13]             [0:09]             [0:09]             [0:18]             [0:16]
                            pwild = 0:086      pwild = 0:339      pwild = 0:566      pwild = 0:950      pwild = 0:507      pwild = 0:726

                                 2:84               2:82               2:98               2:79               1:64               2:59
 ln   MitAGIN G                 [1:53]             [1:35]             [1:57]             [1:36]             [1:24]             [1:55]
                            pwild = 0:056      pwild = 0:018      pwild = 0:062      pwild = 0:025      pwild = 0:181      pwild = 0:114

                                 0:23                0:11              0:13                0:19               0:51               1:49
 ln   MitOBESIT Y               [0:92]             [0:52]             [0:89]             [0:69]             [1:20]             [0:81]
                            pwild = 0:798      pwild = 0:830      pwild = 0:897      pwild = 0:787      pwild = 0:684      pwild = 0:066

                              Disease,            Disease,          Disease,            Disease,          Disease,            Disease,
 Fixed e¤ects
                             Class Year            Year            Class Year            Year            Class Year            Year
 Number of observations         3796                3796                3796              3796               3723               3723

   Children’s mental health diseases (299, 314, 315) are omitted. See the footnote to Table 1 for an explanation of the standard errors
and p-values.




                                                                   54
                                                          Table 5
                                        Determinants of Type of Medical of Research

                                                     (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)

                                                     DRU G
                                                    Nit       3              DRU G
                                                                            Nit       3              OT HER
                                                                                                    Nit       3              OT HER
                                                                                                                            Nit       3
                  Dependent variable:         ln(    NitALL       )   ln(    NitALL       )   ln(       ALL
                                                                                                      Nit
                                                                                                                  )   ln(       ALL
                                                                                                                              Nit
                                                                                                                                          )

                                                   0:53                    0:54                     0:25                    0:20
                     ^ it
                  ln K                            [0:21]                  [0:21]                  [0:14]                  [0:12]
                                              pwild = 0:005           pwild = 0:001           pwild = 0:043           pwild = 0:089

                                                   0:79                    1:58                     0:62                    0:77
                  ln MitAGIN G                    [1:06]                  [1:05]                  [1:04]                  [0:92]
                                              pwild = 0:494           pwild = 0:196           pwild = 0:563           pwild = 0:459

                                                    1:69                    1:76                    0:65                    0:89
                  ln   MitOBESIT Y                [1:28]                  [1:07]                  [0:46]                  [0:48]
                                              pwild = 0:242           pwild = 0:105           pwild = 0:248           pwild = 0:073

                                               Disease,                 Disease,               Disease,                 Disease,
                  Fixed e¤ects
                                              Class Year                 Year                 Class Year                 Year
                  Number of observations            3697                    3697                    3723                    3723

   Children’s mental health diseases (299, 314, 315) are omitted. See the footnote to Table 1 for an explanation of the standard errors
and p-values.




                                                                       55
